U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Programs
Bureau of Justice Statistics

********************************************************
This file is text only without graphics and many of the
tables. A Zip archive of the tables in this report in
spreadsheet format (.csv) and the full report including
tables and graphics in .pdf format are available on BJS
website at: http://www.bjs.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbdetail&iid=5412
*********************************************************

Technical Report

Assessment of Coverage in the Arrest-Related Deaths Program

Duren Banks, Ph.D. and Lance Couzens, RTI International 
Michael Planty, Ph.D., Bureau of Justice Statistics

*******************
Executive summary
*******************

After the passage of the Death in Custody Reporting Act (DICRA) 
of 2000 (P.L. 106-297), the Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS) 
began collecting data on deaths that occurred in the process of 
arrest. Provisions in the 2000 DICRA called for collecting all 
deaths occurring within the process of arrest in any state, 
county, or local law enforcement agency nationwide. From 2003 
through 2009, BJS obtained reports on 4,813 such deaths through 
its Arrest-Related Deaths (ARD) program. About 3 in 5 of these 
deaths (2,931) were classified as homicides by law enforcement 
personnel. The remaining 2 in 5 deaths were attributed to other 
manners, including suicide (11%), intoxication deaths (11%), 
accidental injury (6%), and natural causes (5%) ***Footnote 1 
Arrest-Related Deaths, 2003–2009 - Statistical Tables (NCJ 
235385, BJS web, November 2011)***. In three-quarters (75%) of 
homicides by law enforcement personnel, the underlying offense of 
arrest was a violent offense. No criminal charges were intended 
in less than 2% of these incidents.

To assess the completeness of the ARD data that BJS received, in 
2013 BJS undertook a technical review of the ARD program’s 
methodology and an assessment of the program’s coverage of all 
arrest-related deaths in the United States. The methodology 
review examined the variation in states’ approaches to 
identifying and confirming arrest-related deaths. The assessment 
of coverage focused on determining whether BJS received all 
arrest-related deaths that occurred or only a portion of them. 
The primary focus of the assessment of coverage was on homicides 
by law enforcement officers.

The analysis showed that the ARD program obtained fewer law 
enforcement homicide deaths than expected, based on the 
methodology used to estimate the expected number of law 
enforcement homicides. It also showed that the data BJS used for 
comparison purposes—the FBI’s Supplementary Homicide Reports 
(SHR)--also reported fewer justifiable homicides than 
expected ***Footnote 2 Arrest-related Deaths Program Assessment: 
Technical Report (NCJ 248543, BJS web, March 2015***. In total, 
the BJS ARD program data and the SHR data each identified about 
half of the expected number of homicides by law enforcement 
officers during the period from 2003 through 2009 and 2011 
(figure 1). The ARD program captured approximately 49% of these 
homicides, while the SHR captured 46%. More than a quarter (28%) 
of law enforcement homicides in the United States were not 
captured by either system. The analysis also showed that the ARD 
program obtained more arrest-related deaths in 2009 and 2011, 
when BJS began to use open source methods (e.g., Google searches 
to identify potential cases), compared with prior years when BJS 
did not use open source methods ***Footnote 3 ARD program data for 
2010 were unavailable due to a shift in data collection 
methodology between 2009 and 2011***.

Drawing from the results of this study, BJS has begun a pilot 
study that explores multiple methods of identifying and 
confirming deaths occurring in the process of arrest. The study 
will inform BJS efforts to implement the requirements of the 
reauthorized 2013 DICRA (P.L. 113-242). 

*******************************************
Arrest-Related Deaths program assessment
*******************************************

BJS designed the ARD program to be a census of all deaths that 
occurred in the process of arrest or during an attempt to obtain 
custody by a state or local law enforcement agency. BJS collected 
ARD data from 2003 through 2013, covering deaths occurring in 
calendar years 2003 through 2012 ***Footnote 4 BJS only published 
statistics from calendar years 2003 through 2009 ***. BJS 
implemented the ARD program as part of its Deaths in Custody 
Reporting Program (DCRP), which it developed in response to the 
2000 DICRA and includes collections that measure deaths occurring 
in jails and state prisons, in addition to deaths occurring 
during the process of arrest. ***Footnote 5 The 2000 DICRA expired 
in 2006, although BJS continued to maintain its DCRP data 
collections. The 2013 DICRA was passed by Congress and became law 
in December 2014. The 2013 DICRA requires any state receiving 
funds from the Department of Justice to report on a quarterly 
basis information regarding the death of any person who is 
detained, under arrest, or in the process of being arrested; is 
en route to be incarcerated; or is incarcerated***., ***Footnote 6 
For more information on the Deaths in Custody Reporting Program, 
see the BJS website***. 

The ARD program identified the manner of arrest-related death, 
including law enforcement homicides, other homicides, accidents, 
suicides, and deaths due to natural causes. Law enforcement 
homicides included all deaths attributed to weapons or restraint 
tactics used by state or local law enforcement officers. From 
2003 through 2009, about 61% of all deaths reported to the ARD 
program were law enforcement homicides ***Footnote 7 See Arrest-
Related Deaths, 2003–2009 - Statistical Tables (NCJ 235385, BJS 
web, November 2011)***.

As part of its ongoing efforts to evaluate the quality of its 
statistical programs, BJS began to assess the quality of ARD 
program data in 2013. This assessment focused on the methodology 
used to obtain the data and on the completeness of the arrest-
related deaths reported to the program. In part, BJS began this 
assessment in response to an unexpected increase in the number of 
law enforcement homicides reported to the ARD program in 2009 and 
2011. In these years, BJS began to use open sources (e.g., web 
searches and Google Alerts) and other methods to independently 
identify potential cases of deaths in the process of arrest. 
These cases were then sent to BJS’s state data collection agents 
for review and verification. The implementation of this new 
methodology led to an increase in the number of homicides by law 
enforcement reported to the ARD that was more than the average 
number (406) for previous years. For example, BJS obtained 689 
reports of law enforcement homicides in 2011, which represented a 
39% increase from the 496 reported in 2009 (figure 2).

Given the increase in the number of deaths identified by the ARD 
program after changes in methodology, along with concerns about 
overall program coverage, BJS temporarily suspended ARD data 
collection while it undertook the ARD program assessment and 
technical review. A primary focus of this BJS study was to 
estimate the coverage error (i.e., the percentage of the expected 
number of ARD deaths that the program missed).

********************************************
Methodology review and coverage assessment
********************************************

The ARD program had methodological limitations that prevented BJS 
from obtaining a full enumeration of all arrest-related deaths in 
the United States. The program relied on voluntary reporting from 
state and local agencies to compile information about arrest-
related deaths, including law enforcement homicides. It also 
relied on centralized reporting mechanisms to compile and submit 
information about these deaths. These state reporting 
coordinators (SRC) in each of the 50 states and the District of 
Columbia were responsible for understanding the scope and 
definition of the ARD program, identifying eligible cases in 
their respective states, and working with available resources to 
collect and report information about those cases. Not all states 
had an SRC. In those states, BJS relied on its contractor to take 
on the SRC role. As of 2009, several jurisdictions (i.e., 
Arkansas, the District of Columbia, Georgia, Maryland, Montana, 
Nevada, Wisconsin, and Wyoming) had yet to participate in the 
program.

BJS studied the completeness of all law enforcement homicides 
reported to the ARD program by using both ARD data and a separate 
source of data on law enforcement homicides—the FBI’s SHR data 
*** Footnote 8 SHR data are voluntarily provided by law enforcement 
agencies to the FBI’s Uniform Crime Reports (UCR) Program. For 
more information about the UCR program, see 
https://www.fbi.gov/about-us/cjis/ucr/ucr ***. BJS compared the 
number of law enforcement homicides reported by the ARD program 
from 2003 through 2009 and 2011, representing all of the ARD 
program years for which data were available, with the number of 
justifiable homicides captured by the SHR over the same period *** 
Footnote 9  The UCR Program handbook defines justifiable 
homicides as (1) the killing of a felon by a police officer in 
the line of duty or (2) the killing of a felon, during the 
commission of a felony, by a private citizen ***.

Applying a commonly used technique known as capture-recapture to 
estimate the size of populations, the BJS assessment produced an 
estimate of the expected number of law enforcement homicides in 
the United States. This estimate was based on the extent to which 
the ARD and SHR data on law enforcement homicides overlapped 
(i.e., reported on the same cases ***Footnote 10 See Palusci, V.J., 
Wirtz, S.J. & Convington, T.M. (2010). Using capture-recapture 
methods to better ascertain the incidence of fatal child 
maltreatment. Child Abuse & Neglect, 24, 396–402. See also 
Wolter, K.M. (1986). Some coverage error models for census data. 
Journal of the American Statistical Association, 81, 338–346***. 
As the amount of overlap between the data sources increased, the 
estimated underlying population size got closer to the number of 
cases in the data sources.

Capture-recapture analysis relies on a number of assumptions, 
including that cases can be matched across lists, that the lists 
are limited to cases that meet the definition of law enforcement 
homicides, and that inclusion on one list is independent from 
inclusion on the other. Many of these assumptions were met, but 
the nature of the ARD program and SHR necessitated the violation 
of other assumptions (including independence across lists, as 
some ARD SRCs relied on the same reporting mechanisms as those 
that inform the SHR). RTI International implemented a number of 
adjustments to account for these violations ***Footnote 11 For 
descriptions of the violations, see Arrest-Related Deaths Program 
Assessment: Technical Report (NCJ 248543, BJS web, March 2015)                   
***.

In the assessment, BJS generated estimates based on differing 
assumptions about missing data. This resulted in an upper- and a 
lower-bound estimate of the expected number of law enforcement 
homicides that should have been reported to the ARD program, if 
the ARD data were 100% complete.

Across the 8 years of data used in the analysis from 2003 through 
2009 and 2011, the lower-bound estimate of the expected number of 
law enforcement homicides that should have been reported to the 
ARD program was 7,427, or an average of 928 per year (table 1). 
The ARD program captured approximately half (49%) or 3,620 of 
these homicides (an average of 453 a year), whereas the SHR 
captured 46% or 3,385 of these homicides (423 per year). More 
than a quarter (28%) or 2,103 of the estimated homicides in the 
United States during those 8 years were not captured by either 
system. The lower-bound estimate assumed that any agencies that 
did not report to the ARD or SHR programs did not have an arrest-
related death during the study period. The upper-bound estimate 
assumed the number of arrest-related deaths in law enforcement 
agencies that did not report to the ARD or the SHR were 
comparable to those of the agencies that did report. This yielded 
an estimated 9,937 law enforcement homicides in the United 
States, an average of 1,242 per year, of which the ARD program 
captured more than a third (36%).

As BJS implemented changes to improve the ARD collection 
methodology, the program’s coverage of arrest-related deaths 
improved. Analysis indicated that the ARD program included a 
greater proportion of the estimated law enforcement homicides in 
2009 and 2011 than it did from 2003 through 2008. In 2011, the 
ARD program captured 69% of the estimated 1,000 law enforcement 
homicides in the United States (figure 3).

**************
Conclusions
**************

BJS’s analysis of the ARD program’s coverage found that for the 
study period from 2003 through 2009 and 2011, both the ARD 
program and the SHR obtained reports for only about half of the 
expected number of law enforcement homicides in the United 
States. Examining the data on deaths that were reported to either 
or both systems, BJS found that, combined, the systems obtained 
reports on at best 72% of all law enforcement homicides in the 
United States across all years observed. The ARD program showed 
improvements in coverage in the most recent years studied (i.e., 
2009 and 2011), and these improvements coincided with the 
increased use of open-source data to identify potential cases of 
arrest-related deaths. Despite demonstrated improvements over 
time, the ARD program missed reports for more than a quarter of 
the expected number of law enforcement homicides in 2011.

The ARD program coverage may be improved by providing a more 
centralized method for identifying arrest-related deaths and 
providing incentives for law enforcement agencies to confirm or 
identify deaths that occur during the process of arrest and to 
provide information about them. Therefore, BJS has begun to 
explore the use of open-source data to identify arrest-related 
deaths in conjunction with a direct survey of law enforcement and 
other agencies responsible for investigating deaths in the 
process of arrest. The study will inform BJS efforts to implement 
the requirements of the reauthorized DICRA of 2013 (P.L. 113-
242).

*************************************************
The Bureau of Justice Statistics of the U.S. Department of 
Justice is the principal federal agency responsible for measuring 
crime, criminal victimization, criminal offenders, victims of 
crime, correlates of crime, and the operation of criminal and 
civil justice systems at the federal, state, tribal, and local 
levels. BJS collects, analyzes, and disseminates reliable and 
valid statistics on crime and justice systems in the United 
States, supports improvements to state and local criminal justice 
information systems, and participates with national and 
international organizations to develop and recommend national 
standards for justice statistics. William J. Sabol is director.

This report was written by Duren Banks and Lance Couzens, RTI 
International, and Michael Planty, Bureau of Justice Statistics. 
Lynn Langton provided verification of the report.

Morgan Young and Jill Thomas edited the report. Tina Dorsey and 
Barbara Quinn produced the report.

October 2015, NCJ 249099
***************************************************

*************************************************
Office of Justice Programs
Innovation * Partnerships * Safer Neighborhoods
www.ojp.usdoj.gov
*************************************************

***********************
9/28/2015 3:00pm JER 
***********************
