U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Programs
Bureau of Justice Statistics

------------------------------------------------------

This file is text only without graphics and many of 
the tables. A Zip archive of the tables in this report 
inspreadsheet format (.csv) and the full report 
includingtables and graphics in .pdf format are 
available on BJSwebsite 
at:http://www.bjs.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbdetail&iid=5260

This reports is one in series. More recent editions 
may be available. To view a list of all reports in the 
series go to http://www.bjs.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbse&sid=74
------------------------------------------------------

*******************
Technical Report
*******************

Arrest-Related Deaths Program: Data Quality Profile

Michael Planty and Andrea M. Burch, Bureau of Justice Statistics
Duren Banks, Lance Couzens, Caroline Blanton, and Devon Cribb, 
RTI International

*******************
Executive summary
*******************

The Arrest-Related Deaths (ARD) program is an annual national 
census of persons who die either during the process of arrest or 
while in the custody of state or local law enforcement personnel. 
The Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS) implemented the ARD 
program in 2003 as part of the Deaths in Custody Reporting 
Program (DCRP). The DCRP was initiated to fulfill the data 
collection requirement of the Deaths in Custody Reporting Act of 
2000 (DICRA, P.L. 106-247). It collects in-depth information on 
deaths during arrest and incarceration, and it provides national-
level information on the deaths of suspects and offenders from 
their initial contact with law enforcement personnel through the 
time they are incarcerated in a jail or prison.

ARD data are collected to quantify and describe the circumstances 
surrounding civilian deaths that take place during an arrest or 
while in the custody of law enforcement. These data describe the 
prevalence and incidence of arrest-related deaths across the 
nation, identify the circumstances or activities that contribute 
to these deaths, and reveal trends in the causes and 
circumstances of these deaths in custody at national and state 
levels. These data can be used to inform specific policies that 
may increase the safety of law enforcement officers and citizens, 
identify training needs in law enforcement agencies, and assist 
in developing prevention strategies.

The current ARD program relies on state reporting coordinators 
(SRCs) in each of the 50 states and the District of Columbia to 
identify and report on all eligible cases of arrest-related 
deaths. BJS compiles data from the states to produce national-
level statistics on deaths that occur in the process of arrest 
by, or while in the custody of, state and local law enforcement 
personnel. When the DICRA reporting requirements ended in 2006, 
BJS undertook efforts to understand the variability between SRCs, 
and within SRCs over time, in terms of data collection 
methodologies and available resources. This variability has led 
to concerns about definitions, data quality, and under coverage 
error. 

This report responds to issues with variability and profiles the 
data quality of the ARD component of the DCRP. The report (1) 
gives an overview of the ARD program, (2) describes the data 
collection methods used by SRCs, and (3) assesses the quality of 
the resulting data and coverage for eligible ARD cases that 
involve law enforcement homicides.

The variation in methodologies resulted in a significant 
underestimate of the annual number of arrest-related deaths, 
including both homicides by law enforcement officers and other 
types of civilian deaths. Key findings include--

*Nationally, the ARD program captured about 50% of the estimated 
law enforcement homicides during 2003–09 and 2011. This 
assessment did not examine the coverage of other deaths the ARD 
program is designed to capture, including those due to accidents, 
drug overdoses, and natural causes.

*The national coverage of homicides by law enforcement captured 
in the ARD program improved from 2003 through 2011. This was 
partially due to the use of open source searches to identify 
potential cases that were eligible for inclusion. Even with this 
improvement, assessments indicate that from 31% to 41% of the 
estimated homicides by law enforcement personnel were not 
captured in the 2011 ARD data collection.

*Significant challenges exist because of the lack of standardized 
modes for data collection, definitions, scope, participation, and 
the availability of resources.


*************************
1.	Program overview
*************************

***************
Highlights
***************
    
* The Arrest-Related Deaths (ARD) program collects 
information on deaths occurring in the process of arrest.

* An arrest-related death is defined as any death (e.g., 
gunshot wound, cardiac arrest, or drowning) that occurs 
during an interaction with state or local law enforcement 
personnel, including those that occur--

* during an attempted arrest or in the process of arrest

* while the person is in law enforcement custody (before 
transfer to jail)

* shortly after the person’s freedom to leave is 
restricted.

* Exclusions include--

* deaths of bystanders, hostages, and law enforcement 
personnel

* deaths occurring during an interaction with federal law 
enforcement agents

* deaths of wanted criminal suspects before police contact

* deaths by vehicular pursuits without any direct police 
action.


******************************************
1.1	Program purpose and justification
******************************************

The Deaths in Custody Reporting Act of 2000 (DICRA; P.L. 106-
297), signed into law on October 13, 2000, required that states 
applying for Violent Offender Incarceration/Truth-in-Sentencing 
(VOI/TIS) grants follow the U.S. Department of Justice guidelines 
for a quarterly data collection of inmate deaths from all state 
prisons (public and private), local jails, juvenile detention 
facilities, and police lockups, as well as deaths occurring in 
transit and in the process of arrest. Under DICRA, state 
applicants for VOI/TIS grants were required to provide assurance 
of
     “…reporting, on a quarterly basis, information regarding the
     death of any person who is in the process of arrest, is en
     route to be incarcerated, or is incarcerated at a municipal
     or county jail, State prison, or other local or State 
     correctional facility (including any juvenile facility) 
     that, at minimum, includes--

* the name, sex, race, ethnicity, and age of the deceased

* the date, time, and location of death

* a brief description of the circumstances surrounding the 
death.”

The Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS) implemented the data 
collection requirement under DICRA legislation. In compliance 
with the specifications outlined in P.L. 106-297, BJS began 
quarterly data collections to cover all inmate deaths in local 
jails (2000), state prisons (2001), and juvenile correctional 
facilities (2002). In 2003, BJS expanded the Deaths in Custody 
Reporting Program (DCRP) to include deaths that occur in the 
process of arrest by state and local law enforcement agencies.

The DCRP provides data that describe the prevalence and incidence 
of deaths that occurred while the decedent was in the custody of 
law enforcement personnel, local jails, or state prisons. These 
data collections provide policymakers, public health officials, 
law enforcement officials, and correctional administrators with a 
comprehensive system for monitoring deaths within three major 
components of the criminal justice system: the police, local 
jails, and corrections. The DCRP collections are the only source 
of this type of information at national, state, and local levels.

Prior to the DCRP, prison mortality data were collected at the 
national level on a limited number of deaths (i.e., homicide, 
suicide, natural causes) and at levels of aggregation that 
precluded analysis of subpopulations. Jail mortality data were 
collected at infrequent intervals through BJS’s Census of Jails 
series; however, like prison mortality data, these data were 
limited to broad categories of causes and provided limited 
information on the demographic characteristics of decedents. 
Deaths in juvenile correctional facilities were collected 
periodically by the Office of Juvenile Justice and Delinquency 
Prevention (https://www.ncjrs.gov/pdffiles1/ojjdp/228128.pdf). No 
national collection of arrest-related deaths, as described by the 
DICRA legislation, had ever been completed. ***Footnote 1 Two 
national-level programs, the Uniform Crime Reports–Supplementary 
Homicide Reports (SHR) and National Vital Statistics System 
(NVSS), collect information on homicides by law enforcement, but 
neither the SHR nor the NVSS captures the full scope of deaths 
specified by the DICRA legislation. The SHR data are limited to 
justifiable homicides by law enforcement. The NVSS data identify 
deaths attributed to legal intervention. Deaths that do not 
directly result from law enforcement action but still occur 
during the process of arrest (e.g., vehicular deaths resulting 
from pursuits, suspects dying from medical conditions, and 
suicides during standoff situations) are not identified in the 
NVSS as legal intervention deaths.*** Arrest-related mortality 
data were restricted to small local studies, mostly at the agency 
level, and focused predominantly on officer-involved homicides 
(Klinger, 2012; Loftin, Wiersema, McDowall, & Dobrin, 2003). 

With information collected through the DCRP, BJS can track 
changes in the mortality rates of persons who have contact with 
the police or are in custody in jail or prison. The DCRP data 
have improved our understanding of civilian deaths while in the 
criminal justice system. For example, through the DCRP, BJS has 
shown that almost 40% of deaths that occur in the process of 
arrest arise from causes other than officer-involved homicides of 
suspects (Mumola, 2007; Burch, 2011); that in any given year, 
about 80% of the roughly 3,000 jails in the United States have no 
deaths and, among those jails reporting deaths, the modal count 
is one death; that the leading cause of death in prisons is 
cancer, followed by heart disease; and that most inmates who died 
in custody had medical conditions that predated their arrival to 
prison or jail, as opposed to contracting a fatal disease while 
in custody (Noonan & Ginder, 2013). Since its initiation in 2003, 
the ARD program has released two reports on the number and 
characteristics of arrest-related deaths (Burch, 2011; Mumola, 
2007).

In 2006, the DICRA reporting requirements expired. BJS continued 
to collect, analyze, and report on deaths in custody. In December 
2014, the Death in Custody Reporting Act of 2013 was signed into 
law (P.L. 113-242, see https://www.congress.gov/bill/113th-
congress/house-bill/1447/text).

**********************
1.2	Definitions
**********************

The DICRA legislation required states to submit quarterly data on 
deaths that occur in the process of arrest. BJS designed the ARD 
program’s scope to include homicides, suicides, accidental 
deaths, and deaths attributed to intoxication and medical 
conditions that occur during a civilian interaction with state or 
local law enforcement. 

BJS operationalized the DICRA term “arrest-related” to describe 
the range of circumstances pertaining to an arrest, including 
those that occur from the process of apprehension to detention. 
BJS defined a death as arrest related when the event causing the 
death (e.g., gunshot wound, cardiac arrest, or drowning) occurs 
during an interaction with state or local law enforcement 
personnel. ***Footnote 2. BJS collaborated with state and local 
law enforcement agencies and law enforcement professional 
organizations, such as the International Association of Chiefs of 
Police (IACP) and the National Sheriffs’ Association (NSA), to 
establish the specific criteria for determining which deaths to 
include within the ARD program’s scope. These callibrations 
addressed topics regarding which deaths should be eligible for 
reporting, the number and type of sources of existing data 
available in each state, and expectations for how states should 
identify within-scope deaths.*** These events can be grouped into 
three categories: deaths that occur (1) while a person is 
detained or restricted and shortly after the person’s freedom to 
leave is restricted, (2) during an attempted arrest or in the 
process of arrest, or (3) while the person is in custody (before 
transfer to jail). Exclusions to this definition are described in 
section 1.3.

Shortly after freedom to leave is restricted -- All deaths that 
*********************************************
occur shortly after a person’s freedom to leave is restricted by 
state or local law enforcement personnel should be reported to 
the ARD program if the circumstances causing the death occur 
during the interaction with law enforcement. For example, if a 
detained individual sustained an injury during an interaction 
with law enforcement personnel and died later as a result of 
those injuries, the death should be reported to the program.

Although the majority of deaths reported to the ARD program 
involve criminal suspects, individuals not considered subjects of 
arrest can be detained by law enforcement personnel, such as 
during a stop-and-frisk search or during a vehicle stop. In 
addition, individuals may be in the custody of law enforcement 
for medical or mental health assistance. Deaths of noncriminal 
persons that occur in the custody of state or local law 
enforcement personnel should be reported to the ARD program when 
the deaths are attributed to events that occur while the person 
is engaged with law enforcement. 

The most common types of noncriminal deaths reportable to the ARD 
program occur during law enforcement’s response to service calls 
for assistance or transport. Often, these service calls are 
civilian requests for mental health or medical assistance. These 
incidents may involve individuals who are suicidal or displaying 
erratic behavior or may occur during transport to a mental health 
facility or hospital. Law enforcement may have engaged with the 
decedent to facilitate care during an emergency, assist with 
involuntary commitment to a medical facility, or support 
emergency medical technicians while transporting an individual 
for continued care.

During an attempted arrest or in the process of arrest -- Arrest-
******************************************************
related deaths include all deaths that occur during an 
interaction with law enforcement personnel in the process of 
arrest or attempted arrest, regardless of whether physical 
custody was established before the death. Deaths occurring before 
arrest include those that are attributed to events that 
transpired either during apprehension or while the decedent was 
detained for questioning or investigation. 

Deaths that occur while law enforcement personnel attempt to 
apprehend or arrest an individual (e.g., those that occur during 
foot or vehicle pursuits of criminal suspects and during 
standoffs or barricade situations) are reportable. Common 
examples of deaths that occur during apprehension include 
officer-involved shootings; deaths related to the use of force or 
law enforcement compliance weapons ***Footnote 3 Compliance or 
less-than-lethal weapons are designed to induce offender 
compliance while minimizing accidental, incidental, and 
correlative casualties associated with weapon use.*** or tactics; 
vehicle accidents and collisions caused by either the decedent, 
intervening law enforcement personnel, or unrelated civilians; 
other types of fatal accidental injuries sustained while 
attempting to elude law enforcement personnel, such as falls from 
heights and drowning; and suicides committed during standoffs and 
barricade situations.

Deaths that occur during interviews and interrogations, or while 
a criminal suspect is detained for questioning or investigation, 
are also within the scope of the ARD program and should be 
reported. These arrest-related deaths may take place at a law 
enforcement facility or in the field. Examples of these types of 
deaths include those attributed to alcohol and drug 
intoxications, sudden medical conditions (e.g., cardiac arrest, 
asthma, stroke, or seizure), choking on ingested objects or other 
forms of asphyxiation, and suicides.

In addition to deaths that occur before a physical arrest, deaths 
that occur while law enforcement attempts to establish physical 
custody of a suspect are also reportable to the ARD program. All 
deaths that are attributed to weapon use by state or local law 
enforcement personnel are considered arrest related and are 
reported. Common examples of deaths attributed to law 
enforcement’s use of weapons include officer-involved shootings, 
complications related to the use of conducted energy devices 
(i.e., Tasers or stun guns), accidents caused by the use of spike 
strips or other tire deflation devices, fatal injuries due to the 
use of impact devices (e.g., batons and soft projectiles) and 
complications due to the use of chemical agents(e.g., pepper 
spray and tear gas).

All deaths caused by law enforcement’s use of restraint tactics 
are also reported to the ARD program. Eligible deaths attributed 
to restraint or use of other tactics include fatal injuries 
caused by physical fighting or struggle with law enforcement 
personnel; deaths caused by positional asphyxia or restraint in 
prone position; fatal injuries due to physical restraint by law 
enforcement personnel, such as those attributed to the use of 
control holds or neck restraint; and deaths caused by 
complications due to body compression.

While in custody (before transfer to jail -- Deaths that occur 
******************************************
after law enforcement personnel have established physical custody 
of an arrestee are reported to the ARD program if the deaths 
occur while custody of the suspects resides with the arresting 
agency. These in-custody deaths can occur at the scene of the 
incident; during transport of a criminal suspect or transport of 
a person in need of medical or mental health assistance; or while 
a suspect is being held at a law enforcement facility, such as a 
booking center or lockup facility. 

For the purposes of ARD, an in-custody death refers only to the 
deaths of criminal suspects under the control of state and local 
police officers and sheriffs’ deputies during booking, but before 
arraignment or transfer to a jail or prison. Once an arrestee is 
arraigned or custody of the individual is transferred to a long-
term correction facility, the death is no longer within the scope 
of the ARD program. The deaths of incarcerated inmates are 
recorded in either the jails or prisons component of the DCRP.

Common examples of deaths that occur during transport or 
confinement include those attributed to complications related to 
the use of weapons (e.g., a firearm or conducted energy device) 
during the arrest incident; injuries caused by the use of 
restraint or impact devices, as well as those resulting from 
physical altercation; fatal intoxications attributed to the 
overuse of alcohol and drugs; medical conditions; and suicides.

*********************
1.3	Exclusions
*********************

Not all deaths that occur during an interaction with state and 
local law enforcement personnel should be reported to the ARD 
program. Four general situations are typically excluded: (1) 
deaths of bystanders, hostages, and law enforcement personnel; 
(2) deaths of persons in the custody of federal law enforcement 
agents; (3) deaths of wanted criminal suspects before police 
contact; and (4) deaths by vehicular pursuits without any direct 
police action. 

Deaths of bystanders, hostages, and law enforcement personnel--
***************************************************************
The deaths of innocent bystanders, hostages, and law enforcement 
personnel are excluded. Including persons killed in the course of 
law enforcement activities against whom no charges were intended 
was considered outside the scope of the ARD program.
Data on law enforcement personnel killed during interactions with 
civilians are outside the scope and are captured by the FBI in 
the Law Enforcement Officers Killed and Assaulted (LEOKA) 
collection. 

Deaths by federal law enforcement -- Deaths that occurred while 
*************************************
the decedent was in the custody of federal law enforcement 
agencies (e.g., the FBI, Drug Enforcement Administration, or U.S. 
Marshals Service) are outside the scope of the ARD program as 
defined in the original DICRA, which did not apply to federal law 
enforcement agencies or the Federal Bureau of Prisons. Fatal 
incidents involving federal law enforcement personnel are 
reportable to ARD only if the interaction causing death also 
included state or local law enforcement personnel. Footnote 4 
?Current Death in Custody Reporting Act of 2013 (P.L. 113-242) 
includes federal law enforcement within scope.***

Deaths of wanted criminal suspects before police contact -- The 
**********************************************************
death of a criminal suspect wanted by law enforcement personnel 
are not reported to the program if the death occurred before the 
decedent came into contact with law enforcement. The death of a 
person with an active arrest warrant are not reported to the ARD 
collection unless law enforcement personnel were present when the 
event causing the death occurred. If law enforcement personnel 
were actively attempting to apprehend a wanted suspect at the 
time the event causing the death occurred, the death is within 
the scope of the collection.

Deaths by vehicular pursuits without any direct police action –
****************************************************************
Although some vehicular deaths can be reported to the ARD 
program, those in which law enforcement did not take direct 
action against the subject or his or her vehicle should be 
excluded from the data collection. Cases in which a vehicular 
pursuit of an arrest subject involved direct action taken by law 
enforcement personnel against the subject, such as shooting at 
the subject’s vehicle, ramming it, or otherwise forcing the 
vehicle to stop or leave the road (e.g., roadblocks or spike 
strips), are within the scope of the collection. Deaths resulting 
from vehicular pursuits—regardless of speed—are not reportable to 
the ARD program if the pursuit did not involve any direct law 
enforcement action taken against the subject and instead merely 
entailed following the subject.

*******************
2.	Methodology
*******************

*************
Highlights
*************

* Centralized state reporting coordinators (SRCs) operate the 
state-level ARD data collection.

* The ARD program has three main tasks:

         * identify arrest-related deaths

         * acquire information about arrest-related deaths

         * (or summary of incidents) and the CJ-11A form, 
            Arrest-Related Death Report (or incident report).  

* SRCs use one or more of the following sources to identify 
eligible ARD cases:

         * law enforcement

         * medical examiner or coroner

         * prosecutor’s office
     
         * Uniform Crime Reports (UCRs)

         * National Violent Deaths Reporting System (NVDRS)\

         * open-source media search.

To implement the ARD collection, BJS developed a program 
methodology that relied on establishing centralized SRCs and 
using them to operate state-level ARD data collections (see 
appendix B for a description of how the current ARD program 
methodology was developed).Footnote 5 When the DICRA legislation 
was enacted, only California and Texas had statutes requiring 
that information on arrest-related deaths be collected and 
reported at the state level. For the remaining 48 states and the 
District of Columbia, the ARD program was the first attempt to 
collect statewide counts of all deaths that occur in the process 
of arrest. In developing the program, BJS contacted multiple 
offices in each state to determine an appropriate reporting agent 
and data provider.*** 

Since 2003, SRCs have been responsible for identifying all ARD 
reportable deaths in their states and for obtaining information 
about these deaths. BJS provided guidance in how to collect ARD 
data but did not require SRCs to use a specified, standard 
methodology. BJS recommends that states use one or more of the 
following procedures to identify arrest-related deaths: 
implementing legislation; contacting state medical examiner and 
county coroner officers; involving state and local prosecutors’ 
offices; contacting the state police; expanding the role of the 
state UCR reporters; or conducting open-source searches. 

Once a reportable death is identified, SRCs are directed to work 
with the law enforcement agency involved with the death to obtain 
the required data elements about the incident. When the SRC is 
unable to obtain full reporting from the law enforcement agency 
involved in the death, the SRC is asked to compile details of the 
event from official source documents and to complete a CJ-11A 
Incident Report (appendix A). As a result, SRCs have developed 
strategies for identifying and collecting data that vary by the 
resources available to them. Consequently, the current ARD 
program design reflects many state-specific methodologies that 
are integrated into a single, national-level program.

**********************
2.1	Data providers
**********************

Information about data providers participating in the ARD program 
is available for calendar years 2003–11.Footnote 6 Although ARD 
data were accepted after 2011, program staff did not actively 
collect data for calendar years 2012 or 2013.*** During 2011, 47 
reporting offices submitted ARD data (table 2-1). Most States 
have maintained participating SRCs over time, with 36 states 
submitting ARD data every year of data collection since 2003 
(states are not shown in table 2-1). Although a state may not 
have participated in the ARD program in a given year, arrest-
related deaths may have been identified and reported by BJS staff 
in these states.

During 2011, a state criminal justice agency was the most common 
data reporting contact (16 states), followed by a department of 
public safety or other state law enforcement agency (14 states) 
(table 2-2). In three states, the department of corrections took 
a lead role in compiling ARD records. 

Participation in the ARD program is voluntary without direct 
payment or compensation. Only SRCs employed by state justice 
statistics analysis centers (SACs) have received federal funds to 
support ARD-related work. SACs are units or agencies at the state 
government level that use information from all components of the 
criminal justice system to analyze statewide policy issues (see 
www.jrsa.org). SACs are maintained in various entities, such as 
state planning or coordinating agencies, governors’ offices, 
criminal justice agencies, and universities.

For 32 states in 2011 (68%), the SRC office reporting ARD data 
also served as the SAC.  

*******************************
2.2  Data collection process
*******************************

The ARD program data collection process includes three main 
tasks:

(1) identify arrest-related deaths

(2) acquire information about arrest-related deaths

(3) submit CJ-11summary of incidents and CJ-11A incident reports.

SRCs are responsible for identifying all arrest-related deaths 
within their states. Arrest-related deaths may be identified 
directly by the SRC or indirectly through assistance from another 
entity involved with the death (e.g., law enforcement agency) or 
death investigation (e.g., medical examiner’s or coroner’s 
office, prosecutor’s office). SRCs use a variety of techniques to 
identify deaths that are consistent with ARD program definitions. 
BJS encourages SRCs to take an active approach in identifying 
deaths, rather than relying solely on a system of voluntary 
reporting by law enforcement or nongovernmental entities. Active 
strategies are those in which the SRC proactively searches for 
arrest-related deaths, such as methods that include surveying law 
enforcement agencies, mining existing data collections, and 
conducting regular open-source searches, in addition to possibly 
receiving voluntary submissions from law enforcement agencies and 
medical offices.

SRCs are responsible for obtaining complete incident reports for 
each arrest-related death in the state and for transmitting 
instruments to ARD program staff for data entry, analysis, and 
dissemination at the national level. Although all three of these 
components are incorporated into the national program design, the 
processes by which data are collected vary by SRC.

**************************************
2.2.1 Active and passive approaches 
to case identification
**************************************

In 2011, most SRCs employed active strategies for identifying 
deaths. Of the 45 SRCs reporting information about their data 
collection procedures, 41 reported using a proactive strategy to 
identify arrest-related deaths. The most common active 
identification strategy involved conducting open-source searches 
for reportable deaths. In total, 32 SRCs reported conducting web-
based searches as a means for identifying reportable deaths: 16 
conducted solely open-source searches, and 16 conducted open-
source searches in addition to another strategy (table 2-3).

SRCs using passive methodologies rely on other agencies to 
identify arrest-related deaths. Passive strategies are those in 
which data are collected through voluntary submissions of 
completed CJ11A incident reports from other entities, such as law 
enforcement agencies and medical examiners’ or coroners’ offices. 
SRCs employing passive methodologies do not conduct independent 
searches for arrest-related deaths. SRCs in four states said that 
deaths were identified solely through voluntary reporting by law 
enforcement agencies. 

*********************************
2.2.2 Number and type of case 
identification strategies
**********************************

Of the 41 SRCs with known active case identification strategies, 
17 mentioned using multiple strategies for identifying arrest-
related deaths, while 24 (59%) said that they used a single 
method for identifying cases. Among those 24 SRCs, open-source 
searches were the most common (16 SRCs), followed by direct 
reporting by law enforcement agencies (3), a query of medical 
examiners’ or coroners’ databases (3), a query of the NVDRS (1), 
and officer-involved death reports submitted to the office of the 
attorney general (1).

The use of open-source searches as a method of identifying 
arrest-related deaths was also common among SRCs using multiple 
case identification strategies. Among the SRCs implementing 
multiple strategies for identifying deaths, 16 in 17 used open-
source searches combined with other methods, such as surveys of 
law enforcement (7 SRCs) and queries of medical examiners’ or 
coroners’ databases (4 SRCs), NVDRS (3 SRCs), and the National 
Incident-Based Reporting System (NIBRS) or UCR (2 SRCs). One 
other SRC searched medical examiners’ databases and conducted 
statewide surveys of prosecutors’ reports.

2.2.3 Primary identification
 methodology
*******************************

Of the 45 participating states with known case identification 
methodologies in 2011, 26 SRCs used the media and open-source 
searches as their primary manner of identifying arrest-related 
deaths (table 2-4). Eight SRCs identified deaths primarily 
through direct reporting by law enforcement agencies, five 
through medical examiners’ or coroners’ offices, three through 
the NVDRS programs, two through the state attorney general’s or 
prosecutors’ offices, and one through the UCR program.

Although SRCs used similar strategies for identifying deaths, 
differences were found in how methodologies are applied. SRCs 
reported using media accounts as their primary case 
identification methodology more frequently than any other method; 
however, this strategy varied the most across states. For 
example, many SRCs stated that their methodology was to watch the 
local television news, read the newspaper, or both. Although some 
arrest-related deaths will be identified by monitoring local 
news, this method is not likely to be sufficient for identifying 
the full universe of reportable deaths. One problem relates to 
whether local outlets are capable of covering the ARD scope for 
the entire state, while another problem relates to whether this 
type of monitoring is conducted systematically. It was not clear 
from discussions with SRCs that routine procedures were employed 
when monitoring news outlets (e.g., daily monitoring or 
monitoring the same outlets). It was also unclear how SRCs 
determined which outlets to monitor and whether any investigation 
was conducted to assess the appropriateness or accuracy of the 
source content.

Besides traditional media, many SRCs also used open-source 
Internet searches to identify deaths. Although some specifically 
mentioned monitoring the web page of the state police for 
incidents of arrest-related deaths, others had a more difficult 
time specifying their procedures. Some SRCs also reported that 
they conducted searches for terms relating to arrest-related 
deaths, but it was unclear whether searches were conducted ad hoc 
or routinely. It was also unclear if the same terms were searched 
consistently or if SRCs varied their terms when searching for 
arrest-related deaths. Without information about specific search 
terms used by SRCs, the variation of search terms are unknown 
across SRCs. Overall, although 26 states reported using media 
searches as their primary mode for identifying arrest-related 
deaths, no two SRCs used the exact same procedures.

2.2.4 Types of state reporting 
coordinators and primary methods 
for identifying arrest-related deaths
****************************************

SRCs were categorized by the location of their offices in an attempt to 
better understand whether there is a relationship between the type of 
reporting office and the primary method for identifying arrest-related 
deaths. Among the SRCs located in state criminal justice agencies, 10 in 14 
relied on open-source searches as their primary method for identifying 
arrest-related deaths. Half (7) of the SRCs located in departments of public 
safety or another state law enforcement agency also used open-source searches 
as their primary means of identifying deaths. Among the 14 SRCs located in 
departments of public safety or another state law enforcement agency, three 
identified arrest-related deaths primarily through direct reporting by law 
enforcement agencies (table 2-5).

2.2.5 Source of case information
************************************

Once an arrest-related death is identified, the SRC is 
responsible for either obtaining information about the death 
directly or coordinating efforts by other entities to obtain 
case-level information. In states in which SRCs identify 
reportable deaths, the SRC may take responsibility for acquiring 
information about the incident or may request that another agency 
involved with the death (e.g., law enforcement agency, medical 
examiner’s office, or prosecutor’s office) provide information 
about the circumstances surrounding the death. In states in which 
deaths are identified by other agencies, the agency that 
identified the death takes responsibility for gathering 
information. 

SRCs responsible for directly obtaining information about the 
death acquire case information from a variety of sources, 
including police reports or press releases, death records or 
autopsy reports, legal accounts, and the media. Non-SRC entities 
responsible for gathering case information typically use the same 
data sources as SRCs because these agencies are often those 
responsible for initially collecting the information. For 
example, law enforcement agencies completing the CJ-11A will 
likely use information from the police reports they produced.

2.2.6 Overlap in sources used to identify 
deaths and to obtain case information
********************************************

SRCs vary in the number and types of sources they use to obtain 
information about arrest-related death incidents. Some SRCs rely 
on a single source of information to both identify deaths and 
gather information about incidents. Other SRCs use a multistep 
data collection process in which information used to complete the 
CJ-11A comes from a source other than the one used to identify 
the death. For instance, a single-source data collection process 
could involve using a media account both to identify the arrest-
related death and to obtain information about it. A multisource 
process involves using one source (e.g., media report) to 
identify a reportable death and one or more additional sources of 
information (e.g., a police report or autopsy report) to obtain 
case information. 

Eleven SRCs (24%) used a single source of information for 
identifying arrest-related deaths and completing CJ-11A incident 
reports (figure 2-1). Of those, the most common source of 
information was law enforcement reports (six SRCs), followed by 
media reports (two SRCs), medical examiner records (two SRCs), 
and UCR data (one SRC). 

Most SRCs (72%) relied on multiple sources of information to 
identify deaths and to obtain incident data during 2011. Thirty-
six percent of SRCs relied on both the source of information used 
to identify arrest-related deaths and at least one additional 
source to obtain the incident data for completing the CJ-11A. 
Thirty-six percent of SRCs used a multistep data collection 
process in which one source was used to identify deaths and a 
different source was used to obtain information about the death. 
The most common example of a multisource process involved using 
open-source searches to identify an arrest-related death and a 
police report to complete the CJ-11A.
 
During 2011, about two-thirds of SRCs used only official sources 
of information for obtaining data regarding incidents of arrest-
related deaths (table 2-6). Law enforcement reports were the most 
common source of incident-level information about arrest-related 
deaths. A small number of SRCs (4%) relied on unofficial sources 
of information, such as journalistic accounts of events, to 
obtain details about reportable incidents.

*******************************
2.3 Completion of CJ-11 
and CJ-11A instruments
*******************************

The ARD program uses two data collection instruments, the CJ-11 
Quarterly Summary of Arrest-Related Deaths (summary of incidents) 
and the CJ-11A Arrest-Related Death Report (incident report). The 
CJ-11 form is completed by SRCs and is a state-level count of 
arrest-related deaths. SRCs are directed to submit a CJ-11 form 
for each reporting period and to show a count of zero if no 
arrest-related deaths are identified within the reporting period. 
BJS requests that SRCs submit zero counts to distinguish between 
the measured absence of an identified death and missing data.

The CJ-11A form is a detailed incident report that describes the 
circumstances surrounding each reportable death. SRCs are asked 
to submit a complete CJ-11A incident report for each death 
recorded on the state-level CJ-11 summary form. Depending on the 
method used to identify the death and the agency responsible for 
acquiring information about the incident, the SRC may take 
responsibility for completing the CJ-11A forms or may request 
that another agency complete the forms.

Information about the entity responsible for completing CJ-11A 
forms during 2011 was available in 45 states. The law enforcement 
agency involved with the death was primarily responsible for 
completing CJ-11A incident reports in 20 states (44%) (figure 2-
2). SRCs obtained case information and completed CJ-11A reports 
in 16 states (36%), followed by staff in medical examiners’ 
offices (2 states) and prosecutors’ offices (1 state). Multiple 
entities took responsibility for completing sections of the CJ11A 
incident report in six states, with joint efforts by the SRC and 
law enforcement agency in three states, the SRC and medical 
examiner’s or coroner’s office in two states, and the law 
enforcement agency and medical examiner’s office in one state.

2.3.1 Data collection cycle
*****************************

The ARD data collection is conducted on a calendar-year cycle. 
The program operates continuously and accepts submissions 
throughout the year. The ARD program also accepts reports of 
arrest-related deaths that occurred before the current calendar 
year and updates to previously reported data.
In January, BJS notifies SRCs that it is beginning a new year of 
ARD data collection and provides them with key program materials, 
including (1) the CJ-11 summary of incidents form, (2) the CJ-11A 
incident report, and (3) a question-by-question guide to aid in 
completing the CJ-11A (see appendix A for survey instruments and 
revisions to the CJ-11A incident report, 2003–13). In addition, 
BJS provides the SRCs with general information about the program, 
such as key dates, methods for submitting data, and contact 
information for ARD program staff. 

When the DICRA legislation was in effect, SRCs were required to 
submit ARD data quarterly. They were asked to submit a CJ-11 
Summary of incidents and corresponding CJ11A incident reports 
within 60 days of the end of the quarter. After DICRA expired in 
2006, BJS relaxed the quarterly reporting requirement and gave 
SRCs the option of submitting their data either quarterly, 
annually, or on a schedule of their choosing. Of SRCs reporting 
ARD data in 2011, about half (49%) submitted data annually, while 
28% continued to collect and report data quarterly (figure 2-3). 
Data can be submitted any time during the year, but SRCs must 
submit all annual CJ-11 and CJ-11A reports no later than March 1 
of the following calendar year. 

 2.3.2 Data submission
*************************

After the SRCs complete their annual data collections, they 
transmit this state-level data to BJS for analysis. Historically, 
the ARD data collection was paper based. Data providers would 
complete paper versions of the CJ-11 and CJ-11A forms and mail or 
fax them to BJS. As the program developed, BJS began accepting 
the forms electronically through email. Electronic versions of 
the forms were submitted either as fillable PDFs or scanned 
documents. BJS staff would then enter information from the CJ-11A 
forms into a national database.
 
To improve efficiency, BJS established an Internet-based data 
collection tool for the ARD (see appendix B for a full 
description). This tool allows SRCs to enter CJ-11A information 
directly on a web-based reporting platform rather than 
transmitting the completed forms to BJS and its ARD program 
staff. Currently, ARD data can be submitted at any time and are 
accepted via postal mail, fax, or electronically through email, 
an uploaded PDF, or direct entry through the web-based reporting 
tool. 

As noted previously, annual state-level ARD data are due by March 
1 of the next calendar year. ARD staff review these data and 
assess them for completeness and consistency before entering them 
into the national database for analysis (see appendix C for a 
description of the BJS verification process). In addition, 
records are reviewed to determine whether each reported death 
falls within the ARD scope. 

****************************
3.	Program assessment
****************************

*************
Highlights
*************

* A national- and state-level comparison of ARD and SHR data 
collected 2003–05 showed that, despite convergence at the 
national level, there were considerable differences in ARD 
program coverage at the state level. Similar differences within 
states at the agency level were also found in an analysis of data 
reported to ARD and SHR in 2006–09.

* Nationally, the ARD program estimates that it has captured 
about 50% of all law enforcement homicides during 2003–09 and 
2011.

* The national coverage of homicides by law enforcement that the 
ARD program captures improved from 2003 through 2011. Even with 
this improvement, assessments indicate that between 31% and 41% 
of homicides by law enforcement personnel were not captured in 
the 2011 ARD data.

The ARD program relies primarily on state-level respondents to 
gather and report information on deaths associated with the 
arrest process for all state and local law enforcement agencies. 
As described in the Methodology section (chapter 2), the manner 
in which these incidents are identified and subsequent 
information collected varies between and within states and over 
time, leading to nonsampling errors from differences in use and 
interpretation of definitions, scope, and data collection modes. 
Although an empirical assessment of the relative level of error 
associated with each data collection approach is not known and 
would be very difficult to design, many of these errors have been 
realized from internal audits and anecdotal accounts from data 
providers and SRCs. Subsequently, this nonstandardized data 
collection process invites concerns about the coverage, bias, and 
reliability of reports. 

This chapter describes critical aspects of the ARD data 
collection methodology, noting important limitations and 
challenges to producing valid and reliable national estimates. 
These challenges include variations in state-level methodologies 
related to (1) whether SRCs actively identify within-scope cases 
and the level of effort they apply to their search for reportable 
cases, (2) what SRCs use as their primary case identification 
strategies, (3) whether SRCs use one or multiple methods for 
identifying deaths, (4) what source of information they use to 
complete CJ-11A forms and whether they use multiple sources of 
information, and (5) which agency is responsible for completing 
the form. To highlight these challenges, we describe issues 
related to scope and definitions, to data collection strategies, 
and modes. We follow this description with an assessment of the 
coverage of the ARD program, focusing on law enforcement 
homicides. 

3.1	Defining eligible incidents
**********************************

The ARD program has definitions and a scope for eligible 
incidents that are difficult to consolidate into a comprehensive, 
precise set of terms. The program relies on a set of examples to 
help identify eligible cases and guide data collection agencies. 
An arrest-related death can occur at any time and in any location 
where law enforcement personnel and civilians interact, including 
while fleeing or being pursued, at scenes of arrest, at locations 
of medical or mental health assistance, and while the person is 
being transported to law enforcement or medical facilities or is 
detained at lockups or booking centers. The breadth of the ARD 
scope and the variety of circumstances and locations in which 
eligible deaths can occur make it difficult for state-level 
reporting agents to identify all reportable deaths.


3.1.1 Arrest-related
***********************

The term “arrest-related” in the DICRA legislation encompasses a 
variety of circumstances from the process of apprehension to 
detention. Confusion about the program scope arose from the 
expansive nature of the terms “in the process of arrest” and 
“arrest-related.” For example, in the law enforcement community, 
“the process of arrest” means Mirandizing and handcuffing 
suspects and is not used to describe pursuits, officer-involved 
shootings, or other uses of force. However, for ARD purposes, 
arrest-related deaths can occur before, during, or after an 
arrest, as long as the event that causes the death occurs during 
an interaction with state or local law enforcement personnel. An 
arrest-related death describes deaths caused by law enforcement 
personnel, and those attributed to suicide, intoxication, 
accidental injury, and medical emergencies or health 
complications. The resulting characterization of arrest-related 
deaths is more inclusive than a collection of officer-involved 
shootings or justifiable homicides by law enforcement, which may 
be more easily understood as eligible incidents. The breadth of 
the program’s definition of “arrest-related” creates problems in 
identifying eligible cases, likely contributing to a significant 
undercount of incidents.

3.1.2 Custody
*****************

The term “custody” includes physically touching or putting hands 
on an arrestee. For the ARD program, it also includes any act 
that indicates an intention to gain control of an arrest subject 
under the authority of the law or any situation in which a 
person’s freedom to leave is restricted by state or local law 
enforcement personnel. This includes deaths occurring while law 
enforcement officers actively pursue or attempt to apprehend 
persons of interest or criminal suspects, regardless of whether 
physical custody is established. For example, many ARD cases are 
officer-involved shootings, and virtually none of these incidents 
involved subjects who were already in the physical custody of law 
enforcement personnel. 

Custody includes individuals in physical custody of law 
enforcement without being in the process of arrest. To gain 
control of a situation, law enforcement personnel sometimes 
handcuff or detain persons against whom they do not plan to file 
charges (e.g., mentally ill or intoxicated persons, or others who 
pose a danger to their own safety).

3.1.3 Reporting deaths in jails
********************************

The goal of the DCRP is to identify and record all deaths of 
civilians in contact with law enforcement and correctional 
personnel. BJS implemented three separate data collection systems 
to capture deaths occurring in the process of arrest and those 
that occur while the person is detained in jail or prison. Deaths 
reportable to the ARD program are limited to those that occurred 
while the decedents were in the custody of law enforcement. 
Therefore, deaths that occur after an individual has been 
processed and custody has been transferred to a holding facility 
are outside the ARD scope. Given that the functions of some law 
enforcement agencies include detention, some SRCs reported 
difficulty in determining whether the decedent died in the 
custody of law enforcement or the custody of a correctional 
facility.

********************************************
3.2	Assessment of data collection modes
********************************************

3.2.1	Standardization
***********************

The ARD program has implemented variable methodologies since its 
first collection in 2003. As a result, data providers have 
designed and developed state-level data collections according to 
their preferences, their capabilities, and the resources 
available to them. The flexibility of the ARD data collection 
allows state-level data providers to use a variety of data 
sources and to rely on those that are most reliable in their 
particular states, but it presents significant challenges for 
collecting statistically sound, national-level data because of 
the variability in data quality both within and across states. 
BJS has developed standardized data collection instruments (CJ-
11A form), training materials, working definitions, and a web 
tool to assist SRCs in gathering and submitting the ARD 
information (see Appendix B). However, significant challenges 
within and between states exist in terms of mode, source, and 
quality.

3.2.2	Variation in program 
methodologies across states
*****************************

SRCs developed their data collection methodologies in relation to 
their preferences and resources. As a result, the ARD program 
operations varied among participating states (see chapter 2: 
Methodology). Deaths may be identified from one or more resources 
from among media, open sources, law enforcement agencies, and 
medical examiners’ or coroners’ offices. The information sources 
consulted for completing each CJ-11A form also differed, and 
included media reports, police reports, medical examiner or 
coroner reports, case reports from the division of criminal 
information, or any combination of these sources. Data collection 
methodologies also differed by the agency responsible for 
completing the CJ-11A form, which can include the SRC, a law 
enforcement agency, a medical examiner’s or coroner’s office, or 
a combination of those offices.

BJS assessed the SRCs’ primary method for identifying deaths, the 
sources of information used to complete the CJ-11A incident 
report, and the entity completing the CJ-11A. BJS determined that 
SRCs used a wide range of methods for collecting ARD data in 
2011. The most common method (nine SRCs) for collecting ARD data 
was for the SRC to identify cases through open-source searches. 
Then, the SRC asked the law enforcement agency involved with the 
death to complete a CJ-11A incident report using the agency’s 
official data about the case. The second most common method (six 
SRCs) for collecting ARD data was direct reporting by the law 
enforcement agency involved with the death. In these states, the 
law enforcement agency involved with the arrest-related death 
took responsibility for identifying it, obtaining and completing 
a CJ-11A incident report using the agency’s official data, and 
submitting the form to the SRC. In three states, SRCs identified 
deaths through media searches and completed CJ-11A instruments by 
obtaining the manner and cause of death from a medical examiner’s 
or coroner’s office. The rest of the information requested on the 
CJ-11A form was obtained through the same open-source record used 
to identify the death, namely, media accounts of events. Two SRCs 
identified arrest-related deaths through open-source searches and 
completed the corresponding CJ-11A instruments with information 
obtained in the media account used to identify the death. The 
remaining 24 states reporting information about their 2011 ARD 
data identification and collection strategies used unique 
methodologies with varying combinations of the source used to 
identify the arrest-related death, the agency responsible for 
completing the CJ-11A form, and the source of information for 
completing the CJ-11A form. 

Most states (26) relied solely on open-source searches to 
identify ARD-eligible cases. Although about half of the 
participating states said that they used open-source searches as 
their primary strategy for identifying deaths, no standard 
methodology exists for this type of identification procedure. 
Therefore, each of these 26 states was likely to use different 
mechanisms, searches, and monitoring plans for identifying 
arrest-related deaths. 

3.2.3	Variation in program 
methodologies within states
*****************************

Some SRCs noted that they did not have a standard operating 
procedure for identifying or collecting information on arrest-
related deaths. They could specify the primary strategies they 
used to identify cases (e.g., media or law enforcement) and 
whether or not they also used alternative methodologies for 
identifying deaths. However, the SRCs suggested that it was more 
difficult to describe their exact data collection procedures 
because they often varied from one case to another. For example, 
SRCs relying on media or open-source searches described 
identifying cases by a variety of means. These included watching 
television, reading local newspapers, using Google Alerts to 
conduct daily web-based searches of key words or phrases, 
monitoring the state police web page, and searching other 
websites. In discussions with SRCs, it appeared to be more common 
for deaths to be identified ad hoc rather than through specified, 
standard procedures conducted routinely. Of the SRCs reporting 
more standardized procedures for identifying cases, some said 
that their methods of obtaining the data needed to complete the 
CJ-11A varied from case to case. For instance, some states that 
relied on law enforcement agencies to complete the CJ11A forms 
had contingency plans for collecting data if the law enforcement 
agency involved with the death refused to supply the information. 
One SRC reported that only about 50% of law enforcement agencies 
return the completed CJ-11A form. When the law enforcement agency 
failed to provide the completed form, the SRC attempted to obtain 
a report from the medical examiner’s office for the information 
they needed to complete the form. If the information required to 
complete the CJ-11A was unavailable from the medical examiner’s 
office, the SRC used media reports to complete the report. 

Data collection methodolgies for SRCs participating in the ARD 
program differed over time. A survey of SRCs conducted in 2007 
revealed that 42 of 47 that reported data used more than one 
source of data to identify deaths and complete CJ-11A forms. 
Commonly referenced sources included local law enforcement 
agencies (43 SRCs), media (30), medical examiners’ or coroners’ 
offices (23), state police (19), state UCR/SHR reporters (9), and 
state attorneys general or prosecutors (6). A follow-up 
discussion conducted in 2012 suggested that 28 of the 46 states 
reporting data used a single source of information for 
identifying cases. Of these, commonly referenced single sources 
of information included media (16 SRCs), law enforcement agencies 
(7), medical examiners’ or coroners’ offices (3), the state 
attorney general or prosecutor (1), and the state NVDRS reporter 
(1). Twenty of the 46 SRCs reporting data indicated that they 
used multiple sources of information to complete CJ-11A forms for 
identified deaths (16 used two sources, and 4 used three or more 
sources). As a result of the variability both within and between 
states, records were often identified through a variety of means 
and comprised both official and unofficial accounts of the 
events.

3.3	Assessment of data quality and coverage 
**********************************************

Given the concern about the lack of standardization both across 
and within SRCs in terms of data collection modes, definitions, 
scope, and availability of the necessary resources, BJS assessed 
the quality of the program’s coverage—that is, how well the 
program performs in capturing the full universe of eligible 
arrest-related deaths.
 
3.3.1	2003–05 national and state assessment
********************************************

Initial efforts began in 2007 with a focus on assessing the 
coverage of the 2003–05 ARD program by comparing homicides 
reported to ARD with those reported in the Supplementary Homicide 
Report (SHR) (Mumola, 2007). The SHR is a component of the FBI’s 
Uniform Crime Reporting (UCR) program, which compiles information 
on crimes known to state and local law enforcement agencies in 
the United States. While the UCR provides aggregate annual counts 
of the number of homicides occurring in the United States, the 
SHR data provide additional information about each homicide 
incident, including the jurisdiction, month, year, and 
circumstances associated with the incident. Like the ARD, the SHR 
data have limitations. Most notably, the SHR program is 
voluntary, so a number of law enforcement agencies either do not 
consistently send their data to the SHR or do not submit it at 
all. The SHR, however, represents the only other national 
database that can provide sufficient information on the 
circumstances surrounding law enforcement homicides to allow 
comparison with the ARD program.
The ARD-SHR comparisons were limited to law enforcement homicides 
because, unlike the ARD program, the SHR does not record law 
enforcement-involved deaths that are attributed to suicide, 
intoxications, accidental injury, or natural causes. Also unlike 
the ARD program, the SHR includes only those homicides by law 
enforcement in which the use of force was ruled justifiable. 
Deaths due to unjustified use of lethal force by law enforcement 
personnel are counted with other murders and cannot be 
disaggregated for comparison to ARD. The ARD counts of homicide 
by law enforcement include all deaths that result from the use of 
force. 
Results of this assessment indicate that, nationally, a similar 
number of officer-involved homicides were recorded in the ARD and 
SHR programs. In the aggregate, the two programs collected very 
similar counts from 2003 through 2005, with 1,095 homicides 
recorded in ARD and 1,082 justifiable homicides recorded in the 
SHR. However, the aggregated, national-level comparison of the 
ARD and SHR data masked differences in reporting at the state 
level. 
Similarly, the aggregate analysis at the state level likely also 
masked differences within states at the agency level. In most 
states, the ARD and SHR counts of law enforcement homicides 
showed small differences in the number of deaths reported to each 
program, but because arrest-related deaths are rare events, even 
small differences in state-level counts could result in a 
substantial change in the proportion of reported deaths. In 33 
states, the two measures differed by fewer than 10 deaths from 
2003 through 2005. Nine states reported counts that differed by 
at least 20 deaths, with the difference ranging from 22 to 194 
homicides. California—one of 2 states with a statute requiring 
that all arrest-related deaths be reported to the state attorney 
general’s office—had the largest reporting variation, with 354 
justifiable homicides by law enforcement reported to the SHR from 
2003 through 2005 but less than half as many (160) reported to 
the ARD program. Over the same period, Florida reported 98 law 
enforcement homicides to the ARD program but did not report any 
data to the SHR. Taking the higher count reported by each state 
for each year yields a total of 1,489 reported law enforcement 
homicides from 2003 through 2005—more than a third as many as 
those reported to either program.
3.3.2  2006–09 agency assessment
BJS conducted an agency-level analysis of homicides by law 
enforcement reported to the ARD program and to the SHR for 2006–
09 to determine the number of cases recorded in the SHR that were 
not recorded in ARD and vice versa. Homicides were disaggregated 
by agency for this comparison, using the agency’s originating 
identification (ORI) number. Law enforcement agencies were 
matched across data sources, and the numbers of recorded 
homicides were compared to better understand how the coverage 
issues identified in the state-level analysis were affected by 
variation in reporting by law enforcement agencies. BJS was 
interested in determining whether the differences in reporting 
were due to (1) different agencies reporting to each system or 
(2) the same agencies reporting different counts to both systems.
BJS conducted this analysis by creating overage variables to 
represent the number of additional cases reported to the ARD 
program and to the SHR by each law enforcement agency. For 
example, if the Springfield Police Department reported one 
homicide by law enforcement to ARD and three homicides by law 
enforcement to the SHR, the ARD overage variable would equal 0 
and the SHR overage variable would equal 2. Although this 
analysis was limited in that it did not determine whether the one 
case reported to ARD was also one of the three cases captured in 
the SHR, it was able to provide evidence of at least two 
homicides by the Springfield Police Department that were not 
captured in ARD. The SHR overage homicides were summed as an 
indication of the minimum number of homicides by law enforcement 
missing from ARD (identified as ARD missing). Similarly, the ARD 
overage cases were transformed into SHR missing. For the 
Springfield Police Department, the ARD missing equaled 2.
This procedure was conducted for every law enforcement agency 
that reported a homicide by law enforcement to either ARD or the 
SHR from 2006 through 2009. The analysis resulted in a minimum of 
701 cases reported to the SHR that were not recorded in ARD, and 
a minimum of 935 cases that were recorded in ARD, that were not 
captured in the SHR. Although this analysis was limited by 
several factors—namely, that the data were not disaggregated by 
year of death or characteristics of the decedent—it demonstrated 
coverage error at the agency level.
3.3.3  2003–11 individual case assessment
To better understand the source of discrepancies in reporting 
across the ARD program and the SHR, BJS compared individual-level 
homicide records in each collection. For this assessment, BJS 
examined law enforcement homicides in ARD and compared them with 
justifiable homicides in SHR using the data available from the 
entire ARD program and a capture-recapture analysis. This 
analysis addresses a key obstacle to understanding the coverage 
of the ARD program. Because the ARD program includes only state 
and local law enforcement agencies that have been involved in one 
or more identified arrest-related deaths and does not include 
agencies that did not have an identified arrest-related death, it 
is difficult to make inferences about coverage using ARD data 
alone. Because the SHR data also provide incident-level 
information on homicides, they can be used to help assess the 
coverage of the ARD data collection. The assessment consisted 
primarily of matching records from the two programs and 
determining the amount of overlap between collections to estimate 
the total universe of reporting deaths. Similar to the other 
assessments using SHR data, this assessment is limited to 
justifiable homicides by law enforcement (see Arrest-Related 
Deaths: Technical Report, NCJ 248544, BJS web, March 2015). 
Under the current ARD collection method, SRCs identify deaths, 
then usually contact the local agencies in which the deaths 
occurred to get the information they need to complete a CJ-11A 
for each death. By this method, BJS can affirm that an identified 
death occurred and met the criteria to be included in ARD, but it 
cannot confirm that there were in fact no other arrest-related 
deaths. This is because BJS does not survey each of the 
approximately 18,000 state and local law enforcement agencies in 
the United States to determine whether arrest-related deaths 
occurred. 
By linking records submitted to the ARD and SHR collections, it 
is possible to make inferences about the total size of the 
officer-involved homicide population and, therefore, about the 
population coverage achieved in the ARD program. This analytical 
technique, known as capture-recapture, is typified by studies of 
wild animal populations, although it is widely used in the study 
of human populations as well, particularly in coverage 
evaluations for censuses. The ARD coverage assessment is based on 
traditional capture-recapture methods, but unique characteristics 
of ARD data necessitate special techniques, including 
probabilistic record linkage between data sources and adjustments 
for unobserved agencies.
3.3.4  Probabilistic case-level linking 
Capture-recapture analysis depends on the ability to link records 
across data sources. In wildlife applications, this requirement 
is easily met as captured animals are identified through tagging. 
In the context of a coverage assessment using an auxiliary data 
source not collected as part of the study, this requirement 
becomes more difficult. Because decedents are not uniquely 
identified across data sources (e.g., by name or Social Security 
number), record linkage must be based on comparable decedent 
demographic and incident characteristics. As linkages made 
without unique identifiers are inherently uncertain, decedents 
are matched between ARD and SHR sources probabilistically on the 
basis of measured similarity between records, within a monte 
carlo replication framework. This means that although a given ARD 
decedent will be linked to either no SHR decedents or a single 
SHR decedent in a particular replicate, the nature of the link 
for that ARD decedent (i.e., whether it is linked and, if so, to 
which SHR decedent) is allowed to vary across replicates 
according to the probabilities associated with particular record 
pairings, on the basis of measured similarity between cases. 
Probabilistic linking is random in nature and incorporates 
additional uncertainty into the process of estimating population 
coverage. Monte carlo replication allows for this additional 
uncertainty to be captured in variance estimates.
3.3.5  Capture-recapture analytic approach
Once decedent records have been linked across the ARD and SHR, 
capture-recapture methods can be used to estimate the total law 
enforcement homicide population and the proportion of that 
population covered by the ARD program. This analysis makes use of 
the commonly applied Lincoln-Petersen (LP) estimator, with 
modifications for bias amelioration necessitated by the 
characteristics of the ARD program (Seber 1982). 
The simple LP method assumes that law enforcement agencies that 
were not recorded in the ARD data did not have any officer-
involved homicides during the observation period. This approach 
provides the highest possible ARD coverage estimate and the 
lowest estimate of the total population of law enforcement 
homicides because it assumes that the data are representative of 
agencies with true zero counts rather than missing responses. 
Essentially, the simple LP approach presents a best case scenario 
for estimating the ARD coverage rate. 
The adjusted LP estimate assumes that a portion of the law 
enforcement agencies that did not report to the ARD program did 
have homicides and that they had, on average, the same number of 
officer-involved homicides as law enforcement agencies that 
reported data to the program. The adjusted approach assumes that 
some law enforcement agencies with homicides are unrecorded in 
the ARD data and that these agencies represent a random sample of 
the overall set of agencies with homicides.
3.3.6  Results
Following the simple LP approach, the estimated ARD coverage of 
all law enforcement homicides is 49%, with a 95% confidence 
interval ranging from 47% to 50%. In other words, the ARD program 
captured only about half of all law enforcement homicides in the 
United States during the observation period. The adjusted LP 
approach, the ARD program is estimated to capture 36% of all law 
enforcement homicides, with a 95% confidence interval ranging 
from 35% to 38%. Therefore, the coverage of law enforcement 
homicides captured in ARD could be as low as 35% or as high as 
50%. These results indicate that the ARD program may provide a 
slightly higher coverage of homicides by law enforcement than the 
SHR, which is estimated to cover 46% of officer-involved 
homicides at best. Further analysis of the data suggests that 
about 28% of homicides by U.S. law enforcement agencies are not 
captured by either the ARD or SHR programs. Overall, these 
findings indicate serious deficiencies in the ability of the ARD 
program, as well as the SHR, to capture a universe of reportable 
homicides by law enforcement.
Despite these deficiencies, coverage of these deaths has improved 
since the inception of the program. Differences in state 
participation (see table 2-1) and changes in state-level 
methodologies contribute to national variation in annual coverage 
rates. Despite dips in coverage in 2005 and 2008, results from 
both the simple LP and the adjusted LP approaches indicate that 
ARD coverage of law enforcement homicides has increased over 
time, with the most pronounced improvement occurring in the most 
recent years of data collection (figure 3-1).
During 2003, the first year of data collection, the estimated 
coverage of homicides by law enforcement was from about 27% 
(adjusted LP) to 42% (simple LP). Except for data collected in 
2008, the coverage of law enforcement homicides captured in ARD 
improved from 2006 through 2011. Using the simple LP approach, 
the ARD coverage of officer-involved homicides grew from 51% in 
2007 to 55% in 2009 and 69% in 2011. The adjusted LP estimate 
(worst case coverage scenario) for 2011 (59%) indicated better 
coverage than the simple LP estimate (best case coverage 
scenario) for 2009 (55%).
These data indicate that the data collection methods used in more 
recent years are associated with better coverage of law 
enforcement homicides. This conclusion is supported by the fact 
that the adjusted LP approach also demonstrates improved coverage 
over time, growing from 40% in 2007 and 2009 to 59% in 2011. The 
gap between the adjusted and unadjusted coverage estimates 
narrowed by 2011, a further indication of improved methodologies. 
Even with this improvement, between 31% and 41% of actual 
homicides by law enforcement personnel were not captured in the 
2011 ARD data.
The assessment is not without limitations. Conducting capture-
recapture approaches at the state level was determined to be not 
statistically sound, given the relatively low number of cases 
reported to the ARD and SHR programs during 2011. For example, 
four states (Delaware, Rhode Island, Vermont, and Wyoming) had 
zero homicides by law enforcement recorded in either ARD or the 
SHR. As such, it was not possible to estimate the coverage rate 
of homicides by law enforcement using simple and adjusted LP 
approaches at the state level. 
4. Conclusion
The ARD program is designed to be a national census of civilian 
deaths when the event causing the death occurs during an 
interaction with state or local law enforcement. Understanding 
when law enforcement officers are involved in a situation in 
which a community member dies during an arrest is critical to a 
democratic society (Fyfe 1981, 2002; McEwen, 1996; Klinger, 
2008). BJS designed the ARD data collection methodology to rely 
on reporting from independent state reporting coordinators 
(SRCs). The manner in which ARD data are collected varies from 
state to state and often depends on the resources available to 
SRCs. This variability in approaches has led to questions about 
whether these data collection methodologies are capable of 
capturing the universe of arrest-related deaths and of law 
enforcement homicides in particular.
Previous research has explored the utility of the Supplementary 
Homicide Report (SHR), the National Vital Statistics System 
(NVSS), law enforcement agency records, media reports, and the 
ARD program for providing reliable statistics on the number of 
law enforcement homicides in the United States. This body of 
literature has generally concluded that there is no single, 
reliable system either for reporting or accessing data about 
arrest-related deaths; no one system consistently outperforms 
others. Furthermore, comparison of various data sources at the 
national level masks significant variations in reporting to one 
source or another at the state and jurisdiction levels (Loftin et 
al., 2003; Mumola, 2007; Sherman & Langworthy, 1979).
The current ARD methodology summarized in the Methodology section 
(chapter 2) and the results of the capture-recapture analysis 
described in the Program Assessment section (chapter 3) echo the 
conclusions of this body of research and highlight the continuing 
obstacles to collecting valid and reliable information about 
arrest-related deaths. At best, the ARD program captured 
approximately half of the estimated law enforcement homicides in 
the United States during 2003–09 and 2011. Consistent with other 
research on the utility of existing sources of data regarding 
arrest-related deaths, we found that the current data collection 
process results in a significant underestimation and potentially 
a biased picture of arrest-related deaths in the United States 
(Borrego, 2011; Ho et al., 2009). Some evidence indicates that 
the system’s coverage has improved over time. Considering the 
2011 data alone, the ARD program was estimated to capture as many 
as 69% of all law enforcement homicides in the United States, up 
from capturing 42% in 2003. 
Although no current national-level system sufficiently measures 
all arrest-related deaths in the United States, previous research 
has shown that one system captures more cases than another in 
some states but not in others (e.g., Loftin et al., 2003; Mumola, 
2007). Some evidence also indicates that using data from a 
combination of systems will result in better coverage. The 
current analysis found that the ARD program covered approximately 
half of the estimated law enforcement homicides in the United 
States during 2003–09 and 2011, but combining data from the SHR 
and the ARD increased coverage to 72%. To improve ARD coverage of 
arrest-related deaths, the ARD program might therefore build on 
two aspects of the current design to (1) allow some variation in 
the methods used to identify cases from state to state and (2) 
require that multiple data sources be used to compile information 
about arrest-related deaths within each state.
First, variation in the methods used to identify arrest-related 
deaths and collect information about them might be warranted from 
state to state, depending on the resources available within that 
state. The source that captures more arrest-related deaths varies 
from state to state, which should not be ignored when developing 
a more robust ARD data collection system.
Second, most SRCs employed a methodology that combines 
information from multiple sources. Given the limitations of 
existing national-, state-, and local-level data systems, 
combining data from all available systems should provide a more 
comprehensive picture of arrest-related deaths. Identifying cases 
from multiple systems will require significant resources to 
ensure that reports are not duplicated. Further, timeliness and 
availability are an issue. Many datasets are not available in the 
current year and may lag multiple years behind other sources. 
Relying on multiple systems would also require an SRC who has 
access to and who systematically reviews all the relevant 
systems. 
A survey that collects information about arrest-related deaths 
directly from local law enforcement agencies (rather than through 
the SRCs) provides an additional option for improving ARD program 
coverage. However, this method would require significant 
resources.
To achieve any improvements in coverage and consistency in 
reporting, the ARD program needs more prescriptive guidance or 
requirements on how arrest-related deaths are identified and 
report them to BJS. Currently, BJS provides definitions, 
examples, and general guidance on how SRCs might go about 
identifying arrest-related deaths and reporting information about 
them, but it does not require that SRCs follow a specific 
methodology. Furthermore, case identification and data collection 
methodology in each state is largely determined and driven by the 
individual SRC’s own experience and available resources. Applying 
consistent definitions and systematic means of identifying deaths 
and collecting information about them from all appropriate 
sources in the jurisdiction is critical to improving ARD program 
coverage.
The scope of the current ARD program may also contribute to 
underreporting. The analyses reported in the Program Assessment 
(chapter 3) and cases found in the SHR and NVSS are limited to 
law enforcement homicides. The ARD program is designed to capture 
all arrest-related deaths, including those due to accidents, drug 
overdoses, and natural causes. It is the only system that 
attempts to collect these data, and it could provide critical 
information on cases that are missing or underreported in other 
sources, such as deaths following the use of tactics commonly 
referred to as less than lethal, including Tasers and restraint 
procedures. However, arrest-related deaths other than law 
enforcement homicides can be difficult for SRCs to define and 
identify from the sources available to them. Furthermore, the 
more clearly defined law enforcement homicide type of arrest-
related death still suffers from significant undercoverage, as 
shown in the capture-recapture analyses presented in chapter 3. 
Improvements to the ARD program might be realized by first 
focusing solely on law enforcement homicides. After the data 
collection methodology has been defined, made routine, and shown 
to result in sufficient coverage for law enforcement homicides, a 
more expansive definition of arrest-related deaths might be 
explored. 
BJS should consider ways to standardize the data collection 
methodologies to improve the reliability and validity of 
capturing eligible cases and overall data quality.
References
Borrego, A. (2011). Arrest-related deaths in the United States: 
An assessment of the current measurement. Master’s degree thesis, 
Arizona State University. 
http://repository.asu.edu/attachments/56537/content/Borrego_asu_0
010N_10572.pdf
Burch, A. (2011). Arrest-related deaths, 2003–2009–statistical 
tables. (NCJ 235385). Washington, DC: Bureau of Justice 
Statistics. Retrieved from 
http://www.bjs.gov/content/pub/pdf/ard0309st.pdf
Fyfe, J. (1981). Observations on police deadly force. Crime & 
Delinquency, 27, 376–389.
Fyfe, J. (2002). Too many missing cases: Holes in our knowledge 
about police use of force. Justice Research and Policy, 4, 87–
102.
Ho, J.D., Heegaard, W.G., Dawes, D.M., Natarajan, S., Reardon, 
R.F., & Miner, J.R. (2009). Unexpected arrest-related deaths in 
America: 12 months of open source surveillance. Western Journal 
of Emergency Medicine, 10(2), 68–73.
Klinger, D.A. (2008). On the importance of sound measures of 
forceful police actions. Criminology and Public Policy, 7, 605–
617.
Klinger, D.A. (2012). On the problems and promise of research on 
lethal police violence: A research note. Homicide Studies, 16, 
78–96.
Loftin, C., Wiersema, B., McDowall, D., & Dobrin, A. (2003). 
Underreporting of justifiable homicides committed by police 
officers in the United States, 1976–1998. American Journal of 
Public Health, 93(7), 1117–1121.
McEwen, T. (1996). National data collection on police use of 
force. (NCJ 160113). Washington, DC: Bureau of Justice 
Statistics. Retrieved from 
http://www.bjs.gov/content/pub/pdf/ndcopuof.pdf
Mumola, C.J. (2007). Arrest-related deaths in the United States, 
2003–2005. (NCJ 219534). Washington, DC: Bureau of Justice 
Statistics. Retrieved from 
http://bjs.ojp.usdoj.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbdetail&iid=379
Noonan. M.E., & Ginder, S. (2013). Mortality in local jails and 
state prisons, 2000–2011–statistical tables. (NCJ 
242186).Washington, DC: Bureau of Justice Statistics. Retrieved 
from http://www.bjs.gov/content/pub/pdf/mljsp0011.pdf
Seber, G.A.F. 1982. The estimation of animal abundance and 
related parameters. Macmillan Publishing, New York, New York, 
USA.
Sherman, L.W., & Langworthy, R.H. (1979). Measuring homicide by 
police officers. Journal of Criminal Law and Criminology, 70, 
546–560.

Appendix A
CJ-11 and CJ-11A data collection instruments and revisions, 2003–
13
Tracking deaths in “the process of arrest” by state and local law 
enforcement presented a wide array of circumstances that are 
difficult to capture. To establish a standardized reporting form 
and process, in 2002 the Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS) began 
working with states and law enforcement professional 
organizations to develop preliminary questionnaires. The process 
yielded two data collection forms, the CJ-11 Quarterly Summary of 
Deaths in Law Enforcement Custody (commonly called the summary of 
incidents form) and the CJ-11A Addendum, Law Enforcement 
Custodial Death Report (commonly called the incident report) 
(http://www.bjs.gov/index.cfm?ty=dcdetail&iid=428#Questionnaires)
.
The CJ-11 summary of incidents form was to serve as a quarterly 
summary of arrest-related deaths occurring in each state 
disaggregated by sex. In addition, the CJ-11 provided 
instructions for submitting data, examples of reportable deaths, 
and descriptions of the types of deaths that should be excluded 
from the data collection. State reporting coordinators (SRCs) 
were asked to submit a completed CJ-11 form indicating their 
statewide count of reportable deaths for each quarter of the 
calendar year. SRCs were instructed to complete a CJ-11 form with 
a count of zero if no arrest-related deaths were identified in 
the state. BJS used these forms to determine state participation 
in the Arrest-Related Deaths (ARD) program. SRCs were instructed 
to report zero counts to distinguish between the measured absence 
of an identified death and missing data. 
On the CJ-11A incident report, SRCs were asked to describe the 
circumstances surrounding each arrest-related death they listed 
on the summary of incidents form, detailing one death per CJ-11A 
form. The 2003 CJ-11A form comprised 13 items to be completed for 
each death and an additional set of 5 items for those deaths that 
occurred before booking (A1–A5) or a set of 4 items for deaths 
that occurred after booking (B1–B4). It included items about the 
decedent, such as his or her name, date of birth, sex, and 
race/Hispanic origin. It featured questions regarding the manner 
and cause of death and asked whether the cause of death had been 
determined by a medical examiner or coroner. The CJ-11A also 
captured information about the decedent’s interaction with law 
enforcement (i.e., the name and originating identification [ORI] 
number of the law enforcement agency involved, location of the 
event, whether charges had been filed against the decedent, and 
the most serious offense with which the decedent was being 
charged at the time of death) and whether the death occurred 
before or after booking.
For arrest-related deaths that occur before booking, SRCs were 
instructed to complete Section A of the CJ-11A form. Section A 
included additional items about the incident between law 
enforcement and the decedent, including whether the decedent 
sustained fatal injuries during the event, and if so, how the 
injuries were sustained; whether the decedent was restrained in 
the time leading up to the death, and if so, the type of 
restraints devices were used by law enforcement; and the 
decedent’s behavior during the interaction with law enforcement 
(i.e., appeared intoxicated, threatened officers, resisted being 
handcuffed or arrested, tried to escape or flee, physically fight 
with the officers involved, or used a weapon to threaten or 
assault officers). Section A also included items regarding the 
type of weapon that caused the death and the type of location 
where the decedent expired (e.g., crime or arrest scene, medical 
facility, or en route to booking center).
SRCs were instructed to complete Section B of the CJ-11A form for 
instances in which the death occurred after booking while the 
decedent was being held in a temporary holding facility (but 
before arraignment transfer to a long-term correctional 
facility). Section B included items on when the decedent was 
booked into the law enforcement facility (i.e., date and time of 
entry) and the decedent’s condition at the time of booking (e.g., 
appeared intoxicated, exhibited mental health problems, or 
exhibited medical problems). Section B also included information 
about who caused the death (i.e., deceased, other detainees, or 
law enforcement or correctional staff) for deaths attributed to 
homicide and accidental injury and the means of death (e.g., 
firearm, blunt instrument, cutting instrument, strangulation, or 
intoxication) for nonnatural deaths.
Revisions to the instruments
BJS has continued to evaluate the CJ-11 and CJ-11A since the 
instruments were implemented in 2003. The content of the CJ-11 
summary form has remained relatively stable. A national listing 
of SRCs was added to the CJ-11 in 2005 and remained until 2013, 
when it was transferred to the CJ-11A incident report. The CJ-11 
summary report was updated in 2013 to include revised reporting 
instructions and the option to complete the form as an annual 
summary (in addition to the continued use of reporting quarterly 
information). In addition, SRCs were no longer required to 
disaggregate state-level summary counts by sex.
The CJ-11A incident report has undergone several revisions since 
the original version. The first revision to the instrument was in 
2007, which were minor and included (a) removing “stun gun or 
Taser” as a response to “What type of weapon(s) caused the 
death?” and (b) adding “conducted energy device (e.g., Taser or 
stun-gun)” as a response to the type of restraint device used in 
the time leading up to the death or the events causing the death. 
In 2008, a response of “No – medical/mental health assistance 
call” was added as a response to “Had charges been filed against 
the deceased at the time of death?” In addition, a response of 
“Pepper spray, mace” was added as a response to the type of 
restraint device used in the time leading up to the death or the 
events causing the death. Finally, “conducted energy device” was 
added back to the responses categories for “What type of 
weapon(s) caused the death?”

