U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Programs
Bureau of Justice Statistics

-------------------------------------------------------
This file is text only without graphics and many of the
tables. A Zip archive of the tables in this report in
spreadsheet format (.csv) and the full report including
tables and graphics in .pdf format are available on BJS
website at: 
http://www.bjs.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbdetail&iid=5864

This report is one in a series. More recent editions 
may be available. To view a list of all in the series 
go to http://www.bjs.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbse&sid=74
-------------------------------------------------------

*******************
Technical report
*******************

Arrest-Related Deaths Program Redesign Study,
2015–16: Preliminary Findings
****************************************************

Duren Banks, Ph.D., Paul Ruddle, and Erin Kennedy, 
RTI International, Michael G. Planty, Ph.D., 
BJS Statistician

**************
Introduction
**************

The Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS) has maintained the 
Arrest-Related Deaths (ARD) program since 2003. BJS developed 
the ARD program in response to the Death in Custody Reporting 
Act (DICRA) of 2000 (P.L. 106-297) and designed it to be a census 
of all deaths that occur during the process of arrest or during 
an attempt to obtain custody by a state or local law enforcement 
agency in the United States (see text box, Deaths reportable to 
the Arrest-Related Deaths program). The ARD program is a component 
of BJS’s Deaths in Custody Program (DCRP), which has also collected 
data on inmate deaths that have occurred in the custody of local 
jail or state prison since 2000.

BJS released two reports on the number, characteristics, and 
circumstances of arrest-related deaths occurring in the United 
States between 2003 and 2009. ***Footnote 1 See Arrest-Related 
Deaths, 2003–2009 - Statistical Tables (NCJ 235385, BJS web, 
November 2011) and Arrest-Related Deaths in the United States, 
2003–2005 (NCJ 219534, BJS web, October 2007).*** BJS has also 
assessed and updated the methods used to identify arrest- 
related deaths and collect information about decedents and the 
circumstances surrounding those deaths. In 2010, for example, 
the ARD program began to rely more on open information sources, 
such as media stories, to identify arrest-related deaths, 
rather than relying solely on law enforcement agencies to 
identify and report these deaths. ***Footnote 2 See Arrest-
Related Deaths Program: Data Quality Profile (NCJ 248544, BJS 
web, March 2015).*** BJS also conducted an assessment of the 
ARD program’s coverage in 2014. ***Footnote 3 See Arrest-
Related Deaths Program Assessment: Technical Report (NCJ 
248543, BJS web, March 2015).*** Based on findings from the 
program assessment, BJS launched a redesign of the ARD program 
in June 2015 to include multiple methods of identifying and 
confirming arrest-related deaths. The revised ARD program 
methodology is designed to increase the reliability, validity, 
and comprehensiveness of the data collection. A key feature of 
the redesigned data collection process is a standardized review 
of media articles to identify potential arrest-related deaths. 
This review is followed by a survey of law enforcement agencies 
and medical examiner/coroners’ (ME/C) offices for official 
reports and information about the arrest-related death.

This report describes the redesign methods, findings from the 
media reviews conducted from June 2015 through March 2016, and 
preliminary results from the agency survey to collect more 
information about deaths identified in June, July, and August 
2015.

Media reviews identified 1,348 potential arrest-related deaths 
in the United States from June 1, 2015 through March 31, 2016 
(figure 1). With the exception of June, the number of deaths 
was fairly consistent across months, ranging from 87 to 156 
arrest-related deaths--an average of 135 deaths per month.

BJS conducted a survey to confirm and collect more information 
about the 379 deaths that were identified in June, July, and 
August 2015. The survey asked law enforcement agencies and ME/C 
offices to confirm or deny those potential arrest-related 
deaths and to identify other deaths meeting the ARD program 
scope that were not identified through media review. 
Preliminary survey findings indicate 425 arrest-related deaths 
occurred in the United States from June to August 2015. Using 
information captured from media sources from June 2015 through 
May 2016 and assuming another 12% identified directly from 
agencies, an estimated 1,900 arrest-related deaths occurred.

*******************************************
Arrest-Related Deaths program redesign
*******************************************

The DICRA of 2000 expired in 2006, although BJS continued to 
maintain the ARD program until 2014, at which time BJS 
suspended data collection efforts to assess the program’s 
ability to capture all relevant incidents. The program 
assessment found that the ARD program captured about half of 
the estimated number of justifiable homicides in the United 
States from 2003 through 2011, excluding 2010. ***Footnote 4 
See Assessment of Coverage in the Arrest-Related Deaths Program 
(NCJ 249099, BJS web, October 2015).***In general, the 
incomplete coverage each year was due in part to the 
unstandardized data collection process across states. However, 
program coverage increased to a high of 69% in 2011, when the 
program began to rely more on open information sources to 
identify potentially eligible deaths.

The DICRA of 2013 (P.L. 113-242) was reauthorized in December 
2014 and requires any state receiving funds from the Department 
of Justice to report information on a quarterly basis regarding 
the death of any person who is detained, under arrest, in the 
process of being arrested, en route to be incarcerated, or 
incarcerated. BJS has been developing new methodologies to 
identify the full scope of arrest-related deaths identified by 
the DICRA of 2013 and to collect information about those deaths 
through the ARD program redesign study.

The ARD program redesign data collection methodology includes 
two phases to maximize agency participation and data 
completeness. During the first phase, BJS identified potential 
arrest-related deaths through review of open information 
sources, including news outlets, official agency documents, and 
other publicly available information. During the second phase, 
BJS conducted a survey of law enforcement agencies and ME/C 
offices. BJS surveyed the state and local agencies with 
jurisdiction over the potential arrest-related deaths 
identified in phase one and a selected group of agencies where 
no death was identified.

This hybrid approach was designed to address two primary 
obstacles to compiling accurate and reliable information from 
media sources. First, a huge amount of information is available 
from open sources that must be reviewed, which carries 
associated cost and time resources. This obstacle was addressed 
through a process of automated article reduction, coding, and 
classification. Second, the reliability and accuracy of various 
media sources was unknown and in many cases limited to a few 
pieces of information about the event. As a result, any 
information about the decedent and circumstances surrounding 
the death must be collected and verified through official 
sources. This obstacle was addressed through the agency survey.

The redesigned ARD program study will enable BJS to--

* confirm whether potential arrest-related deaths identified 
through open information source review meet the ARD program 
definition and scope

* identify any additional arrest-related deaths that BJS did 
not identify during the open information source review

* collect additional information about the decedent and the 
circumstances surrounding the incident for all confirmed 
arrest-related deaths.

For the purposes of the ARD program, a death is defined as 
arrest-related when (1) the death results from police use of 
force or (2) the event causing the death (e.g., self-inflicted 
injury, cardiac arrest, fall from a height, and drowning) 
occurs while the decedent’s freedom to leave is restricted by a 
law enforcement agency.

************************************************************
*****************************************
Deaths reportable to the Arrest-Related
Deaths program
*****************************************

* All deaths attributed to any use of force by law enforcement 
personnel acting in an official agency capacity.

* Any death that occurs while the decedent’s freedom to leave 
is restricted by a state or local law enforcement agency prior 
to, during, or following an arrest, which includes--

** while detained for questioning 

** during the process of apprehension

** while in the custody of, or shortly after restraint by, law 
enforcement (even if the decedent was not formally under 
arrest)

** during transport to or from law enforcement or medical 
facilities.

* Any death that occurs while confined in lockups or booking 
centers.
************************************************************

******************************************************
Redesign phase 1: media review methods and findings
******************************************************

BJS set up a series of media alerts designed to capture the 
full scope of arrest-related deaths. The alerts return articles 
that include one or more of several primary search terms in 
proximity to other text that indicates state or local law 
enforcement personnel acting in an official agency capacity.
The primary search terms included text variations of shot, 
killed, death, standoff, Taser, use of force, accidental, 
overdose, and heart attack. Law enforcement proximity words 
included text variations of police, officers, custody, and 
arrest.

A data pipeline was built to manage the large volume of data 
returned through the media alerts and reduce the number of 
articles that needed to be manually coded by reviewers (figure 
2). An external media monitoring provider was used to obtain 
URLs, titles, and short descriptions of articles that matched 
alerts of interest. Some sources (e.g., reddit.com, 
craigslist.com, and tumblr.com) were determined to be either 
unreliable sources of information on arrest-related deaths or 
returned information not relevant to the ARD program scope.
Articles from such sources were excluded. Returned articles 
that corresponded to duplicate web addresses were also 
excluded.

An external text retrieval service was then used to retrieve 
article text associated with each URL. Modern natural language 
processing techniques were used to identify articles that are 
similar to each other and exclude such similar articles from 
further classification and coding. Similarity was determined on 
the basis of whole text similarity and similarity of the 
entities (e.g., people, places, and things) automatically 
extracted from an article.

Machine learning classifiers were developed to identify 
articles that were likely to provide information related to an 
arrest-related death. Information from approximately 150,000 
articles, which were manually reviewed and coded, was used to 
train logistic regression and decision tree classifiers. 
Classifiers were combined to maximize predictive power. 
Articles were weighted to protect against developing a 
classifier that identified arrest-related deaths covered widely 
in the media but failed to identify arrest-related deaths 
mentioned in a few articles. During model building, articles 
that identified a decedent found in a small number of articles 
were weighted higher than articles that identified a decedent 
found in many articles. Between June 2015 and June 2016, more 
than 2 million articles were classified using this approach.

Following the classification process, approximately 250,000 
media articles with a higher likelihood of providing relevant 
information were manually coded to determine if they identified 
a potential arrest-related death. The vast majority of articles 
(83%, not shown in table) were associated with the primary 
search terms of shooting, shot, killed, death, or dead.

Each article was reviewed to determine if it identified a death 
that appeared to meet the ARD program scope. For these 
potential arrest-related deaths, reviewers then recorded the 
name of the decedent, incident location, date of death, and the 
primary law enforcement agency or agencies involved. The list 
of decedents was then re-reviewed to remove duplicate 
references to the same decedent and to follow up on any records 
with incomplete information. The resulting list of unique 
decedents was further compared to existing open source lists 
with overlapping scope (see text box, Arrest-Related Deaths 
program scope).

Among the reviewed articles, an average of 8% of articles 
identified a potential arrest-related death (not shown). From 
June 2015 through March 2016, 18% of the potential arrest-
related deaths were identified through one article, while 2% of 
the potential deaths were referenced in more than 100 articles 
(figure 3).

An open source review of articles published from June 2015 
through March 2016 identified potential arrest-related deaths 
in all 50 states (figure 4). California had the largest number 
of potential arrest-related deaths identified during this 
period, although the District of Columbia, Wyoming, and New 
Mexico had the highest rate of potential arrest-related deaths 
per million residents. In some states with very high rates, 
such as Wyoming, the estimated rate is based on a low number of 
deaths. New Jersey, New York, and Rhode Island had the lowest 
rates of potential arrest-related deaths per million residents 
compared to other states (figure 5).

********************************************
Arrest-Related Deaths program scope
********************************************
In addition to direct media alerts, BJS consulted existing open 
source lists of deaths with scopes that overlapped with the 
ARD program, including lists maintained by Fatal Encounters, 
The Guardian, Killed by Police, Gun Violence Archive, and The 
Washington Post (table 1). Of these, Fatal Encounters most closely 
matched the ARD program scope. Killed by Police included deaths 
associated with off-duty police officers who are not acting in 
an official agency capacity, and the ARD program excludes 
such deaths.
********************************************

************************************************
Redesign phase 2: survey methods and findings
************************************************

The ARD program survey was distributed to the chief executive 
in each state and local law enforcement agency that was 
involved with the 379 potential arrest-related deaths that 
occurred from June to August 2015, as well as the chief medical 
examiner or coroner with concurrent jurisdiction over those 
deaths. Each survey respondent was asked to confirm or deny 
each potential arrest-related death identified through media 
review and identify any other deaths that met the ARD program 
scope and occurred during the same time frame. For all 
confirmed deaths, the agency was then asked to complete an 
incident form.

The law enforcement agency incident form (Form CJ-11A) requests 
information about the decedent, the reason the law enforcement 
agency was involved with the decedent, actions the decedent 
took during the incident, and actions the law enforcement 
agency took during the incident. The ME/C office incident form 
(Form CJ-12A) also includes decedent characteristics and the 
cause and manner of death (see text box, ARD Program Incident 
Form Measures).

************************************************
***************************************
Arrest-Related Deaths program incident
form measures
***************************************

Form CJ-11A
-------------------------------------------------
Law Enforcement Agency (LEA) Arrest-Related Death
Incident Report

1. Identifying information
 - LEA involved
 - State
 - Decedent name
 - Date/time of death
2. Location of incident
3. Decedent demographics
4. Precipitating events
 - Reason for initial contact
 - Did decedent commit or allegedly commit any crimes
5. Decedent behavior during incident
 - Barricade, threaten, assault, escape, etc.
 - Exhibit mental health problems or appear to be intoxicated
 - Possess or appear to possess a weapon
 - Use a weapon to threaten or assault
 - Attempt to injure officers or others
6. Law enforcement actions during incident
 - Engage in pursuit or restraint tactics
 - Use of force
 - If firearm discharged, how many shots fired
 - Number of officers and LEAs that responded to incident

Form CJ-12A
------------------------------------------------------

Medical Examiner/Coroner’s Office Arrest-Related Death
Incident Report

1. Identifying information
 - State
 - Decedent name
 - Date/time of death
2. Location of incident
3. Decedent demographics
4. Whether autopsy was performed
5. Manner of death
6. Cause of death
7. If died from injuries, how were those injuries sustained
8. If weapon caused death, what type of weapon
************************************************


In most states, separate surveys were sent to the law 
enforcement agencies and the local ME/C offices involved in the 
death. Respondents in Arizona, California, Maryland, and Texas 
provided information on behalf of both the law enforcement 
agencies and ME/C offices due to centralized reporting 
requirements already in place in those states. From June to 
August 2015, a total of 486 agencies were surveyed, with 75% 
providing some response and 72% providing a complete response, 
including full incident forms for all confirmed decedents 
(table 2). The response was approximately the same for both law 
enforcement and ME/C offices. While the response rates for 
agencies reached 75%, a low response was expected given the 
short response window and follow-up period. Many of these 
incidents were open investigations at the time of data 
collection or had other matters standing, such as civil cases. 
More time to allow these cases to close, coupled with more 
aggressive nonresponse follow-up strategies, could yield higher 
participation rates.

Of the 379 potential arrest-related deaths identified through 
media sources for the agency survey from June through August
2015, 79% were confirmed by at least one survey respondent and 
55% were confirmed by both the law enforcement agency and ME/C 
office involved (table 3).

Sixty deaths were denied by at least one agency, with more than 
half (32) of those deaths denied by one agency but confirmed by 
another. The most common reason for denying a potential arrest-
related death was because the agency surveyed had no record of 
the decedent (N = 24, 40% of all denied deaths). The second 
most common reason was because the agency reported that the 
potential decedent was in the custody of another agency (N = 
15, 25% of denied deaths). Approximately 15 deaths were denied 
because the agency did not agree that the death met the ARD 
program scope. Follow-up review of publicly available 
information showed that these deaths meet the ARD program scope 
and included suicides and accidents that occurred during police 
pursuit. Two deaths were denied by both the law enforcement 
agency and ME/C office involved, who indicated in both cases 
that the potential decedent was not deceased. These two deaths 
were removed from further analysis. The remaining denied cases 
were researched further, and no information was identified that 
excluded these cases from the ARD program scope, so they were 
retained for further analyses.

In addition to reviewing the list of deaths BJS identified from 
open source review, agencies were asked to report any other 
deaths that met the ARD program scope and occurred in their 
jurisdiction from June to August 2015. Agency-reported deaths 
determined to be out of ARD program scope, either because they 
occurred outside of the survey period, occurred in the custody 
of local jail or state prison, or otherwise did not meet ARD 
program criteria, were excluded from the analysis (not shown in 
table). Forty-eight deaths were reported by agency respondents 
and retained in the ARD program analysis. Through follow-up 
media review, 14 of these agency-reported deaths were confirmed 
to meet the ARD program scope. A media record of the remaining 
34 agency-reported deaths was not located.

Media reviews and agency surveys together identified a total of 
425 arrest-related deaths that occurred from June to August 
2015, excluding the two persons determined not to be deceased. 
Among the total deaths, 88% or 375 decedents had an incident 
form completed by either a law enforcement agency or ME/C 
office. Forty-four states had at least one death in the 3 month 
period, with three states accounting for 35% of the total—
California (64), Texas (58), and Florida (25) (table 4).

Twelve percent of the 425 deaths in June, July and August 2015 
were reported by agency respondents and not initially 
identified through media searches. Based on deaths identified 
from open source information review from June 2015 to May 2016 
and assuming an additional 12% identified by agencies, there 
were an estimated 1,900 arrest-related deaths.

Manner of death was determined for decedents with a completed 
ME/C office incident form (N = 300) or imputed from open source 
information when the item was missing (N = 125). Of all deaths 
occurring in June, July, and August 2015, 64% were homicides, 
18% were suicides, and 11% were accidents (table 5).

*************
Conclusions
*************

A key component to the Arrest-Related Deaths (ARD) program 
redesign study is the standardized mixed method, hybrid 
approach that does not rely solely on media sources or 
voluntary reporting from law enforcement agencies to identify 
and provide information about arrest-related deaths.

Arrest-related homicides are often reported in the media and 
included in other open source existing lists, while deaths due 
to suicide, accident, and other manners of death are also 
within the scope of the ARD program and may be identified less 
often in publicly available information sources. Information on 
the circumstances surrounding all manners of arrest-related 
deaths death--including homicides, suicides, accidents, and 
deaths due to natural causes--may inform law enforcement 
training and policies. Furthermore, information about the 
incident, such as the number of shots fired, the reason for the 
interaction between law enforcement and the decedent, and 
whether the decedent threatened or assaulted officers or 
civilians during the incident may be incomplete or unavailable 
in the media.

The ARD program redesign also includes a survey of law 
enforcement agencies and medical examiner/coroners’ (ME/C) 
offices that did not have a potential arrest-related death 
identified through media review. This survey component was 
concluded in July 2016. Based on the survey data, BJS will 
update the number of arrest-related deaths that occurred from 
June to August 2015 to include any deaths identified by the 
additionally surveyed agencies. BJS will also report more 
detailed information on the circumstances surrounding confirmed 
arrest-related deaths, including decedent race and ethnicity, 
reason for law enforcement involvement, decedent actions during 
the incident, and law enforcement agency actions during the 
incident.

Additionally, the redesign study deviates from past ARD data 
collection efforts by centralizing data collection efforts 
across states, standardizing search efforts, and conducting 
direct contact with the responsible law enforcement and ME/C 
offices. These efforts result in improvements in data 
completeness and quality.

************************************************
************************
Federal coordination
************************

The FBI has historically collected information on law enforcement 
homicides through the Supplementary Homicide Reports, which are part of 
the Uniform Crime Reporting Program. To better capture the 
wider scope of use of force by law enforcement officers, the 
FBI is developing a national use of force data collection 
system.

BJS and the FBI continue to coordinate data system 
development and data collection efforts to ensure that the 
activities of both federal agencies minimize reporting burden 
on law enforcement agencies and maximize the comprehensiveness 
and accuracy of the information that is collected. The ARD program 
redesign work will inform the development of a reliable and valid 
use of force data system maintained by the DOJ. This collaboration 
across agencies will serve as a way to maintain and increase data 
quality and public accountability.

************************************************

***************************************************************
The Bureau of Justice Statistics of the U.S. Department of 
Justice is the principal federal agency responsible for 
measuring crime, criminal victimization, criminal offenders, 
victims of crime, correlates of crime, and the operation of 
criminal and civil justice systems at the federal, state, 
tribal, and local levels. BJS collects, analyzes, and 
disseminates reliable and valid statistics on crime and justice 
systems in the United States, supports improvements to state 
and local criminal justice information systems, and 
participates with national and international organizations to 
develop and recommend national standards for justice 
statistics. Jeri M. Mulrow is acting director.

This report was written by Duren Banks, Paul Ruddle, and Erin 
Kennedy of RTI International, and Michael Planty of BJS. Jason 
Nance and Nicole Johnson verified the report.

Morgan Young edited the report. Tina Dorsey and Morgan Young 
produced the report.

December 2016, NCJ 250112

***************************************************************

***************************************************************
Office of Justice Programs
Building Solutions * Supporting Communities * Advancing Justice 
www.ojp.usdoj.gov
***************************************************************

***************************************
11/29/16 /JER/10:12am 
***************************************





