U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Programs
Bureau of Justice Statistics

Special Report

Aviation Units in large Law Enforcement Agencies, 2007

July 2009, NCJ 226672

-------------------------------------------------------------

This file is text only without graphics and many of the
tables. A Zip archive of the tables in this report in 
spreadsheet format (.csv) and the full report including 
tables and graphics in .pdf format are available from:
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/abstract/aullea07.htm
-------------------------------------------------------------

By Lynn Langton
BJS Statistician

During 2007, about 1 in 5 large law enforcement agencies had
a specialized aviation unit operating at least one fixed-wing
plane or helicopter. These 201 aviation units, located in
departments of 100 or more sworn officers, employed about
3,400 persons, operated almost 900 aircraft in 46 states and
the District of Columbia, and logged an estimated 363,000
flight hours. The units performed functions ranging from
general operations, such as engaging in pursuits and
responding to calls for service, to more specialized
operations, such as homeland security, emergency medical
services (EMS), special weapons and tactics (SWAT), and
firefighting missions.

This report is based on data from the 2007 Census of Law
Enforcement Aviation Units (CLEAU), which collected
information on the characteristics, expenditures, equipment,
personnel, functions, and training and safety requirements of
aviation units found in law enforcement agencies with 100 or
more sworn officers. The CLEAU is the first nationwide study
to examine the nature and extent of airborne law enforcement.

Major findings from the 2007 Census of Law Enforcement
Aviation Units include--

*Aviation units from large departments provided aerial law
enforcement coverage in 46 states and the District of
Columbia.

*A greater percentage of units had helicopters (88%) than
planes (50%). In absolute numbers, units operated more than
twice the number of helicopters (604) than planes (295).

*Aviation units spent an estimated total of $300 million in
2007 on aircraft purchases, leasing and financing, and
maintenance and fuel.

*About two-thirds (68%) of aviation unit aircraft were
acquired through outright purchase, and about a fourth (24%)
were secured through a government surplus program.
Approximately half of the aircraft in operation were at least
20 years old.

*Aviation units logged a median of 1,100 flight hours per
unit in 2007. State police units had the greatest median
number of hours per unit (2,000).

*In 2007, 92% of aviation units engaged in vehicle pursuits.
Almost 90% of units performed counternarcotics missions, and
about 80% conducted counterterrorism missions. Nearly 70% of
units engaged in firefighting activities. Fewer units
reported using aircraft for SWAT member insertions (36%),
emergency medical response (26%), and prisoner transport
(22%) (figure 1).

*About half of aviation units required new pilot candidates
to have law enforcement experience. Over 60% required that
they hold prior pilot ratings.

Aviation units assist in law enforcement missions

Law enforcement aviation units are thought to be beneficial
supplements to traditional ground units. An aircrew typically
has a broader field of vision than an officer does on the
ground, allowing airborne officers to give ground units
advanced alert on upcoming dangers or opportunities that may
not be observed otherwise. Airborne officers can monitor
situations from a level at which they can go undetected by
the suspects involved, and be removed from any danger that
may unfold. Additionally, aircraft can cover more distance in
less time than ground units, allowing airborne officers to
respond to some calls for service or requests for assistance
in a more timely manner. While the rationale for aviation
units has been articulated, there have been few studies that
examine the nature and function of law enforcement aviation
units.

Three in 4 agencies with 1,000 or more sworn officers had
aviation units

Approximately 20% of all agencies with 100 or more sworn
officers had aviation units in 2007.***Footnote 1:
Calculation based on the 911 agencies with 100 or more sworn
officers in the 2003 Law Enforcement Management and
Administrative Statistics (LEMAS) Survey. Excludes 25
agencies that reported an aviation unit in the 2007 LEMAS,
but not in the 2003 LEMAS. See Methodology for more
information.*** The percent of agencies with aviation units
varied depending on agency type and size. Approximately 75%
of the 89 agencies with 1,000 or more sworn officers had
aviation units, compared to 6% of agencies with less than 250
sworn officers (table 1). Ninety percent of state police, 38%
of county police, 23% of sheriffs' offices, and 13% of
municipal police agencies operated aviation units during
2007.

Aviation units in large law enforcement agencies provided
aerial coverage for more than 90% of the nation

The 201 aviation units provided aerial law enforcement
coverage in 46 states and the District of Columbia (not shown
in a table). Thirty states had an aviation unit responsible
for full state coverage and at least one additional unit
within a specific city or county jurisdiction. Fifteen states
and the District of Columbia had one aviation unit covering
the entire jurisdiction. Aviation units in South Carolina
provided local coverage, not full state coverage. In four
states--Wyoming, Vermont, Rhode Island, and Idaho--none of
the agencies with 100 or more sworn officers reported having
an aviation unit. (See appendix table 1 for aviation units by
state.)

Sheriffs' offices accounted for about 40% of aviation units
in 2007 

Aviation units were most commonly found in sheriffs' offices
(38%) in 2007 (table 2). Municipal police agencies operated
34% of aviation units, followed by state police agencies
(22%), and county police agencies (7%). 

Regardless of agency type, 60% of aviation units in large
departments were located in agencies employing 500 or more
sworn officers. A third (33%) of aviation units were operated
by agencies with 1,000 or more sworn officers. 

More than half (52%) of aviation units had 10 or fewer 
personnel specifically assigned to the unit, with the largest
percentage (30%) having 6 to 10 employees.

Aviation units used more helicopters than planes to carry out
law enforcement activities. In 2007, 88% of units had at
least one helicopter and 50% had at least one plane. More
than 70% of units operated more than one helicopter, compared
to 25% operating more than one plane. The majority (60%) of
units had between two and five aircraft. Less than 20% of the
units operated one aircraft.

Half of all units operated helicopters only

Aviation units can be characterized by whether they operate a
plane, helicopter, or both types of aircraft. In 2007, half
(50%) of all aviation units used helicopters only, compared
to 12% operating planes only. More than a third (37%) of all
units operated both helicopters and planes. (See appendix
table 2 for the number of aircraft flown by type of aviation
unit.) 

Helicopter-only units were most commonly found in municipal
police agencies (72%), county police agencies (85%), and
sheriffs' offices (47%). The majority of state police units
(66%) operated both planes and helicopters and had the lowest
percentage of helicopter-only units (11%). Municipal police
agencies had the lowest percentage of plane-only units (4%).

-----------------------------------------------------------
-----------------------------------------------------------
Type of                    State  Municipal  County  Sheriffs'
aviation unit       All    police police     police  offices
-----------------------------------------------------------
Plane-only          12%    23%       4%         8%      15%
Helicopter-only     50     11       72         85       47
Both          	    37     66       24          8       38
Total number        
of Units     	   201     44       68         13       78
--------------------------------------------------------------
Note: Percentages may not add to 100% due to rounding.
*Includes units operating planes and helicopters. Includes one
unit operating a plane borrowed on an as-needed basis and one
unit operating a helicopter borrowed on an as-needed basis.

-------------------------------------------------------------
------------------------------------------------------------

Aviation units operated nearly twice as many helicopters as
planes

Nearly 9 in 10 aviation units located in agencies with 100 or
more sworn officers reported operating at least one helicopter
in 2007; half reported operating at least one plane (table 3).
Helicopters accounted for two-thirds (604) of the nearly 900
aircraft (899) in operation, and planes accounted for a third
(295). None of the 201 aviation units reported using unmanned
aerial vehicles (UAVs), light-sport aircraft, ultralight
aircraft, or powered parachutes (not shown in a table).

Aviation units in state police departments reported the
largest number of aircraft (384), followed by sheriffs'
offices (243), municipal police (237), and county police (35)
units. State police units accounted for 20% of all aviation
units, but flew 40% of the total aircraft in operation. State
police units had a median of six aircraft per unit. 

Sheriffs' office units reported a greater number of total
aircraft than municipal and county police units, but a smaller
median number of aircraft per aviation unit. Both municipal
and county police units had a median of three aircraft per
unit while aviation units operated by sheriffs' offices had a
median of two per unit. (See appendix table 3 for data on
aircraft by agency type). 

Aircraft purchases accounted for over half of aviation unit
expenditures in 2007

Aviation units (190) reporting actual expenditures for 2007
spent approximately $283 million to purchase, lease or
finance, maintain, and fuel their aircraft (table 4). Total
expenditures for all 201 aviation units were estimated at $301
million in 2007. (See Methodology for details on estimating
expenditures for the 11 units unable to provide data.)

Aircraft purchases accounted for the largest percentage (56%)
of aviation unit expenditures, followed by aircraft
maintenance (27%), fuel (12%), and leasing or financing (6%).
The estimated $159 million spent by aviation units for
aircraft purchases was attributed to the 21% of aviation units
that obtained aircraft in 2007.

Law enforcement agencies spent a median of $347,000 per
aviation unit on aircraft. Median expenditures were greatest
for aviation units located in state police agencies. Median
expenditures for state police units were more than three times
higher than sheriffs' office units, almost two times higher
than county police units, and 1.5 times greater than municipal
police units. 

Median expenditures were higher per helicopter than per plane.
Helicopter-only units spent a median of $132,000 per
helicopter in 2007; plane-only units spent a median of $35,500
per plane. While higher spending on helicopters can be
partially attributed to higher spending on purchasing,
leasing, and financing, aviation units also spent a median of
over 3.5 times more on maintenance and over twice the amount
on fuel per helicopter, compared to the amount spent per
plane. 

Helicopters had higher maintenance and fuel costs than planes

The CLEAU collected expenditure and flight hour data at the
aviation unit level. Cost estimates for planes and helicopters
were generated by examining maintenance and fuel costs per
flight hour for plane-only and helicopter-only units. For
helicopter-only units, the median costs per flight hour were
$168 for maintenance and $74 for fuel (text table 2). The
median costs per flight hour for plane-only units were $54 for
maintenance and $45 for fuel.*** Footnote 2:CLEAU data do not
allow for a complete economic analysis of the total costs
associated with obtaining and operating helicopters and
planes.***

-------------------------------------------------------------
--------------------------------------------------------------
                              Median cost per flight hour for-
                         --------------------------------
Type of aircraft                 Maintenance        Fuel
-------------------------------------------------------------
Plane-only units (a)                $54             $45  
Helicopter-only units (b)           168              74
-------------------------------------------------------------
(a) Cost per flight hour based on expenditure amount divided
by flight hours for 25 plane-only units.
(b) Cost per flight hour based on expenditure amount divided
by flight hours for 101 helicopter-only units.
--------------------------------------------------------------
--------------------------------------------------------------

One in 4 aircraft used by law enforcement were acquired
through a government surplus program

Aviation units obtain aircraft through outright purchase,
lease, seizure, government surplus programs, or by other
means, such as renting an aircraft or using one on a
contractual basis. Outright purchase was the most common
method used by agencies to acquire aircraft. In 2007, 68% of
aviation unit aircraft (899) had been acquired through
outright purchase (table 5), followed by 24% acquired through
the Section 1033 government surplus program.***Footnote
3:Section 1033 of the National Defense Authorization Act of
1997 authorizes the Department of Defense to transfer excess
military equipment to state and local law enforcement agencies
having officers with powers of arrest and apprehension.***

Aviation units overall were more likely to acquire planes
(82%) through outright purchase than helicopters (60%). Units
acquired a larger percentage of helicopters (33%) through the
Section 1033 government surplus program than planes (6%).
Seizure accounted for approximately 7% of planes acquired by
aviation units, compared to less than 1% of helicopters.

Sheriffs' offices had the largest percentage of aircraft
obtained through government surplus (43%). Less than half
(44%) of the aircraft used by sheriffs' offices were acquired
through outright purchase. 

One in 5 aviation units acquired aircraft in 2007

In 2007, 42 (21%) aviation units added a total of 55 aircraft
to their fleets (text table 3). The majority of these aviation
units (76%) increased their fleet by one aircraft, 17% added
two aircraft, and 7% added three (not shown in a table).

-------------------------------------------------------------
-------------------------------------------------------------
                              Aircraft obtained in 2007
                              -------------------------
                  Number of        Percent of       Number of
Type of agency    aviation units   agencies         aircraft
-------------------------------------------------------------
     
   All agencies       201              21%            55    
State police           44              27             17    
Municipal police       68              21             20    
County police          13              31              6    
Sheriffs' offices      76              16             12
------------------------------------------------------------
------------------------------------------------------------

Among municipal police aviation units, 14 (21%) added a total
of 20 aircraft to their fleets. Twelve state police units
(27%) added 17 aircraft. Twelve sheriffs' office units (16%)
added one additional plane each, and four county police units
(31%) added six aircraft.

Nearly half the aircraft flown by law enforcement were at
least 20 years old

Aviation units reported that almost half the aircraft (45%)
used for law enforcement activities were 20 years or older on
average (table 6). Approximately 80% of the aircraft in
operation were over five years old, and 60% were more than 10
years old on average. In comparison, the average age of U.S.
commercial aircraft in 2005 was 11.3 years while some U.S.
military fleets, such as the Navy's P-3 Orion, averaged over
24 years.***Footnote 4: Bureau of Transportation Statistics.
(2007). Transportation Statistics Annual Report. U.S.
Department of Transportation, Research and Innovative
Technology Administration.***
***Footnote 5: U.S. Government Accountability Office. (2005).
Military Readiness: DOD Needs to Identify and Address Gaps and
Potential Risks in Program Strategies and Funding Priorities
for Selected Equipment. Report to Congressional Committees
(GAO-06-141).***

Municipal police units reported the lowest percentage of
aircraft age 20 years or older (36%) and the highest
percentage of aircraft age one year or less (7%). Sheriffs'
office units reported the highest percentage of aircraft at
least 20 years old (61%). 

Searchlights were the most common type of aircraft equipment

The two most common types of equipment outfitting aviation
unit aircraft in 2007 were geared towards providing units with
a better view of the ground below. About ninety percent of
units had at least one aircraft equipped with a searchlight to
illuminate the ground at night (table 7). More than 80% of
aviation units had aircraft with forward-looking infrared
(FLIR) systems with video cameras installed to provide law
enforcement officers thermal images of the ground. 

A majority of aviation unit aircraft were equipped with public
address systems (59%) and night vision compatibility (54%). A
smaller percentage of aircraft were equipped with external
cargo hooks (41%), digital downlink (31%), analog downlink
(26%), mobile data terminals (22%), external hoist (21%), and
FLIR without a video camera (13%). 

The greatest variability among law enforcement agencies-state
police, municipal police, county police, and sheriffs'
offices-in the use of a particular type of equipment involved
night vision capability. Unit aircraft equipped with night
vision capability ranged from a high of 73% for state police
units to a low of 32% for municipal police units, with
sheriffs' offices (66%) and county police (39%) falling in
between. 

Median flight hours per helicopter were more than twice the
median flight hours per plane in 2007

Two corresponding measures of aviation unit activity in the
CLEAU were the number of flight hours logged and the number of
missions flown. In 2007, 193 aviation units logged 350,300
total flight hours or an average of 960 flight hours per day
nationwide (table 8). The estimated total flight hours for all
201 units was 363,000. (See Methodology for details on
estimating flight hours for eight agencies that did not
provide data.)

State police units reported the greatest median number of
flight hours per unit (2,000) in 2007. State police units
logged a median of over three times more flight hours per unit
than sheriffs' offices (600), almost double the median flight
hours of county police (1,200), and about 1.5 times the median
flight hours per unit for municipal police units (1,400). 

Overall, the median flight hours logged per aircraft were
greater for helicopters than for planes. Agencies operating
helicopters reported a median of 360 flight hours per
helicopter in 2007; agencies operating planes reported a
median of 160 flight hours per plane. 

The median number of flight hours per pilot varied among law
enforcement agencies. Municipal police pilots recorded the
greatest median number of flight hours per pilot (250) for the
year, followed by county police (200), state police (190) and
sheriffs' office (170) pilots.

Aviation units reported a median of 1,000 missions in 2007

Approximately 336,700 missions were flown during 2007 by the
145 aviation units reporting data (table 8). The estimated
total for all 201 units was 384,800 missions. (See Methodology
for details on estimation methods.)

Municipal police units flew more missions (189,700) than other
law enforcement agencies. Those missions translated to a
median of about 1,700 missions per municipal police unit.
County police units flew the greatest median number of
missions per aviation unit (2,500). Units in sheriffs' offices
flew the fewest missions per unit (500). As with flight hours,
the median number of missions flown per aircraft was greater
for helicopters (440) than for planes (70).
  
State police units flew the longest missions

Missions flown by aviation units lasted a median of 1.2 flight
hours per mission for the 144 units providing both mission and
flight hour data. State police units reported the longest
flight time per mission (2.2 hours), while county police units
reported the shortest flight time per mission (0.5 hours). 

Across all agency types, the median number of flight hours per
mission was greater for planes than for helicopters.

-------------------------------------------------------------
-------------------------------------------------------------
                         Median number of flight hours    
                              per mission flown per-
                              --------------------------------
              Number of units   Unit  Plane(a) Helicopter(b)
--------------------------------------------------------------
  All agencies       144         1.2     2.4       1.0 
State police          29         2.2     2.2       1.8 
Municipal police      44         0.7     2.3       0.6 
County police          9         0.5     0.8       0.5 
Sheriffs' offices     62         1.2     2.5       1.0 
-------------------------------------------------------------
Note: Based on 144 agencies (72%) that provided data on both
flight hours and missions flown. 

(a) Excludes 101 units that did not operate a plane. Data on
both flight hours and missions flown were available for 68% of
the included units.

(b) Excludes 25 units that did not operate a helicopter. Data
on both flight hours and missions flown were available for 68%
of the included 
agencies.
--------------------------------------------------------------
--------------------------------------------------------------

Nearly all aviation units responded to calls for service or
requests for assistance

In 2007, aviation units engaged in a variety of general law
enforcement operations. Almost all units (98%) responded to
calls for service or requests for assistance and conducted
photo flights (table 9). About 9 in 10 units (94%) provided
direct assistance to ground units in making arrests, assisted
with vehicle or foot pursuits (92% each), and performed search
operations using thermal imagery camera equipment (87%).
Approximately 7 in 10 units (72%) were involved in stolen
vehicle recoveries, and nearly half of all units (47%) issued
traffic enforcement citations. The same percentage of units
(47%) made DUI arrests. 

Aviation units across the four agency types were relatively
consistent in the percent of units engaging in general
operations activities. Sheriffs' offices had the lowest
percentage of units engaging in each activity except for
stolen vehicle recovery. 

Although not all aviation units were able to report on the
number of times the general operation functions were
performed, the two most frequently reported aviation unit
tasks were responding to calls for service and issuing traffic
enforcement citations. (See appendix table 4 for data on
general operation functions.)

About 80% of aviation units performed counterterrorism
missions

Aviation units were also responsible for carrying out or
assisting with special operations, such as homeland security
missions, emergency medical services (EMS), surveillance
operations, prisoner transport, and firefighting operations.
 
The most common special operations performed by aviation units
involved surveillance activities. These were performed by more
than 85% of all aviation units (table 10). Eighty-nine percent
of units engaged in counternarcotics surveillance operations,
and 94% participated in other types of criminal activity
surveillance. Nearly 8 in 10 (79%) aviation units performed
counterterrorism missions, such as conducting critical
facility checks on buildings, ports, public utilities, oil
refineries, bridges, airports, and monuments. County police
departments had the largest percentage of aviation units
engaging in counterterrorism missions (92%), while sheriffs'
offices had the lowest percentage (75%). 

Aviation units less commonly performed functions related to
special weapons and tactics (SWAT) operations. Thirty-six
percent of aviation units performed tactical insertions of
SWAT members, 24% conducted tactical insertions via helicopter
skid deployment, and 17% conducted tactical insertions through
fast rope or rappel deployment. Fewer  than 10% of aviation
units were involved in incidents requiring airborne use of
force.

With the exception of conducting search operations, less than
half of aviation units performed air ambulance or EMS
operations. EMS activities varied among agencies and by type
of activity, with a high of 92% of county police units
conducting searches for missing individuals, compared to a low
of 10% of municipal police department units performing
transports to medical facilities and hoist rescues.

Prisoner air transport missions were performed by 22% of
aviation units, and 19% of units conducted extraditions using
unit aircraft during 2007. State police had the highest
percentage of units performing both air transport (43%) and
extradition (32%) missions of all agency types. More than half
(57%) of all aviation units participated in firefighting
missions in 2007. (See appendix table 4 for more detailed
information on special operations activities performed). 

More law enforcement functions performed by helicopters than
planes

In 2007, the functions performed by aviation units varied
depending on whether a plane or helicopter was used. With the
exceptions of personnel transport, prisoner transport, and
speed enforcement, a greater percentage of units performed the
16 listed functions of aviation units using a helicopter than
using a plane (figures 2, 3). Aviation units performed an
average of 10 of the 16 functions using helicopters, while
aviation units using planes performed an average of 8 of the
16 functions (not shown in a table). This finding suggests
that there was greater variability in the types of tasks that
were seen as suitable for helicopters as those that were
suitable for planes.

Among aviation units operating planes, the three most common
functions performed by 80% or more of all units were pilot
training (87%), surveillance (84%), and personnel transport
(80%). By contrast, over 80% of aviation units using a
helicopter engaged in the following seven functions:
photographic flights (99%), surveillance (97%), routine patrol
or patrol support (93%), fugitive searches (91%), pilot
training (90%), search and rescue (90%), and drug location and
interdiction (89%).

The functions with the largest disparity in terms of the
percentage of units performing the action with a helicopter
versus units performing with a plane were SWAT operations
performed by 74% of units with a helicopter and 25% of units
with a plane, and fugitive searches performed by 91% of units
with a helicopter and 48% with a plane.

Over half of aviation unit personnel were pilots

In 2007, a total of about 3,400 sworn and non-sworn personnel
were assigned on at least a part-time basis to aviation units
in large law enforcement agencies. Of those employees,
approximately 60% were full-time sworn officers, 16% were
part-time sworn officers, 15% were full-time non-sworn
personnel, and 9% were part-time non-sworn personnel (table
11). Aviation units had a median of 10 employees.

Among the positions held by aviation unit personnel, pilots
accounted for the largest percentage of employees (51%),
followed by tactical flight officers (TFOs) (24%), mechanics
(11%), administrators (6%), paramedics (6%), and other
personnel (2%).*** Footnote 6:CLEAU did not capture how
mechanical or other services were provided if in-house
employees were not assigned to the aviation unit.*** 


In part, pilots accounted for a high percentage of aviation
unit personnel because only 65% of units had a TFO or
mechanic, 40% had an administrator, and less than 10% had
paramedics or employees serving in other positions.

The majority of aviation unit pilots (77%), administrators
(57%), and paramedics (55%) were full-time sworn officers.
Most TFOs were part-time sworn officers (49%). Of those
employed as mechanics, the largest percentage were full-time
non-sworn personnel (67%). The majority of other unit
personnel were part-time, non-sworn employees (53%).


***********************************************************
County police had more aviation personnel per unit than any
other law enforcement agency  
 
The median number of full-time equivalent personnel per
aviation unit varied depending on the agency type-state
police, municipal police, county police, and sheriffs'
offices-and type of aviation unit. The number of personnel per
aircraft also varied across the types of law enforcement
agencies. 

County police units (N=13) had the largest median number of
personnel per unit (13.0) and per aircraft (4.3). State police
units had the second largest median number of personnel per
unit (12.5), and the smallest median number of personnel per
aircraft (1.7). Units operating both types of aircraft had a
larger median number of personnel (12.5) than plane-only (6.5)
or helicopter-only (8.0) units (figures 4,5, and 6).
*************************************************************

Prior law enforcement experience was required of pilots and
pilot candidates by the majority of aviation units

The majority of aviation units required plane (69%) and
helicopter (73%) pilots to be sworn law enforcement officers.
More than half (52%) of the 201 units required pilots or pilot
candidates to meet a set minimum number of years of law
enforcement experience (table 12). Of those units requiring
previous law enforcement experience, about 70% (or 36% of all
units) required pilots to have between two to four years
experience. Eighty-one percent of units (or 42% of all units)
requiring previous law enforcement experience mandated that it
must be within the agency.

County police agencies had the greatest percentage of units
requiring both plane (100%) and helicopter (83%) pilots to be
sworn law enforcement officers. Sheriffs' office aviation
units were the least likely to require that plane or
helicopter pilots be sworn officers. 

Municipal police (68%) had the highest percentage of units
with a mandate for pilots or pilot candidates to have previous
law enforcement experience. Sheriffs' offices (30%) had the
lowest percentage.

In addition to previous law enforcement experience, 63% of all
aviation units required new pilot candidates to have Federal
Aviation Administration (FAA) pilot ratings prior to joining
the unit.

Commercial pilot license was required for about 70% of plane
and helicopter pilots in command

The majority of aviation units required new pilot candidates
to hold a minimum pilot rating prior to serving as the pilot
in command (PIC) responsible for the operation and safety of
the aircraft during flight time. Among aviation units with
planes (100), 95% required PIC plane pilots to hold a set
minimum pilot rating, and among units with helicopters (176),
88% reported having a minimum pilot-rating requirement for the
helicopter PIC (table 13).
*************************************************************
**************************************************************
Aviation units having both types of aircraft flew more
helicopters than planes 

Aviation units with both planes and helicopters theoretically
have the option of using either type of aircraft to perform a
particular function. With the CLEAU data, there are two main
ways to assess which type of aircraft multicraft aviation
units used when they had the option of either a plane or a
helicopter. 

The first way to assess aircraft preference is to examine the
flight hours accumulated in helicopters versus planes. Of the
75 multicraft aviation units, 76% logged more flight hours in
helicopters than in planes. Approximately 70% of the
multicraft units had at least twice as many helicopter flight
hours as plane flight hours. Over 50% of the multicraft units
(38 units) logged four times or more flight hours in
helicopters than planes (not shown in a table).

To assess aircraft preference regarding the functions
performed in helicopters compared to planes, multicraft units
that reported engaging in a particular function were examined.
For all but three functions (personnel transport, speed
enforcement, and prisoner transport) a greater percentage of
units used a helicopter than a plane. The three functions in
which the difference in the percentage of units performing the
function with a helicopter versus with a plane was the
greatest were firefighting, SWAT operations, and medical
support.
*************************************************************

The most frequent aviation unit rating requirements for plane
PICs were a commercial pilot's license (68%), private pilot's
license (34%), instrument rating (53%), and rating to fly a
single-engine land (SEL) (35%) plane. For helicopter PICs, the
most frequent rating requirements were a commercial license
(74%), private license (20%), and instrument rating (18%). The
FAA specifies that at a minimum a commercial rating requires
250 hours of flight time and instruction, and ratings for a
private license or single-engine or multi-engine plane require
40 hours. An instrument rating allows a pilot to fly in
inclement weather and requires an already-certified pilot to
take a specific course on the instrument panel and pass a
knowledge test.***Footnote 7: Electronic Code of Federal
Regulations. Title 14: Part 61. Accessed April 21, 2009.
Available at http://ecfr.gpoaccess.gov.*** 

Multiple rating requirements were more common for plane PICs
than for helicopter PICs. Nearly 7 in 10 (69%) aviation units
operating planes required multiple ratings for the PIC,
compared to 35% of units operating helicopters (not shown in a
table). 

Approximately 9 in 10 aviation units had a certified flight
instructor on staff in 2007

In 2007, 87% of aviation units employed a certified flight
instructor (CFI). A CFI holds a FAA flight instructor
certificate and is authorized to teach and give pilot
endorsements. State police had the highest percentage of units
(93%) with a CFI. 


--------------------------------------------------------------
--------------------------------------------------------------
Type of agency                    Percent of units with a CFI
-------------------------------------------------------------
  All agencies                                87%
State police                                  93  
Municipal police                              88  
County police                                 85  
Sheriffs' offices                             83  
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Note: Percentages based on 201 total aviation units (44 state
police, 68 municipal police, 13 county police, and 76
sheriffs' office units). Data available for 99.5% of aviation
units
-------------------------------------------------------------
-------------------------------------------------------------

Over 80% of aviation units provided in-house recurrent
training for pilots

In 2007, 81% of aviation units provided their pilots with
in-house recurrent training, 66% provided factory recurrent
training, 36% conducted unit checkrides, and 34% provided
other types of training, including training on equipment such
as helibuckets, hoists, and night vision goggles (table 14).
Recurrent training, such as refresher courses on aircraft
systems, emergency procedures, or protocols for missions
performed infrequently, were offered in-house two to four
times per year and through a vendor one to two times per year
by approximately half of aviation units. A quarter of the
units conducted unit checkrides either once or twice a year. 

About 40% of aviation units paid for all pilot training

The greatest proportion of aviation units (44%) provided
funding for some of the required pilot training, 38% paid for
all types of training, and 6% did not pay for any pilot
training (not shown in a table). The largest percentage of
aviation units (93%) paid for recurrent training, followed by
advanced (73%) and initial (42%) training.

-------------------------------------------------------------
-------------------------------------------------------------
Type of pilot training     Paying for pilot training
------------------------------------------------------------
Initial                             42%
Advanced                            73  
Recurrent                           93
-------------------------------------------------------------
Note: Data are available for 199 units (or 99%
------------------------------------------------------------
------------------------------------------------------------

The majority of aviation units conducted safety meetings on at
least a quarterly basis

In addition to trained pilots, aviation units frequently
practiced a number of other safety measures. In 2007, 89% of
aviation units had a designated safety manual, 90% conducted
safety meetings, and 90% held private insurance. Over 75% of
units had a designated safety officer (table 15). 

Of the 181 aviation units conducting safety meetings, the
greatest percentage (36%) held the meetings quarterly,
followed by 27% holding them monthly. Among units with
insurance coverage from a private insurer, 80% had hull and
liability coverage, 14% had liability-only coverage, and about
4% had hull-only coverage. Overall, sheriffs' offices had the
highest percentage of units with private insurance (97%),
while state police had the lowest percentage (82%).

All accidents reported in 2007 involved a plane

An accident was defined in the CLEAU as "any incident in which
the aircraft caused damage or injury or was damaged during
use." The 201 aviation units nationwide reported three
accidents in 2007, and all three involved a plane.

From 2003 to 2006, there were 32 accidents involving aviation
unit aircraft. Half of these accidents involved planes and
half involved helicopters.

------------------------------------------------------------
------------------------------------------------------------
                                    
                                      Number of accidents
                              ----------------------
Year                                  Plane    Helicopter
----------------------------------------------------------
2007                                    3          0   
2003-2006                              16         16
----------------------------------------------------------- 
Note: Respondents were instructed to include any incident in
which the aircraft caused damage or injury or was damaged
during use.
-------------------------------------------------------------
-------------------------------------------------------------

Methodology

The universe for the 2007 Census of Law Enforcement Aviation
Units (CLEAU) was any law enforcement agency with 100 or more
sworn officers that reported operating a fixed-wing plane or
helicopter in the 2003 Law Enforcement Management and
Administrative Statistics (LEMAS) Survey. Based on the 2003
LEMAS, the CLEAU was sent to 245 of the 941 LEMAS agencies
with 100 or more sworn officers. 

The CLEAU was a paper questionnaire mailed to each agency
chief. Data collection began in March 2008 and ended in
September 2008. Respondents used either calendar or fiscal
year 2007 for all questions referring to 2007 and the last day
of calendar or fiscal year 2007 for all other questions.

Of 245 agencies, 241 (or 98%) responded. Twenty-four agencies
(9.8%) no longer operated aircraft or had misreported in the
2003 LEMAS and never operated aircraft. Five agencies shared
an aviation unit with another agency that had already
responded, and 11 agencies had fewer than 100 sworn officers.
As a result, the final CLEAU database included 201 aviation
units. 

Not enough data were available for reliable estimates on the
11 aviation units in smaller law enforcement agencies. Of
these 11 agencies,10 were sheriffs' offices and one was a
municipal police department. Six units operated one plane,
three operated one helicopter, and two operated two
helicopters.

The 2007 LEMAS Survey revealed an additional 25 agencies
operating a plane or helicopter that were not included in the
CLEAU because in 2003 they had fewer than 100 sworn officers,
did not operate a plane or helicopter, did not respond to the
question regarding the type of equipment operated, or did not
complete the 2003 LEMAS survey. The 25 agencies operated a
total of 39 planes and 31 helicopters in 2007. These agencies
and the number of planes, helicopters, and full-time sworn
officers are listed in appendix table 5. 

Estimating total expenditures

Eleven agencies in the CLEAU did not report 2007 expenditures.
Expenditures among reporting units were highly correlated with
whether an aircraft was obtained in 2007, type of aircraft
operated, and flight hours logged. Thus, for the remaining 11
units a total expenditure amount was estimated from data on
whether an aircraft was obtained in 2007 and from plane and
helicopter flight hours. 

For the six units that did not obtain a plane in 2007,
expenditures were computed by multiplying plane flight hours
by the mean plane cost per hour for maintenance ($76) and the
mean plane cost per hour for fuel ($69), by multiplying
helicopter flight hours by mean helicopter cost per hour for
maintenance ($224) and mean helicopter cost per hour for fuel
($102), then adding the four amounts. If the agency did not
have a plane or helicopter, the flight hours were set to zero. 

For the five units that obtained a plane in 2007, $2,720,036
(the mean amount of aircraft purchases among units obtaining
one aircraft in 2007) was added to the end of the same
formula. The sum of the estimated total expenditures for the
11 agencies was $18,058,306. The six units that did not
obtained an aircraft in 2007 had mean expenditures estimated
at $535,108 per unit. The five units that had obtained an
aircraft in 2007 had mean expenditures estimated at
$2,969,532.

Estimating total flight hours

Eight units in the CLEAU were unable to report on 2007 flight
hours. For these units total flight hours were estimated from
unit data on number of planes, helicopters, pilots, and total
expenditures, which were significantly related to flight
hours. The estimate was computed using the mean flight hours
per plane, helicopter, pilot, and cost per flight hour for the
96% of the units with available data. Three different
estimates of total flight hours were computed, and the average
of the three was used as the estimate for the unit. First,
total flight hours per aircraft was computed by multiplying
total planes by mean flight hours per plane, by multiplying
total helicopters by mean flight hours per helicopters, then
adding the two amounts. Second, total flight hours per pilot
was computed by multiplying the number of sworn pilots in the
unit by the mean flight hours per pilot. Third, the total unit
expenditures were divided by the mean cost per flight hour.
Fourth, flight hours per aircraft, per pilot, and as a
proportion of total expenditures were then added together and
divided by three to reach an average. The sum of the estimated
flight hours for the eight agencies was estimated at 12,751,
with a mean of 1,594 flight hours per unit.

Estimating total missions flown

Fifty-six aviation units either did not track or report the
number of missions flown. For these units, the total number of
missions flown was estimated from data on the type of agency,
number of flight hours, and mean flight hours per mission,
computed from the units reporting both flight hours and
missions flown. The mean number of flight hours per mission
varied depending on agency type. 

The formula for state police units was (x/2.2); for municipal
police (x/5.8); for county police (x/0.6); and for sheriffs'
offices (x/3.8). In each, "x" equals the mean number of flight
hours per mission flown for each agency. For the eight
agencies not reporting flight hours the formula remained the
same, but the previously-computed flight hour estimates were
used in the place of the actual flight hours. The sum of
estimated missions flown for the 56 aviation units was 384,816
missions. 

07/08/2009 JER
