U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Programs
Bureau of Justice Statistics

-----------------------------------------------------
This report is one in series. More recent 
editions may be available. To view a list 
of all reports in the series go to 
http://www.bjs.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbse&sid=13

This file is text only without graphics and many of the
tables. A Zip archive of the tables in this report in
spreadsheet format (.csv) and the full report including
tables and graphics in .pdf format are available on BJS
website at:http://bjs.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbdetail&iid=4596

------------------------------------------------------

Background Checks for Firearm Transfers, 2010 - Statistical 
Tables


Ronald J. Frandsen
Dave Naglich
Gene A. Lauver
Regional Justice Information Service

Allina D. Lee
Bureau of Justice Statistics

February 2013, NCJ 238226


Over 118 million applications for firearm transfers or 
permits were subject to background checks from the inception 
of the Brady Handgun Violence Prevention Act of 1993 on 
March 1, 1994, through December 31, 2010. During this time 
period, about 2.1 million applications, or 1.8%, were denied 
(table 1). In 2010, 1.5% of the 10.4 million applications 
for firearm transfers or permits were denied by the FBI 
(approximately 73,000) or by state and local agencies 
(approximately 80,000). The denial rate for applications 
checked by the FBI (1.2%) was lower than the rate for 
checks by state and local agencies (1.8%)(table 2).

The data in this report were developed from the Bureau of 
Justice Statistics’ (BJS) Firearms Inquiry Statistics (FIST) 
program, which collects information on firearm background 
checks conducted by state and local agencies and combines 
this information with the FBI’s National Instant Criminal 
Background Check System (NICS) transaction data.

This report presents the overall trends in the estimated 
number of applications and denials for firearm transfers or 
permits since the inception of the Brady Act and describes 
background checks for firearm transfers conducted in 2010. 
Data include the number of firearm transaction applications 
checked by state and local agencies and the FBI, the number 
of applications denied and the reasons for denial, and 
estimates of applications and denials by each type of 
approval system. Statistical tables also provide data on 
appeals of denied applications and arrests for falsified 
documents.

************************************
List of tables 

Table 1. Estimated number of applications and denials for 
firearm transfers or permits since the inception of the 
Brady Act, 1994–2010

Table 2. Applications and denials, by type of agency and 
type of check, 1999–2010

Table 3a. Firearm applications received and denied by state 
agencies, 1999–2010

Table 3b. Local denial rates by community size and type of 
permit, 1999–2010

Table 4. Percent distribution of reasons for denial of 
firearm transfer applications by checking agencies, 1999–
2010

Table 5. Percent change in the number of applications, 
denials, and reasons for denial, 1999–2010

Table 6. Appeals by type of checking agency, 2000–2010

Table 7. Reported arrests of persons denied a firearm permit 
or purchase, 2000–2010

Table 8. Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives 
(ATF) investigation of National Instant Criminal Background 
Check System (NICS) denials by the FBI, 2010

Table 9. Number of National Instant Criminal Background 
Check System (NICS) Index prohibited person records, 2010

Table 10. Number of checking agencies in the 2010 FIST 
survey

**********************************************

*****************
Summary findings
*****************

* Since the inception of the Brady Act, over 118 million 
applications for firearm transfers or permits were subject 
to background checks. About 2.1 million applications, or 
1.8%, were denied.

* In 2010, 1.5% of the 10.4 million applications for firearm 
transfers or permits were denied by the FBI (approximately 
73,000) or by state and local agencies (approximately 
80,000).

* Among state agencies, denial rates for transfer checks or 
permits ranged from less than 1% to more than 4% in 2010 
(table 3a).

* Among local agencies, the denial rate was 2.5% for 
purchase permit checks and 1.3% for exempt carry permit 
checks (table 3b). 

* A felony conviction or indictment was the most common 
reason for the FBI (47%) to deny an application in 2010. A 
fugitive from justice charge was the second most common 
reason (19%) (table 4).

* Among the 21 state agencies that reported reasons for 
denial, a felony conviction or indictment was the most 
common reason to deny an application in 2010 (31%). A state 
law prohibition (16%) was the second most common reason 
(excluding other prohibitions).

* Among all the agencies that reported reasons for denial in 
2010, approximately 41% of applications were denied because 
of a felony conviction (table 5). 

* In 2010, nearly 37,000 denials (24%) were appealed. More 
than 12,000 appeals (34%) resulted in reversal of the denial 
(table 6). 

* According to the four state agencies and 19 local checking 
agencies that reported arrest data, 1,520 denied persons 
were arrested in 2010 due to an outstanding warrant or the 
submission of false information on an application (table 7).
 
* Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives (ATF) 
field offices investigated 4,732 NICS Index denials (6.2%) 
that were referred by the FBI in 2010 (table 8). 

* From January 1, 2010, to December 31, 2010, records of 
persons ineligible to possess a firearm due to a mental 
health commitment or adjudication increased 25% in the NICS 
Index; overall, the number of records in the Index increased 
13% (table 9). 

***********
Background
***********

The Brady Handgun Violence Prevention Act of 1993 (Pub. L. 
No. 103-159, 107 Stat.1536 (1993), codified as amended at 18 
U.S.C. § 921 et seq.) mandates a criminal history background 
check on any person who attempts to purchase a firearm from 
a Federal Firearms Licensee (FFL). The permanent provisions 
of the Brady Act established the NICS, which is accessed by 
the FBI or a state point of contact (POC) prior to 
transferring a firearm. The NICS is a system comprising data 
on persons who are prohibited from purchasing or possessing 
a firearm under the Brady Act or under state law. 

The Brady Act prohibits the transfer of a firearm to a 
person who--

* is under indictment for, or has been convicted of, a crime 
punishable by imprisonment for more than 1 year

* is a fugitive from justice

* is an unlawful user of, or addicted to, a controlled 
substance

* has been adjudicated as a mental defective or committed to 
a mental institution

* is an illegal alien or has been admitted to the United 
States under a nonimmigrant visa

* was dishonorably discharged from the U.S. Armed Forces

* has renounced U.S. citizenship

* is subject to a court order restraining him or her from 
harassing, stalking, or threatening an intimate partner or 
child

* has been convicted of a misdemeanor crime of domestic 
violence

* is under age 18 for long guns or under age 21 for 
handguns.

An FFL contacts either the FBI or state POC to determine 
whether a prospective purchaser is prohibited from receiving 
a firearm. The FBI conducts all NICS checks for 29 states. 
POC agencies, which may be statewide or local, conduct all 
NICS checks for 13 other states. In the remaining 8 states, 
POC agencies conduct NICS checks on handgun transfer 
applicants and the FBI conducts checks on long gun transfer 
applicants. Several states require an additional background 
check, usually by a local agency that does not access the 
NICS but uses only state records. State laws may require a 
check on a permit applicant or a person who seeks to receive 
a firearm from an unlicensed seller.

For more information on the NICS, visit the FBI Criminal 
Justice Information Service (CJIS) website at 
http://www.fbi.gov/hq/cjisd/nics.htm. 

BJS began the FIST project in 1995 to provide national 
estimates of the total number of firearm applications 
received and denied pursuant to the Brady Act and similar 
state laws. The FIST project collects counts of firearm 
transfers and permit checks conducted by state and local 
agencies and combines this information with the FBI NICS 
transaction data. In addition, FIST collects information on 
reasons for denials, appeals of denials, and law enforcement 
actions the FBI and the ATF have taken against denied 
persons.

****************************
Components of the national 
firearm check system
***************************

About 3,000 federal, state, and local agencies conduct 
background checks on persons who apply to purchase a firearm 
or for a permit that may be used to make a purchase. 
Variations in federal and state procedures for determining 
firearm possession eligibility are summarized below.

************************
Overview of the NICS
************************

Prospective firearm applicants must either undergo a NICS 
background check that has been requested by a dealer or 
present a state permit that the ATF has qualified as an 
alternative to the point-of-transfer check. 

ATF-approved permits are those that--

* allow an applicant to possess, acquire, or carry a firearm

* were issued not more than 5 years earlier by the state 
where the transfer is to take place, after an authorized 
government official verified that possession of a firearm by 
the applicant would not be a violation of law. 

All permits issued since November 29, 1998, must have 
included a NICS check. Many state-qualifying permits may be 
used for multiple purchases while valid. State laws often 
provide that a permit will be revoked if the holder is 
convicted of an offense or otherwise becomes ineligible 
after receiving the permit. Prior to transferring a firearm 
under the permanent Brady provisions, an FFL is required to 
obtain a completed Firearm Transaction Record (ATF form 
4473) from the applicant.

An FFL initiates a NICS check by contacting either the FBI 
or the state POC. Most inquiries are initiated by telephone. 
In 2002, the FBI added E-Check to allow FFLs to request a 
check electronically. The FBI or state POC queries available 
federal, state, and local systems and notifies the FFL that 
the transfer may proceed, may not proceed, or must be 
delayed pending further review of an applicant’s record.
 
An applicant who is denied may appeal to the FBI or the POC. 
A denied person who submitted a false application or has an 
outstanding warrant may be subject to arrest and prosecution 
under federal or state laws.

***********************************
State and local NICS participation
***********************************

Each state government determines the extent of its 
involvement in the NICS process. 

* Three levels of state involvement currently exist:
A full POC requests a NICS check on all firearm transfers 
originating in the state. 

* A partial POC requests a NICS check on all handgun 
transfers; FFLs in the state are required to contact the FBI 
for NICS checks for long gun transfers. 

* The state does not maintain a POC; FFLs are required to 
contact the FBI for NICS checks on all firearm transfers 
originating in the state.

******************
Methodology
******************

Data used for this report are prepared by the Regional 
Justice Information Service (REJIS) through a cooperative 
agreement with the Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS) under 
the Firearm Inquiry Statistics (FIST) program, which 
collects information on background checks for firearm 
transfers or permits from federal, state, and local 
agencies.

****************
Sample design 
****************

In 1996, when the data collection was implemented, a 4% 
margin of error was put in place on the sampling process for 
local agencies in the 30 states that did not have statewide 
data collection. A total of 5,477 agencies were responsible 
for background checks in these 30 states in 1996. Since the 
project’s inception, the sampling design selected agencies 
proportional to the size of the population served.

State and local checking agencies were stratified into the 
following groups by size of the population served in 1996: 

* state agencies that served an entire state population

* local agencies that served a population of more than 
100,000 U.S. residents

* local agencies that served a population of 10,000 to 
100,000 U.S. residents 

* local agencies that served a population of fewer than 
10,000 U.S. residents. 

The stratification classification of the county was based on 
the largest city within the county. If cities within a 
county conducted their own background checks, their 
populations were subtracted from the county population.  If 
an agency provided services for other agencies or 
jurisdictions, then populations for those other agencies 
were added to the populations of the reporting agency. 

Checking agencies were determined by state law and were 
specified in the state laws that require background checks 
on applicants for a firearm transfers or permits. The mix of 
state and local agencies conducting background checks has 
changed over time, as the state statutes that govern how 
background checks are conducted also change. Some agencies 
that had conducted statewide checks at the time of the 
original sample turned their background checks over to the 
FBI. Other states that had not performed their background 
checks for certain types of permits began statewide checking 
systems. In some states, local agencies no longer conduct 
background checks, as states either assume responsibility or 
delegate responsibility to the FBI. Finally, some states 
began reporting complete counts of applications and denials 
to FIST (or publish such counts online) on behalf of local 
checking agencies. As a consequence, the original sample has 
been modified.

Over time, the number of local agencies conducting checks 
dropped from 3,104 in 1999 (the first year after provisions 
of the Brady Act became permanent) to 2,052 in 2010 
(table 10). Agencies in the original FIST sample have been 
deleted as responsibility has been transferred to the state 
or the FBI. In 2010, data were collected from 11 states that 
operated local background checking agencies. 

The sample of local agencies in these 11 states has not been 
redrawn since 1996. Annual estimates have been produced by 
using weighting factors derived from the original 
stratification and adjusted for changes in the population 
served by the remaining agencies in each size category. In 
2010, population figures provided by the U.S. Census 
Bureau’s Population Estimates Program for 2005 were used. 
All estimates were taken from the July 1, 2005, population 
estimates for states, counties, incorporated areas, and 
minor civil divisions. The stratification based on 2005 
population estimates applies to the years from 2006 to 2010.

The sample has been continuously updated to reflect changes 
in checking activity and willingness of sampled agencies to 
participate in the survey. Agencies have been added to the 
FIST sample if responding agencies in states fell to fewer 
than 30 eligible agencies or less than 10 percent of 
eligible agencies in that state. In adding agencies, special 
emphasis has been placed on obtaining cooperation from 
agencies in the largest size category (i.e., agencies 
serving more than 100,000 population).

*****************
Changes in 2010
****************

For the 2010 survey sample, 781 local agencies were 
initially surveyed. During data collection, REJIS discovered 
that 20 of these local agencies were either ineligible to be 
in the sample or were no longer in existence and were 
therefore removed from the sample. Additionally, 71 local 
agencies from Massachusetts were removed from the sample 
because the state reported firearm data as a total entity 
for the first time (though the background checks continue to 
be conducted on a local level). Data from Massachusetts are 
now reported in the state counts. Because the state of New 
Jersey reported application and denial data for its local 
checking agencies (100% of firearm applications and denials 
were reported for all agencies), New Jersey’s 109 local 
agencies were also excluded from the sample total for the 
calculation of the response rate, although REJIS still 
surveyed local agencies in the state to obtain their reasons 
for denial.

Kansas and Nebraska were added to the 2010 data collection 
because the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms, and 
Explosives (ATF) allowed each state’s concealed carry permit 
to serve as a National Instant Criminal Background (NICS) 
Check System alternative to the point-of-transfer check 
process. These two states, along with Massachusetts, were 
added to the total number of states eligible to provide 
state-level data for 2010. Connecticut, Illinois, New 
Jersey, and Utah conduct instant checks and permit checks. 
Each state, regardless of the number of reporting units, was 
counted as a single response.*** Footnote 1 Past FIST 
collections counted each state reporting unit as separate 
respondents in states with multiple reporting units. The 
change in methodology to count each state as a single 
response applies only to the calculation of response rates 
and does not impact the totals of any data items.*** In 
total, 31 states were eligible to provide state-level data 
for the 2010 collection.

Wisconsin and Mississippi did not report their data for 
2010, which left 29 of 31 states that reported data or 
verified publicly available information. Of the remaining 
580 local agencies in the sample, 488 (84%) reported at 
least their total firearm transfer or permit applications 
and denials. Overall, 517 state and local agencies provided 
data, for a total response rate of 85%. 

************
Estimation
************

Data obtained from state and local agencies were combined 
with FBI NICS transaction data to create an estimate of the 
total number of firearm purchase applications received and 
denied nationally. National estimates of applications and 
denials were developed using population weighting factors. 
When an agency did not provide data for all months, missing 
data were imputed by calculating and applying a monthly 
average based on available data. Imputing data for missing 
months was necessary only in the case of three local 
agencies, each of which reported only six months of counts.

Michigan reported concealed carry permit data by fiscal 
year, which was used to estimate for the calendar year. 
Pennsylvania reported 423,100 instant checks, included in 
the FIST national estimate, and 223,375 applications for 
nonexempt licenses to carry. Also, Pennsylvania provided the 
combined number of denials of all applications, which was 
prorated to obtain the number of denials of instant checks. 

The estimates of applications and denials for Wisconsin and 
Mississippi are the same as the reported numbers from 2009. 
Wisconsin’s growth in the number of applications and denials 
in the last five years was inconsistent relative to the 
growth for states overall. As a result, Wisconsin’s 2009 
counts were used for 2010, rather than using trends over 
time or rates of growth among similar states. Mississippi 
submitted counts for the number of applications and denials 
in 2009; however, counts were unavailable for several years 
prior. As a result, 2009 counts were used as the best 
available estimates for 2010 counts in Mississippi.

FIST sample weighting is consistent with a post-
stratification weighting scheme whereby agencies in FIST are 
stratified by area population categories (of area 
populations of <10,000; 10,000-100,000; and >100,000, 
respectively). After data for sample units have been 
collected, a ratio adjustment is made to adjust up the 
results of the sample agencies in a particular size category 
to reflect total population of agencies in that size 
category. Population numbers used to determine these weights 
were based on 2005 population estimates at the state level 
and size category totals.

****************
Standard errors
****************

As with any survey, the FIST estimates for local agencies 
are subject to error arising from the fact that they are 
based on a sample rather than a complete enumeration. A 
common way to express this sampling variability is to 
construct a 95%-confidence interval around each survey 
estimate. Typically, multiplying the standard error by 1.96 
and then adding or subtracting the result from the estimate 
produces the confidence interval. This interval expresses 
the range of values that could result among 95% of the 
different samples that could be drawn using the same 
sampling procedures.

Standard errors have been provided for the number of 
applications and denials and for the percentage of 
applications denied in local agencies (see appendix tables 1 
and 2). These standard errors take into account the 
probability of selection (assuming that added agencies and 
replaced agencies since original sample selection have a 
probability of selection that is proportionate to their 
size) and post-stratification adjustments (adjusting for 
partial year coverage and controlling the weighted sample 
totals to population totals in 2005 for each size category).

*******************
Reasons for denial
*******************

Information about reasons for denial has been collected by 
the FIST project since the program’s inception in 1996. The 
FBI and some state agencies provided a reason for each 
denial while other state agencies provided reasons only for 
some denials or did not provide any reasons for denials. 
Twenty-one state agencies provided reasons for denial. 
Reasons for denial are reported only as the distribution of 
the actual number of reasons received in the survey; no 
estimation is made of the reported reasons for 
denial.***Footnote 2 Reasons for denial are reported only as 
a percentage relative to one another because data on reasons 
for denial are not consistent in how they are reported. A 
distribution of denial proportions is reported to provide an 
overall context of the reasons for denials issued in 
2010.*** The reported reasons for denial do not have an 
impact on the overall estimate for the denial rate because 
the reasons for denial are reported as counts and are not 
included in the process for estimating the total number of 
denials issued by state agencies.

********************
Appeals and arrests
********************

Information on appeals and arrests has been collected by the 
FIST project since 2000. The FBI provided data on appeals 
for 2010, and some state and local agencies provided data on 
appeals and arrests for 2010. All information on appeals and 
arrests were actual totals and not estimates. Fourteen state 
agencies provided appeal counts and four state agencies 
provided arrest counts. Twenty-five local agencies provided 
appeal counts and 19 provided arrest counts.

**************
Definitions
**************

National Instant Criminal Background Check (NICS) is a 
national system that checks available records in the 
following files to determine if prospective transferees are 
disqualified from receiving firearms: the Interstate 
Identification Index (millions of criminal history records); 
the National Crime Information Center (protection orders and 
active felony or misdemeanor warrants); and the NICS Index 
(a database created solely for use by NICS that contains 
information provided by local, state, and federal agencies 
about persons prohibited under federal law from receiving or 
possessing a firearm). Additionally, a fourth search of the 
applicable databases via the Department of Homeland 
Security’s United States Immigration and Customs Enforcement 
is conducted for background checks initiated on all non-
United States citizens.

Firearm is any weapon that is designed to or may readily be 
converted to expel a projectile by the action of an 
explosive.

Handgun is a firearm that has a short stock and is designed 
to be held and fired using a single hand, such as a pistol 
or revolver.

Long gun is a firearm with a barrel extended to around 
30 inches to improve accuracy and range, commonly with a 
shoulder butt, and designed to be fired with two hands, such 
as a rifle or shotgun.

Federal Firearms Licensee (FFL) is also known as a federally 
licensed firearms dealer. A dealer must be licensed by ATF 
to be classified as an FFL and enrolled with the FBI’s NICS 
to request a NICS check. 

Application for firearm transfer is information submitted by 
a person to a state or local checking agency to purchase a 
firearm or obtain a permit that can be used for a purchase. 
Information may be submitted directly to a checking agency 
or forwarded by a prospective seller.

Denial occurs when an applicant is prohibited from receiving 
a firearm or a permit that can be used to receive a firearm 
because a disqualifying factor was found during a background 
check.*** Footnote 3 While some local agencies in the FIST 
sample reported reasons for denial, over 50% did not provide 
data. For this reason, the data were not robust enough to 
report the distribution of the counts ***

Transactions are inquiries to the federal NICS system and 
may include more than one inquiry per application.

Instant check (instant approval) systems require a seller to 
transmit a purchaser’s application to a checking agency by 
telephone or computer, after which the agency is required to 
respond immediately or as quickly as possible.

Purchase permit systems require a prospective firearm 
purchaser to obtain, after a background check, a government-
issued document (called a permit, license, or identification 
card) that must be presented to a seller to receive a 
firearm. 

Exempt carry permit is a state carry permit (issued after a 
background check) that exempts the holder from a check at 
the time of purchase under an ATF regulation or state law.

Other approval systems require a seller to transmit a 
purchaser’s application to a checking agency by telephone or 
other electronic means. The agency is not required to 
respond immediately but must respond before the end of the 
statutory time limit.

*********************
Related Publications 
*********************

The report, Background Checks for Firearm Transfers, - 
Statistical Tables, is available only in electronic format 
for the following publication years:

* 2009, NCJ 231679, October 2010

* 2008, NCJ 227471, August 2009

* 2007, NCJ 223197, July 2008

* 2006, NCJ 221786, March 2008.

Avabilable in print and electronic formats—

* Background Checks for Firearm Transfers, 2005, 
NCJ 214256, November 2006

* Background Checks for Firearm Transfers, 2004, 
NCJ 210117, October 2005

* Background Checks for Firearm Transfers, 2003: Trends for 
the Permanent Brady Period, 1999-2003, NCJ 204428, September 
2004

* Background Checks for Firearm Transfers, 2002,  
NCJ 200116, September 2003

* Background Checks for Firearm Transfers, 2001,  
NCJ 195235, September 2002

* Background Checks for Firearm Transfers, 2000,  
NCJ 187985, July 2001

* Background Checks for Firearm Transfers, 1999,  
NCJ 180882, June 1999.

Data on this subject for the Brady Interim Period prior to 
the permanent provisions are available in Presale Handgun 
Checks, the Brady Interim Period, 1994–98, NCJ 175034, BJS 
website, June 1999.
 
* Enforcement of the Brady Act, 2009: Federal and State 
Investigations and Prosecutions of Firearm Applicants Denied 
by a NICS Check in 2009 
https://www.ncjrs.gov/pdffiles1/bjs/grants/234173.pdf

* Enforcement of the Brady Act, 2008: Federal and State 
Investigations and Prosecutions of Firearm Applicants Denied 
by a NICS Check in 2008
http://www.ncjrs.gov/pdffiles1/bjs/231052.pdf

* Enforcement of the Brady Act, 2007: Federal and State 
Investigations and Prosecutions of Firearm Applicants Denied 
by a NICS Check in 2007
http://www.ncjrs.gov/pdffiles1/bjs/grants/227604.pdf 

* Enforcement of the Brady Act, 2006
http://www.ncjrs.gov/pdffiles1/bjs/grants/222474.pdf

* Federal Firearms Cases, FY 2008 
http://www.ncjrs.gov/pdffiles1/bjs/grants/229420.pdf

* Federal Firearms Cases, FY 2007 
http://www.ncjrs.gov/pdffiles1/bjs/grants/224890.pdf 

The following BJS surveys provide an overview of the firearm 
check procedures in each of the states and the states’ 
interaction with NICS:

* Survey of State Procedures Related to Firearm Sales, 2005, 
NCJ 214645, November 2006

* Survey of State Procedures Related to Firearm Sales, 
Midyear 2004, NCJ 209288, August 2005

* Survey of State Procedures Related to Firearm Sales, 
Midyear 2003, NCJ 203701, August 2004

* Survey of State Procedures Related to Firearm Sales, 
Midyear 2002, NCJ 198830, April 2003

* Survey of State Procedures Related to Firearm Sales, 
Midyear 2001, NCJ 192065, April 2002

* Survey of State Procedures Related to Firearm Sales, 
Midyear 2000, NCJ 186766, April 2001

* Survey of State Procedures Related to Firearm Sales, 
Midyear 1999, NCJ 179022, March 2000

* Survey of State Procedures Related to Firearm Sales, 1997, 
NCJ 173942, December 1998

* Survey of State Procedures Related to Firearm Sales, 1996, 
NCJ 160705, September 1997

* Survey of State Procedures Related to Firearm Sales, 
NCJ 160763, May 1996.

The following BJS survey examines the quality and 
accessibility of certain criminal and noncriminal records 
when states conduct a firearm presale background check:

* Survey of State Records Included in Presale Background * * 
Checks: Mental Health Records, Domestic Violence Misdemeanor 
Records, and Restraining Orders, 2003, 
NCJ 206042, August 2004

* Trends for Background Checks for Firearm Transfers, 
1999-2008 
http://www.ncjrs.gov/pdffiles1/bjs/grants/231187.pdf

******************************************************

The Bureau of Justice Statistics is the statistical agency 
of the U.S. Department of Justice. William J. Sabol is the 
acting director.

The Regional Justice Information Service (REJIS) prepared 
these tables under the supervision of Allina D. Lee of the 
Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS). Allen Beck of the Bureau 
of Justice Statistics provided statistical consultation. 
Tracey Kyckelhahn, BJS statistician, provided verification. 
Terry J. Tomazic, Professor of Sociology at Saint Louis 
University, served as statistical advisor and Jennifer 
Karberg at REJIS managed the data collection and assisted 
with data analysis on the project. The tables were prepared 
under BJS cooperative agreement #2011-BJ-CX-K017. The BJS-
sponsored Firearm Inquiry Statistics (FIST) program collects 
information on firearm background checks conducted by state 
and local agencies and combines this information with 
Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) National Instant 
Criminal Background Check System (NICS) transaction data.

Vanessa Curto, Jill Thomas, and Morgan Young edited the 
report, and Tina Dorsey and Morgan Young produced the 
report, under the supervision of Doris J. James.

February 2013, NCJ 238226

********************************************************

******************************************************
Office of Justice Programs * Innovation * Partnerships 
* Safer Neighborhoods * http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov
******************************************************
______________________
2/11/13/JER/12:50pm

