U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Programs
Bureau of Justice Statistics

***************************************************************
This file is text only without graphics and many of the tables. 
A Zip archive of the tables in this report in spreadsheet 
format (.csv) and the full report including tables and graphics 
in .pdf format are available on BJS website at: 
http://www.bjs.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbdetail&iid=5664
***************************************************************

**************************************************************
This report is one in a series. More recent editions 
may be available. To view a list of all in the series 
go to http://www.bjs.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbse&sid=13
************************************************************

*********************
Statistical Tables
*********************

*********************************************************
Background Checks for Firearm Transfers, 2013–14 – 
Statistical Tables
*********************************************************

Jennifer C. Karberg
Ronald J. Frandsen
Joseph M. Durso
Trent D. Buskirk, Ph.D.
Regional Justice Information Service
Allina D. Lee
Bureau of Justice Statistics

More than 180 million applications for firearm transfers or 
permits were subject to background checks since the effective
date of the Brady Handgun Violence Prevention Act on February 
28, 1994, through December 31, 2014. During this period, about 
2.8 million applications (1.6%) were denied. In 2014, nearly 15 
million applications were subject to background checks, and
193,000 (1.3%) were denied, including about 91,000 denied by 
the FBI and about 102,000 denied by state and local agencies.

Data in this report were obtained from the Bureau of Justice 
Statistics’ (BJS) Firearm Inquiry Statistics (FIST) program. 
The FIST program collects information on firearm applications 
and denials and combines this information with the FBI’s 
National Instant Criminal Background Check System (NICS) 
transaction data to produce an estimated number of background 
checks for firearm transfers or permits since the effective 
date of the Brady Act. 

These statistical tables describe trends in background check 
activities that occurred in 2014 and include partial data for 
2013. Data include the number of firearm transaction 
applications processed by the FBI and by state and local 
agencies, the number of applications denied, reasons for 
denial, and estimates of applications by jurisdiction and by 
each type of approval system.

Summary findings
*******************

* Since the effective date of the Brady Act on February 28, 
1994, through December 31, 2014, more than 180 million 
applications for firearm transfers or permits were subject to 
background checks. More than 2.8 million applications (1.6%) 
were denied (table 1).

* Nearly 15 million applications for firearm transfers were 
received in 2014, down from an estimated 17.6 million in 2013.

* About 1.3% of the nearly 15 million applications for firearm 
transfers or permits in 2014 were denied--about 91,000 by the 
FBI and about 102,000 by state and local agencies. An estimated
193,000 applications for firearm transfers or permits in 2013 
were denied--about 88,000 by the FBI and about 104,000 by state 
and local agencies (table 2).

* Among state agencies, denial rates in 2014 were 3.1% for 
purchase permits, 1.5% for instant checks, 0.9% for other 
approval checks, and 1.0% for exempt carry permits. Denial 
rates in 2013 were estimated to be 1.9% for purchase permits, 
1.2% for instant checks, 0.8% for other approval checks, and
0.9% for exempt carry permits (table 3).

* Among local agencies, the denial rates in 2014 were 4% for 
purchase permit checks and 1.2% for exempt carry permit checks 
(table 4).

* A felony conviction (42%) was the most common reason for the 
FBI to deny an application in 2014, followed by a fugitive from 
justice status (19%) (table 5).

* Among the 18 state agencies that reported reasons for denial, 
a state law prohibition (26%) was the most common reason to 
deny an application in 2014, followed by a felony conviction 
(22%).

* Excluding other prohibitions, of the approximately 330 local 
agencies that reported reasons for denial, a state law 
prohibition (20%) was the most common reason to deny an 
application in 2014.

* Among all agencies that reported reasons for denial in 2014, 
denial of an application due to a felony conviction, 
indictment, charge, or arrest accounted for approximately
42% of denials (table 6).

* Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives (ATF) 
field offices investigated 7,978 NICS denials that were 
referred by the FBI in 2014—up from 6,257 in 2013. Among 
denials, a felony conviction was the most common reason for 
referral to a field office in 2014 (37%) and in 2013 (33%) 
(table 7).

***********************************************************
***********
Tables
**********

TABLE 1
Estimated number of firearm applications received and denied 
since the effective date of the Brady Act, 1994–2014

TABLE 2
Firearm applications received and denied, by type of agency 
and type of check, 2013 and 2014

TABLE 3
Firearm applications received and denied by state agencies, 
by type of check, 2013 and 2014

TABLE 4
Firearm applications received and denied by local agencies, 
by community size and type of permit, 2014

TABLE 5
Reasons for denial of firearm transfer and permit applications, 
by checking agencies, 2013 and 2014

TABLE 6
Percent change in the number of applications, denials, 
and reasons for denial, 1999–2014

TABLE 7
Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives 
investigation of National Instant Criminal Background
Check System denials by the FBI, 2013 and 2014

TABLE 8
Number of checking agencies in the 2014 Firearm
Inquiry Statistics survey

*****************
Appendix tables
*****************

APPENDIX TABLE 1
Estimated standard errors for firearm applications received 
and denied by local agencies, 2014

APPENDIX TABLE 2
Standard errors for table 4: Firearm applications received and 
denied by local agencies, by community size and type of permit, 
2014

APPENDIX TABLE 3 
Firearm applications received and denied by jurisdiction, 2014

APPENDIX TABLE 4
Firearm applications received and denied by jurisdiction, 2013

APPENDIX TABLE 5
Reasons for denial of firearm transfer and permit applications, 
by checking agencies, 2013 and 2014

APPENDIX TABLE 6
Prohibited person records in the National Instant Criminal 
Background Check System Index, 2014

APPENDIX TABLE 7 
Prohibited person records in the National Instant Criminal 
Background Check System Index, 2013 

APPENDIX TABLE 8 
Reasons for denial of firearm transfer and 
permit applications, December 31, 2014 

APPENDIX TABLE 9 
Agencies conducting firearm background checks,
December 31, 2014 

APPENDIX TABLE 10 
National Instant Criminal Background Check System 
checking agencies, FBI, or state Point of Contact for firearm transfers, 2014 

APPENDIX TABLE 11 
Forums for appeals of firearm transfer and permit denials, 2014

***********************************************************


**************
Background
*************

The Brady Handgun Violence Prevention Act of 1993 (Pub. L. No. 
103-159, 107 Stat. 1536 (1993), codified as amended at 18 
U.S.C. § 921 et seq.) mandates that a criminal history 
background check be performed on any person who attempts to 
purchase a firearm from a Federal Firearms Licensee (FFL). The 
permanent provisions of the Brady Act established the NICS, 
which the FBI or a state Point of Contact (POC) accesses prior 
to approval or denial of a firearm transfer. The NICS is a 
system comprised of data on persons who are prohibited from 
purchasing or possessing a firearm under federal or state law.

The Gun Control Act (18 U.S.C. § 922) prohibits transfer of a 
firearm to a person who--

* is under indictment for, or has been convicted of, a crime 
punishable by imprisonment for more than 1 year

* is a fugitive from justice

* is an unlawful user of, or addicted to, a controlled 
substance

* has been adjudicated as a mental defective or committed to a 
mental institution

* is an illegal alien or has been admitted to the United States 
under a nonimmigrant visa

* was dishonorably discharged from the U.S. Armed Forces

* has renounced U.S. citizenship

* is subject to a court order restraining him or her from 
harassing, stalking, or threatening an intimate partner or 
child

* has been convicted of a misdemeanor crime of domestic 
violence

* is under age 18 for long guns or under age 21 for handguns.

An FFL contacts either the FBI or a state POC to determine 
whether a prospective purchaser is prohibited from receiving a 
firearm. During 2014, the FBI conducted all NICS checks for 30 
states, the District of Columbia, and U.S. territories. POC 
agencies, which may be statewide or local, conducted all NICS 
checks for 13 other states. In the remaining 7 states, POC 
agencies conducted NICS checks on handgun transfer applicants, 
and the FBI conducted checks on long gun transfer applicants. 
Several states require an additional background check that does 
not access the NICS. State laws may require a check on a permit 
applicant or a person who seeks to receive a firearm from an 
unlicensed seller. For more information on the NICS, visit the 
FBI’s Criminal Justice Information Service (CJIS) website at 
http://www.fbi.gov/about-us/cjis/nics.

BJS began the FIST program in 1995 to provide national 
estimates of the total number of firearm applications received 
and denied pursuant to the Brady Act and similar state laws. 
The FIST program collects counts of firearm transfers and 
permit checks conducted by state and local agencies and 
combines this information with the FBI’s NICS transaction data. 
In addition, FIST collects information on reasons for denials 
and law enforcement actions taken by the FBI and ATF against 
denied persons.

**********************************************
Overview of the national firearm check system 
**********************************************

About 1,300 federal, state, and local agencies conduct background 
checks on persons who apply to purchase a firearm or for a permit 
that may be used to make a purchase.

Prospective firearm applicants must either undergo a NICS 
background check that has been requested by a dealer or present 
a state permit that ATF has qualified as an alternative to the 
point-of-transfer check.

ATF-qualified permits are those that--

* allow an applicant to possess, acquire, or carry a firearm

* were issued not more than 5 years earlier by the state where 
the transfer is to take place, after an authorized government 
official verified that possession of a firearm by the applicant 
would not be a violation of law.

All permits issued since November 29, 1998, must have included 
a NICS check. Many NICS-alternative permits may be used for 
multiple purchases while valid. State laws often provide that a 
permit will be revoked if the holder is convicted of an offense 
or otherwise becomes ineligible after receiving the permit.

NICS-alternative permit changes occurred in two states during 
2013 and 2014. Alaska reinstated processing of NICS-alternative 
permits (called NICS exempt carry permits within the state) in 
2013. West Virginia carry permits were qualified by ATF as a 
NICS alternative in 2014, after amendments to state laws.

Prior to transferring a firearm under the permanent Brady 
provisions, an FFL is required to obtain a completed Firearm
Transaction Record (ATF form 4473) from the applicant.
An FFL initiates a NICS check by contacting either the FBI or 
the state POC. Most inquiries are initiated by telephone. In 
2002, the FBI added E-Check to allow FFLs to request a check 
electronically. The FBI or state POC queries available federal, 
state, local, and tribal systems and notifies the FFL that the 
transfer may proceed, may not proceed, or must be delayed 
pending further review of the applicant’s record.

When an FFL initiates a NICS background check, a name and 
descriptor search is conducted to identify any matching records 
in three nationally held databases managed by the FBI’s CJIS. 
The following databases are searched during the background 
check process:

* The Interstate Identification Index (III) maintains 
individual criminal history records. As of January 8, 2015, the 
NICS accessed and searched 85,909,018 III records during a 
background check. *** Footnote 1 Data are reported through 
January 8, 2015, because the FBI did not run data through 
December 31, 2014, in the 2014 report, National Instant 
Criminal Background Check System Operations, available at 
https://www.fbi. gov/about-us/cjis/nics/reports/2014-
operations-report. See also Survey of State Criminal History 
Information Systems, 2014, available at https://www. 
ncjrs.gov/pdffiles1/bjs/grants/249799.pdf.***

* The National Crime Information Center (NCIC) contains data on 
persons who are the subjects of protection orders or active 
criminal warrants, immigration violators, and others. As of 
December 31, 2014, the NICS searched 5,598,974 NCIC records 
during a background check.

* The NICS Index, a database created specifically for the NICS, 
collects and maintains information contributed by federal, 
state, local, and tribal agencies pertaining to persons 
prohibited from receiving or possessing a firearm pursuant to 
federal and state law. Typically, the records maintained in the 
NICS Index are not available via the III or the NCIC. As of 
December 31, 2014, the NICS Index contained 12,881,223 records.

* The U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE) databases 
contain information on non-U.S. citizens who attempt to receive 
firearms in the United States. In 2014, the NICS Section and 
POC states sent 104,828 such queries to ICE. From February 2002 
to December 31, 2014, ICE conducted more than 622,771 queries 
for the NICS. *** Footnote 2 For more information about the 
NICS background check process, see the 2014 report, National 
Instant Criminal Background Check System Operations, available 
at https://www.fbi.gov/about-us/cjis/nics/reports/2014-
operations-report.***

An applicant who is denied a firearm transfer or permit may 
appeal to the FBI or a POC. Some jurisdictions allow a further 
appeal to a court. A denied person who submitted a false 
application or has an outstanding warrant may be subject to 
arrest and prosecution under federal or state laws.

************************************
State and local NICS participation 
************************************

Each state government determines the extent of its involvement 
in the NICS process. Three levels of state involvement 
currently exist:

* A full POC requests a NICS check on all firearm transfers 
originating in the state.

* A partial POC requests a NICS check on all handgun transfers. 
FFLs in the state are required to contact the FBI for NICS 
checks for long gun transfers.

* The state does not maintain a POC. FFLs are required to 
contact the FBI for NICS checks on all firearm transfers 
originating in the state.

************************
Other uses of the NICS
************************

In addition to NICS background checks required by the Brady 
Act, use of the NICS is limited to providing information to 
criminal justice agencies in connection with the issuance of a 
firearm- or explosives-related permit or license, or responding 
to an inquiry from ATF in connection with a civil or criminal 
law enforcement activity relating to federal firearm laws (28 
CFR § 25.6). Firearm-related permits include ATF-qualified 
alternative permits and other permits issued by state or local 
agencies. In addition to checks on new and renewed 
applications, rechecks may be conducted on current permit 
holders.

**************
Methodology
**************

Data used for this report were prepared by the Regional
Justice Information Service (REJIS) through a cooperative 
agreement with the Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS) under the 
Firearm Inquiry Statistics (FIST) program. The FIST program 
collects information on background checks for firearm transfers 
or permits from federal, state, and local agencies.

***********************
FIST frame generation
************************

State statutes determine which agencies conduct background 
checks for a firearm permit or transfer. To generate the FIST 
sampling frame for the 2014 collection, REJIS, under the 
direction of BJS, used multiple data sources combined with a 
large known pool of past FIST responders. First, REJIS included 
local agencies from the 2012 FIST frame that were known to have 
responded to the FIST survey at least once in the previous 3 
years and had a verified status of conducting background checks 
or processing applications for firearm transfers or permits. 
REJIS used other data sources and resources to verify the 
frame, including the 2008 Census of State and Local Law 
Enforcement and a 2011 Originating Agency Identifier file of 
law enforcement agencies obtained from the FBI.

The 2014 FIST universe was composed of the following:

* FBI--30 states and the District of Columbia rely on the FBI’s 
National Instant Criminal Background Check System (NICS) to 
conduct firearm background check activities for handguns and 
long gun transfers. In seven other states, the FBI’s NICS 
conducts checks for long gun transfers only.

* State reporting agencies--31 state agencies and the District 
of Columbia police provide complete statewide counts of 
applications for firearm transfers or permits, denials of 
applications, and (when reported) reasons for denial for at 
least one type of check.

* Local reporting agencies--1,287 local checking agencies in 11 
states issue permits, track applications and denials, or 
conduct background checks for various types of firearm permit 
or transfer systems.***Footnote 3 The FIST program obtains data 
from local law enforcement agencies that conduct background 
checks and issue permits as well as from other types of local 
agencies that conduct these activities, such as probate courts 
(in Georgia) and county clerks or other types of administrative 
offices (in New York). In such cases, the agency surveyed may 
not actually conduct a background check but rather issue a 
permit, track a permit that was issued, or track a transfer 
check. For the FIST program, collecting application and denial 
data from agencies that conduct background checks or track 
permit or transfer applications is considered to be the most 
accurate and sometimes the only means available to assess 
background check activity. Additionally, populations covered by 
local agencies (for basic NICS checks and permits, not 
including other types of checks and permits, such as separate 
state-level checks and ATF-exempt carry permits) account for 
only 7% of the total U.S. population.***

For the FIST program, it is important to distinguish between 
local agencies that are authorized by statute to conduct 
background checks and those that actually conduct the checks. 
Although local agencies in certain states are legally 
authorized to conduct background checks for firearm transfers 
or permits, these agencies are not required to do so. When 
developing the 2014 FIST frame, REJIS identified a few 
instances where a local agency (usually a municipal police 
department) that was legally authorized by state statute to 
conduct a background check had never actually conducted 
background check activities and was unlikely to ever do so. 
Instead, transfer or permit applicants who might use such a 
local agency are directed to another local authority (usually 
the county sheriff) with jurisdiction to conduct a transfer 
check or issue a permit. Agencies that did not conduct 
background check activities were considered to be out of scope 
for the 2014 data collection.

For the FIST data collection, BJS determined that eligible 
agencies in the frame should be those that are authorized to 
conduct and are known to conduct or maintain information on 
background checks. Such agencies collect or maintain data on 
the critical FIST data elements: applications, denials, and 
(when reported) the reasons for denial. Agencies that only have 
delegated background check functions are considered out of 
scope because they do not actually conduct firearm background 
check activities nor track information on such activities, 
which are the critical data collection items on the survey. 
Smaller law enforcement agencies that had closed since the 
construction of the FIST frame were determined to be out of 
scope for the 2014 data collection.

**************
FIST sample
**************

The 2014 FIST survey was designed to provide state-level 
estimates of background check activity. BJS produced a national 
estimate of the number of applications for firearms received 
and denied pursuant to the Brady Act by combining data obtained 
from state agencies and local checking agencies with FBI’s NICS 
transaction data obtained from the FBI’s NICS Section. 
***Footnote 4 The FBI reports on NICS transaction data in its 
annual NICS Operations Report. The FBI tracks the number of 
applications and denials processed by the NICS system. However, 
the FBI only reports reasons for denials made by the NICS 
Section and does not include reasons for denials issued at the 
state and local levels (information that FIST collects). In 
2014, the FBI reported more than 12.7 million state Point of 
Contact transactions, compared to the approximately 6 million 
reported by FIST. This variation can be attributed to several 
factors, notably within the category of state firearm permits. 
The FIST counts include applications for two types of state 
firearm permits: (1) permits required for a transfer (purchase 
permits) and (2) concealed carry permits that may be used to 
exempt the holder from a background check at the time of 
transfer (exempt carry permits). At yearend 2014, 21 states had 
an exempt carry permit, and 29 other states had concealed carry 
permits that were not exempt and were not included in FIST. At 
least some of those 29 states used NICS for checks on 
applicants, and those checks have been included in the FBI 
statistics. The largest difference within the state firearm 
permit category was caused by periodic rechecks that at least 
two state agencies ran on all current carry permit holders. The 
rechecks were included in FBI transaction counts but not in 
FIST counts because they were not connected to a firearm 
transfer, and the FIST reporting agency was able to separately 
report new and renewed permit applications.***

REJIS collected state-level data from the state reporting 
agencies via survey or extracted publicly available online 
reports from the state website. Except for one state 
(Pennsylvania) in which denials were estimated, all data 
collected by state agencies are considered to be complete 
counts. To obtain FIST data in 2014, REJIS surveyed local 
agencies in 11 states with local checking agencies that were 
authorized to conduct firearm background check activities or 
process applications. Totals were estimated for states where 
the reporters were local agencies.

Local agencies in 8 (Idaho, Iowa, Montana, Nebraska, North 
Carolina, Nevada, New York, and West Virginia) of the 11 states 
were enumerated, and local agencies in 3 (Georgia, Minnesota, 
and Washington) of the states were sampled in 2 of the 4 sample 
strata due to the large number of potential reporters. REJIS 
created a stratified random sample proportionate to state and 
stratum size in each of the 3 states sampled based on 
population size that roughly equates to--

* Stratum 1: rural--places of less than 10,000 population

* Stratum 2: small cities--places of between 10,000 and
99,999 population

* Stratum 3: small metropolitan areas--places of between
100,000 and 199,999 population

* Stratum 4: large metropolitan areas--places of 200,000 or
more population.

BJS created a reserve sample to account for potential low 
response rates for the 2014 collection. In total, a 30% reserve 
sample was drawn for each of the three sampled states; it was 
split into two reserve samples yielding a 15% sample per 
reserve sample. Because all agencies in strata 3 and 4 were 
surveyed, the reserve sample only affected strata 1 and 2 of 
the sampled agencies. The first reserve sample was to be used 
if one of the sampled states had a response rate of less than 
85% for the initial data collection period. The second reserve 
sample was to be used if one of the sampled states had a 
response rate of less than 75% after the first reserve sample 
was collected. REJIS used the first and second reserve samples 
for Georgia in 2014. No reserve samples were used for the 
sampled agencies in Minnesota and Washington.

The final designated sample included 561 enumerated (self-
representing or SR) local agencies and 274 sampled (non-self-
representing or NSR) local agencies. After adjusting for 
agencies that were ineligible to participate in the survey, the 
final sample consisted of 845 state and local agencies. The 
overall response rate was 80%. All (100%) state agencies and 
80% of local agencies responded to the survey (table 8).

BJS and REJIS updated the 2013–14 FIST survey form. To minimize 
respondent burden, the form was changed to provide clearer 
instructions tailored to terminology used by individual state 
agencies to describe the permit or permits of interest. BJS 
removed questions from the 2014 FIST survey on arrests, 
appeals, and reversals of denied applications because only a 
small number of agencies historically reported these data, 
which significantly limited the ability to draw reliable 
conclusions about the data. To increase survey response, REJIS 
used multiple survey modes (e.g., online form, paper survey, 
and fax) and a rigorous nonresponse follow-up contact strategy.

************
Estimation
************

Data obtained from state and local agencies were combined with 
the FBI’s federal NICS transaction data to create an estimate 
of the total number of firearm transfer and permit applications 
received and denied nationally. REJIS applied design weights 
and nonresponse adjustment factors for enumerated and sampled 
local agencies to generate estimates of the number of 
applications and denials at the state level.

The 2014 FIST data collection provides for two basic weighting 
structures for local respondent agencies: a weight applied to 
SR agencies and a weight applied to NSR agencies.

*************************
SR agencies (enumerated)
*************************

Each local checking agency within the eight states in which all 
known eligible agencies were contacted received a design weight 
of 1 (w1 = 1). In addition to the design weight, a nonresponse 
adjustment (w2) was applied to responding agencies to 
compensate for the agencies that did not respond.

***********************
NSR agencies (sampled)
***********************

The process for calculating weights for NSR agencies was 
similar to that for SR agencies, except these agencies (the 
small agencies in strata 1 and 2 of the sampled states) 
received a design weight of greater than 1 (w1 > 1) according 
to the population-based stratum and the state in which they 
reside. This weight reflects the inverse of the probability of 
selection for the state and stratum size (cell) in which the 
agency resides. The reserve samples for Minnesota and 
Washington were not released. In these cases, the design 
weights were further adjusted to compensate for the reserve 
subsampling. Agencies in strata 3 and 4 (large agencies) were 
selected with certainty and were therefore given a weight of 1. 
Weights were adjusted for any agencies that were out of scope 
in the sampled states.

*************************
Nonresponse adjustment
*************************

The nonresponse adjustment accounts for agencies that were 
ineligible (out of scope) and for nonrespondents. It consists 
of a ratio adjustment of the sum of the weighted eligible 
agencies (per state and population size stratum) to the sum of 
weighted respondent agencies (also per state and population 
size stratum). A nonresponse adjustment was applied to each 
cell (stratum within state) if there was any nonresponse. This 
created a specific adjustment for each cell that applies to all 
states, whether enumerated or sampled.

************************************
Partial-year reporting adjustment
************************************

A weight (w3), consisting of a small ratio adjustment to 
account for missing months of data, was applied to adjust for 
any agency that reported only partial-year data. This 
adjustment to account for missing months was necessary for six 
local agencies and to calculate reasons for denial from 
Pennsylvania.

****************
Final weights
****************

The final weights (Fw) applied to each FIST case are the 
product of a design weight applied to each agency, a 
nonresponse adjustment weight, and the partial-year reporting 
weight (Fw = w1 × w2 × w3).

***********************************************
Item nonresponse imputation for local agencies
***********************************************

For the 2014 FIST collection, REJIS determined that there were 
very few cases in which information on applications for firearm 
transfers or permits was missing. There were more cases of 
missing data for denials, but this was a small number compared 
to other missing data (e.g., reasons for denial). To count 
partial responses, agencies were required to report either the 
number of applications received or the number of denials 
issued. If neither was present, the agency was considered a 
nonrespondent. Fifteen agencies provided denials but not 
applications. Twenty-eight agencies provided the number of 
applications but not denials. In the instances of missing data 
on applications or denials, REJIS used a conditional mean 
imputation to estimate the number of applications and denials.

To yield the most reliable estimates, REJIS replaced missing 
values with the mean number of applications of other agencies 
in the same state that were in the same population category. In 
population stratum 1, this approach was deemed sufficient 
because all agencies served a population of less than 10,000. 
In population stratum 2, the population size covered a broad 
range (10,000 to 99,999). As such, a traditional group-mean 
replacement would have produced unacceptably imprecise 
approximations. To address this, for agencies with complete 
data, REJIS employed a basic multiple imputation strategy that 
took into account the number of denials, the actual population 
size served, and the number of applications to calculate the 
estimated number of applications in instances of missing data. 
The result was a within-state and stratum group-based sum of 
imputed values, but it was proportionate to the population 
allocation of imputed applications or denials per agency.

*************************
Estimates for 2013 data
*************************

BJS collected 2013 and 2014 data from federal agencies and from 
the 31 state agency reporters and the District of Columbia. Due 
to various factors, including time spent revising the survey to 
incorporate more accurate terminology familiar to respondents, 
complexities associated with trying to collect multiple years 
of data from local jurisdictions, and BJS’s objective to report 
more timely FIST data, BJS collected only 2014 data from local 
checking agencies. ***Footnote 5 To mitigate reporting burden, 
BJS collected only 2014 data from local checking agencies. 
While state agencies are more likely to maintain the requested 
data in an automated format (e.g., a database), local agencies, 
especially those in smaller jurisdictions, may not have access 
to these same resources. These agencies may need to gather FIST 
data from files or other sources that require manual counts, 
and requesting multiple years of data could result in an 
unnecessary increase in respondent burden when reliable 
estimates can be produced in a different way.***  To account 
for the missing 2013 local agency data in the national 
estimate, REJIS used available FIST 2012, 2013, and 2014 state 
data to estimate the number of applications and denials from 
local agencies. ***Footnote 6 Data were also estimated for the 
state agency reporter from Illinois, as data were not provided 
for 2013.*** Specifically, REJIS used a random intercept linear 
regression spline model with one knot at 2013 to incorporate 
the hierarchical structure of the data (multiple time points 
and total application and denials estimates per state) to 
separately model total applications and total denials. The 
spline models were selected over conditional growth models 
(linear or quadratic) to allow for nonlinearity in the trends 
in total applications (and denials) over time across all 
states. To improve the overall imputations, these models also 
incorporated either a fixed or time varying covariate shown to 
be highly correlated with the FIST applications and denials 
totals over time.

*********************
Adjustments to data
*********************

REJIS obtained concealed carry permit data from Michigan by 
fiscal year, which were used to provide estimates for calendar 
years 2013 and 2014.

Mississippi reported applications for 2013 and 2014 but did not 
report denials for either year. Because sufficient data from 
prior years were unavailable to calculate an estimate using a 
linear trend, the ratio of denials to applications reported by 
Mississippi in 2012 was used to calculate a simple ratio that 
was applied to the number of applications to estimate the 
number of denials.

Pennsylvania reported the number of instant checks for 2013 and 
2014, which are included in the FIST national estimate. The 
proportion of all Pennsylvania transactions that were instant 
checks was used to estimate the number of denials of instant 
checks and reasons for denials.

****************
Standard errors
****************

Standard error calculations were computed for the estimates of 
total applications, total denials, and the ratio of denials to 
total applications for three types: purchase, transfer and 
concealed carry permits across states, and size of region for 
local agencies. The standard error computations take into  
account several aspects of the FIST design, including 
stratification of data collection by a combination of state and 
population served categories and finite population sampling 
(without replacement) across the states and population 
categories of interest. REJIS approximated the FIST design by 
generating 68 final strata defined as combinations of state and 
population categories. Data from SR agencies were treated as 
certainty samples with an initial selection probability of one. 
For these states and population category combinations, complete 
responses would have a negligible contribution to the overall 
standard errors for a given estimate. To account for this and 
the fact that finite population correction (FPC) factors for 
the samples generated by the FIST design were very small, FPCs 
were directly incorporated into the standard error 
computations. Finally, estimates for local agencies included 
one additional subdomain of agency type: local or state 
(centralized reporting). All computations were generated using 
the FIST final sampling weight, which incorporated adjustments 
for missing values, nonresponse, and an overall population 
eligibility or coverage adjustment. In some cases, standard 
error computations were not possible, as only one agency 
reported information from a given type of application in
areas where more than one agency was queried (via sample or 
census). In these cases, no standard error computations were 
provided.

*********************
Reasons for denial
*********************

BJS has collected information about reasons for denial since 
the FIST program’s inception in 1996. The FIST survey includes 
12 categories that reflect the most common reasons for denial 
and closely match the categories of federal prohibitors. NICS 
POC agencies enforce federal prohibitors and state law 
prohibitors that may vary from the federal categories (see 
appendix table 6 for a list of federal and state prohibitors). 
Agencies that responded to the FIST survey were asked to record 
their denials in the most appropriate categories. When REJIS 
obtained data from an agency’s website or internal report that 
did not match with an existing FIST denial category, REJIS 
determined which denial category best matched the reported 
reason and verified the classification with the responding 
agency.

In 2014, the FBI, 18 state agencies, and approximately 330 
local agencies reported reasons for denials. There are two 
major difficulties in reporting reasons for denial.

First, among reporting agencies there was a high degree of 
nonresponse on items that asked about reasons for denial.
Among local agencies, nonresponse was high in most states
and population strata. Local agencies in one state (New York) 
did not report any reasons for denial. In 2014, the FBI and 
some state agencies provided a reason for each denial. Other 
state agencies provided reasons only for some denials, and some 
state agencies did not provide any reasons for denials.

Second, the method by which agencies record or track reasons 
for a denial varies among state and local agencies. Of those 
that report any reasons for a denial, approximately three-
quarters of local agencies report all of the reasons found on a 
background check that disqualify a permit or transfer seeker 
from obtaining a firearm, while a quarter of agencies report 
only one reason for a denial. This proportion is reversed among 
state agencies, for which a third report all of the reasons a 
permit or transfer was denied and two-thirds report only one 
reason. Another difficulty among some state and local agencies 
that report one reason for a denial is that some report only 
the most serious charge listed on a background check, others 
list the first reason found, and others do not indicate how 
they determined which reason to report.

Due to the high nonresponse and variation in the way reasons 
for denial are reported, a simple estimation for the number of 
reasons for denial by local agencies was calculated. Estimates 
used only the agency base weight rather than the final weight 
that was applied to all other local agency estimates. (See 
Final weights section.) This was done to bring the 
representation of responses from sampled agencies in line with 
those from states in which a census of agencies was conducted. 
The FBI and state agency reasons for denial counts are 
reported, and no estimation on these counts was conducted.

**************
Definitions
**************

Application for firearm transfer is information submitted by a 
person to a state or local checking agency to purchase a 
firearm or obtain a permit that can be used for a purchase. 
Information may be submitted directly to a checking agency or 
forwarded by a prospective seller.

Denial occurs when an applicant is prohibited from receiving a 
firearm or a permit that can be used to receive a firearm 
because a disqualifying factor was found during a background 
check.

Exempt carry permit is a state carry permit (issued after a 
background check) that exempts the holder from a check at the 
time of purchase under an ATF regulation or state law.

Federal Firearms Licensee (FFL) is also known as a federally 
licensed firearms dealer. A dealer must be licensed by the 
Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives (ATF) to be 
classified as an FFL and must be enrolled with the FBI’s NICS 
to request a NICS check.

Firearm is any weapon that is designed to or may readily be 
converted to expel a projectile by the action of an explosive.

Handgun is a firearm that has a short stock and is designed to 
be held and fired using a single hand, such as a pistol or 
revolver.

Instant check (instant approval) systems require a seller to 
transmit a purchaser’s application to a checking agency by 
telephone or computer, after which the agency is required to 
respond as quickly as possible.

Long gun is a firearm with a barrel extended to about 30 inches 
to improve accuracy and range, commonly with a shoulder butt, 
and designed to be fired with two hands, such as a rifle or 
shotgun. 

National Instant Criminal Background Check System (NICS) is a 
national system that checks available records to determine if 
prospective transferees are disqualified from receiving 
firearms.

Other approval systems require a seller to transmit a 
purchaser’s application to a checking agency by telephone or 
other means. The agency is not required to respond immediately 
but must respond before the end of the statutory time limit.

Purchase permit systems require a prospective firearm purchaser 
to obtain, after a background check, a government-issued 
document (called a permit, license, or identification card) 
that must be presented to a seller to receive a firearm.

Transactions are inquiries to the federal NICS system and may 
include more than one inquiry per application.

*******************
Jurisdiction notes
*******************

The following notes provide additional information about 
changes in jurisdictions that occurred and about the types of 
firearms included in a jurisdiction’s instant checks, purchase 
permits, exempt carry permits, or other approval checks in 2013 
and 2014. Jurisdiction statutes should be consulted for 
complete details on a jurisdiction’s firearm laws.

Alaska-- A state agency conducted background checks on 
applicants for exempt carry permits that may have been used for 
handgun or long gun transfers.

Arizona-- A state agency conducted background checks on 
applicants for exempt carry permits that may have been used for 
handgun or long gun transfers.

Arkansas-- A state agency conducted background checks on 
applicants for exempt carry permits that may have been used for 
handgun or long gun transfers.

California-- A state agency conducted other approval checks on 
applicants for handgun and long gun transfers.

Colorado-- A state agency conducted instant checks on 
applicants for handgun and long gun transfers.

Connecticut-- The state authorized two types of purchase 
permits, and every handgun transferee was required to obtain 
one of the permits. Beginning April 1, 2014, a purchase permit 
was also required for a long gun. In addition, a state agency 
conducted instant checks at the point of transfer on applicants 
for handgun and long gun transfers.
 
District of Columbia-- The chief of police conducted checks on 
applicants for a registration certificate (categorized by the 
FIST as a purchase permit), which was required to obtain a 
handgun or a long gun. In addition, the FBI conducted NICS 
checks requested by dealers who transferred a firearm after 
receiving a buyer’s registration certificate.

Florida-- A state agency conducted instant checks on applicants 
for handgun and long gun transfers.

Georgia-- Local agencies issued exempt carry permits that may 
have been used for handgun or long gun transfers.

Hawaii-- A purchase permit was required to obtain a handgun or 
a long gun. Local agencies conducted checks on purchase permit 
applicants.

Idaho-- Local agencies issued exempt carry permits that may 
have been used for handgun or long gun transfers.

Illinois-- A purchase permit was required to obtain a handgun 
or a long gun. In addition, a state agency conducted instant 
checks at the point of transfer on applicants for handgun and 
long gun transfers.

Iowa-- A purchase permit was required to obtain a handgun. An 
exempt carry permit may have been substituted for the purchase 
permit. Both types of permits may have been used to acquire a 
long gun. Local agencies conducted checks on applicants for 
purchase and exempt carry permits.

Kansas-- A state agency conducted background checks on 
applicants for exempt carry permits that may have been used for 
handgun or long gun transfers.

Kentucky-- A state agency conducted background checks on 
applicants for exempt carry permits that may have been used for 
handgun or long gun transfers.

Maryland-- A purchase permit issued by a state agency was 
required to obtain a handgun after October 1, 2013. In 
addition, a state agency conducted other approval checks on 
applicants for transfers of handguns and assault weapons, which 
were designated by state law as regulated firearms.

Massachusetts-- A purchase permit was required to obtain a 
handgun or a long gun. Three types of purchase permits were 
included in the FIST survey data. Local agencies conducted 
checks on permit applicants.

Michigan-- A purchase permit was required for a handgun 
transfer between two individuals who were not licensed dealers. 
An exempt carry permit may have been substituted for the 
purchase permit and may have also been used to acquire a long 
gun. Local agencies conducted checks on purchase permit and 
exempt carry permit applicants.
 
Minnesota-- A purchase permit was required to obtain a handgun 
or an assault weapon. An exempt carry permit may have been 
substituted for the purchase permit. Local agencies conducted 
checks on purchase and exempt carry permit applicants.

Mississippi-- A state agency conducted background checks on 
applicants for exempt carry permits that may have been used for 
handgun or long gun transfers.

Montana-- Local agencies issued exempt carry permits that may 
have been used for handgun or long gun transfers.

Nebraska-- Local agencies conducted checks on applicants for a 
purchase permit, which was required to obtain a handgun. An 
exempt carry permit issued by a state agency may have been 
substituted for the purchase permit. Both types of permits may 
have been used to acquire a long gun.

Nevada-- A state agency conducted instant checks on applicants 
for handgun and long gun transfers. Local agencies issued 
exempt carry permits that may have been used for handgun or 
long gun transfers.

New Hampshire-- A state agency conducted instant checks on 
applicants for handgun transfers.

New Jersey-- A purchase permit was required to obtain a handgun 
or a long gun. Local agencies and the state police conducted 
checks on purchase permit applicants. In addition, the state 
police conducted instant checks at the point of transfer on 
applicants for handgun and long gun transfers.

New York-- The state’s purchase permit was required to obtain a 
handgun and certain types of long guns. Local agencies 
conducted checks on purchase permit applicants.

North Carolina-- A purchase permit was required to obtain a 
handgun. An exempt carry permit may have been substituted for 
the purchase permit. Both types of permits may have been used 
to acquire a long gun. Local agencies conducted checks on 
applicants for purchase and exempt carry permits.

North Dakota-- A state agency conducted background checks on 
applicants for exempt carry permits that may have been used for 
handgun or long gun transfers.

Oregon-- A state agency conducted instant checks on applicants 
for handgun and long gun transfers.

Pennsylvania-- A state agency conducted instant checks on 
applicants for handgun and long gun transfers.

Rhode Island-- Local agencies conducted other approval checks 
on applicants for handgun and long gun transfers.

South Carolina-- A state agency conducted background checks on 
applicants for exempt carry permits that may have been used for 
handgun or long gun transfers.

Tennessee-- A state agency conducted instant checks on 
applicants for handgun and long gun transfers.

Texas-- A state agency conducted background checks on 
applicants for exempt carry permits that may have been used for 
handgun or long gun transfers.

Utah-- A state agency conducted instant checks on applicants 
for handgun and long gun transfers, and conducted background 
checks on applicants for exempt carry permits.

Virginia-- A state agency conducted instant checks on 
applicants for handgun and long gun transfers.

Washington-- Local agencies conducted other approval checks on 
applicants for handgun transfers.

West Virginia-- Local agencies issued exempt carry permits that 
may have been used for handgun or long gun transfers on or 
after June 4, 2014, when the permit was qualified by ATF as an 
alternative to the NICS transfer check.

Wisconsin-- A state agency conducted instant checks on 
applicants for handgun transfers.

Wyoming-- A state agency conducted background checks on 
applicants for exempt carry permits that may have been used for 
handgun or long gun transfers.

**********************
Related Publications
***********************

Background Checks for Firearm Transfers - Statistical Tables,
2012 (NCJ 247815, December 2014)

Background Checks for Firearm Transfers - Statistical Tables,
2010 (NCJ 238226, February 2013)

Background Checks for Firearm Transfers - Statistical Tables,
2009 (NCJ 231679, October 2010)

Background Checks for Firearm Transfers - Statistical Tables,
2008 (NCJ 227471, August 2009)

Background Checks for Firearm Transfers - Statistical Tables,
2007 (NCJ 223197, July 2008)

Background Checks for Firearm Transfers - Statistical Tables,
2006 (NCJ 221786, March 2008)

Background Checks for Firearm Transfers, 2005 (NCJ 214256,
November 2006)

Background Checks for Firearm Transfers, 2004 (NCJ 210117,
October 2005)

Background Checks for Firearm Transfers, 2003: Trends for the 
Permanent Brady Period, 1999–2003 (NCJ 204428, September 2004)

Background Checks for Firearm Transfers, 2002 (NCJ 200116,
September 2003)

Background Checks for Firearm Transfers, 2001 (NCJ 195235,
September 2002)

Background Checks for Firearm Transfers, 2000 (NCJ 187985,
July 2001)

Background Checks for Firearm Transfers, 1999 (NCJ 180882,
June 2000)

Data on this subject for the Brady Interim period prior to the 
permanent provisions are available in Presale Handgun
Checks, the Brady Interim Period, 1994–98 (NCJ 175034,
June 1999)

Enforcement of the Brady Act, 2010: Federal and State
Investigations and Prosecutions of Firearm Applicants Denied
by a NICS Check in 2011
https://www.ncjrs.gov/pdffiles1/bjs/grants/239272.pdf

Enforcement of the Brady Act, 2009: Federal and State
Investigations and Prosecutions of Firearm Applicants Denied
by a NICS Check in 2009
https://www.ncjrs.gov/pdffiles1/bjs/grants/234173.pdf

Enforcement of the Brady Act, 2008: Federal and State
Investigations and Prosecutions of Firearm Applicants Denied
by a NICS Check in 2008
http://www.ncjrs.gov/pdffiles1/bjs/231052.pdf

Enforcement of the Brady Act, 2007: Federal and State
Investigations and Prosecutions of Firearm Applicants Denied
by a NICS Check in 2007
http://www.ncjrs.gov/pdffiles1/bjs/grants/227604.pdf

Enforcement of the Brady Act, 2006
http://www.ncjrs.gov/pdffiles1/bjs/grants/222474.pdf

Federal Firearms Cases, FY 2008
http://www.ncjrs.gov/pdffiles1/bjs/grants/229420.pdf

Federal Firearms Cases, FY 2007
http://www.ncjrs.gov/pdffiles1/bjs/grants/224890.pdf

Summary of State Firearm Transfer Laws, December 31, 2013
https://www.ncjrs.gov/pdffiles1/bjs/grants/248657.pdf

The following BJS surveys provide an overview of the firearm 
check procedures in each of the states and the states’ 
interaction with NICS:

Survey of State Procedures Related to Firearm Sales, 2005
(NCJ 214645, November 2006)

Survey of State Procedures Related to Firearm Sales, Midyear
2004 (NCJ 209288, August 2005)

Survey of State Procedures Related to Firearm Sales, Midyear
2003 (NCJ 203701, August 2004)

Survey of State Procedures Related to Firearm Sales, Midyear
2002 (NCJ 198830, April 2003)

Survey of State Procedures Related to Firearm Sales, Midyear
2001 (NCJ 192065, April 2002)

Survey of State Procedures Related to Firearm Sales, Midyear
2000 (NCJ 186766, April 2001)

Survey of State Procedures Related to Firearm Sales, Midyear
1999 (NCJ 179022, March 2000)

Survey of State Procedures Related to Firearm Sales, 1997
(NCJ 173942, December 1998)

Survey of State Procedures Related to Firearm Sales, 1996
(NCJ 160705, September 1997)

Survey of State Procedures Related to Firearm Sales
(NCJ 160763, May 1996)

The following BJS survey examines the quality and accessibility 
of certain criminal and noncriminal records when states conduct 
a firearm presale background check:

Survey of State Records Included in Presale Background
Checks: Mental Health Records, Domestic Violence
Misdemeanor Records, and Restraining Orders, 2003
(NCJ 206042, August 2004)

Trends for Background Checks for Firearm Transfers, 1999–2008
http://www.ncjrs.gov/pdffiles1/bjs/grants/231187.pdf

**************************************************************
The Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS) of the U.S. Department 
of Justice is the principal federal agency responsible for 
measuring crime, criminal victimization, criminal offenders, 
victims of crime, correlates of crime, and the operation of 
criminal and civil justice systems at the federal, state, 
tribal, and local levels. BJS collects, analyzes, and 
disseminates reliable and valid statistics on crime and justice 
systems in the United States, supports improvements to state 
and local criminal justice information systems, and 
participates with national and international organizations to 
develop and recommend national standards for justice 
statistics. Jeri M. Mulrow is acting director.

The Regional Justice Information Service (REJIS) prepared these 
tables under the supervision of Allina D. Lee of BJS. Allen 
Beck, Ph.D., of BJS provided statistical consultation. Trent D. 
Buskirk, Ph.D., of REJIS provided statistical and sample design
consultation. The tables were prepared under BJS cooperative 
agreement #2011-BJCX- K017. The BJS-sponsored Firearm Inquiry 
Statistics program collects information on firearm background 
checks conducted by state and local agencies and combines this
information with Federal Bureau of Investigation National 
Instant Criminal Background Check System transaction data to 
create a national estimate of the number of applications
received and denied annually pursuant to the Brady Handgun 
Violence Prevention Act of 1993 and similar state laws.

Morgan Young edited the report. Barbara Quinn produced the 
report.

June 2016, NCJ 249849
**************************************************************

*************************************************
Office of Justice Programs
Innovation * Partnerships * Safer Neighborhoods
www.ojp.usdoj.gov
*************************************************

**********************
6/22/2016 2:08pm JER 
**********************
