U.S. Department of Justice
office of Justice Programs
Bureau of Justice Statistics


Bureau of Justice
Statistics 2000:
At a Glance

August 2000 NCJ 183014

-----------------------------------------------------------------
This file is text only without graphics and many of the tables.
A zip archive of the tables in this report in spreadsheet format
(.wk1) and the full report including tables and graphics in
.pdf format are available from:
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/abstract/bjsag00.htm

This report is one in a series.  More recent editions
may be available.  To view a list of all in the series go to
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/pubalph2.htm#glance
-----------------------------------------------------------------

Contents
 
About the Bureau of Justice Statistics
 
Crimes and victims
 
         Victimization surveys
         School crime
         Victimization of the disabled
         Cybercrime statistics
         Intimate partner victimization
         Tracking homicide
 
The justice system
 
         Law enforcement
         Prosecution
         Courts and sentencing
         Federal justice statistics
         Juvenile defendants
         Corrections
         Expenditure and employment
         Drugs, alcohol, and crime
         International statistics
         Methodological research and studies
         General criminal justice statistics
         Visiting Research Fellowship Program
 
Support to State and local governments
 
         State Justice Statistics Program
         Criminal records systems improvement and policy
         National Incident-Based Reporting System (NIBRS)
 
How to use BJS services
 
         From the BJS website
         Dissemination programs
 
How to order BJS products
 

About the Bureau 
of Justice Statistics

The Bureau of Justice Statistics  collects, analyzes, publishes,
and disseminates information on crime, criminal offenders,
victims of crime, and the operation of justice systems at all
levels of government. These data are critical to Federal,
State, and local policymakers in combating crime and ensuring
that justice is both efficient and evenhanded. 

This year BJS will  --

*  Interview nearly 100,000 citizens in 50,000 households about
any experiences they may have had as crime victims during the
year.

*  Describe the characteristics and consequences of over 31
million criminal victimizations. 

*  Analyze the operations of the 50,000 agencies, offices,
courts, and institutions that comprise the justice system.

*  Count populations and conduct sample surveys among the more
than 5.9 million adults who during an average day are subject to
the care, custody, or control of Federal, State, and local
criminal justice authorities. 

*  Maintain more than two dozen major data collection series
from which it publishes and distributes reports nationwide. 

*  Undertake special data collections and analyses to respond to
programmatic, policy, and legislative needs of the Department,
the Administration, Congress, and the criminal justice community.

*  Maintain a website and data archive that is accessed up to
6,000 times a day by scholars, students, policymakers, the
media, and others around the world.

*  Provide assistance to users in identifying sources of BJS
information, interpreting statistical data from BJS series and
data collections, and understanding the methodologies of BJS
surveys.

BJS annually publishes data on --

*  Criminal victimization 
*  Populations under correctional supervision 
*  Federal criminal offenders and case processing. 

BJS's periodic data series include --

*  Administration of law enforcement 
agencies and correctional facilities 
*  Prosecutorial practices and policies 
*  State court case processing 
*  Felony convictions 
*  Characteristics of correctional populations 
*  Criminal justice expenditure and employment 
*  Civil case processing in State courts
*  Special studies on other criminal justice topics 

A description of the various BJS data series can be 
found under the topical sections of this report. 

The U.S. Census Bureau carries out many of BJS' data
collection activities. BJS staff also coordinate with other
Department of Justice statistical programs, such as the FBI's
Uniform Crime Reporting Program and National Incident-Based
Reporting System.  The BJS Federal Justice Statistics Program
collects data from other Federal agencies, including the
Executive Office for U.S. Attorneys, the Administrative Office
of the U.S. Courts, the U.S. Sentencing Commission, and the
Federal Bureau of Prisons. 

BJS provides financial and technical 
support to State and local governments 
in --
*  developing capabilities in criminal justice statistics
*  implementing the National Incident-Based Reporting System
*  improving the accuracy, utility, and interstate accessibility
   of criminal history records
*  enhancing records of protective orders involving domestic
   violence and stalking, sex offender records, automated 
   identification systems, and other State systems supporting 
   national records systems and their use for background checks.  

BJS also supports surveys, conferences, and technical assistance
on issues that relate to criminal records policy, covering
topics such as State criminal history record procedures and
systems, privacy and security standards, and interstate exchange
of criminal history records for noncriminal justice purposes. 

Crimes and victims

Victimization surveys

The National Crime Victimization Survey (NCVS) is the Nation's
primary source of information on criminal victimization.  The
NCVS provides data on the number of rapes, sexual assaults,
robberies, assaults, thefts, household burglaries, and motor
vehicle thefts experienced by U.S. residents age 12 or older and
their households each year.  


*  In 1998, U.S. residents age 12 or older experienced
approximately 31.3 million crimes.  Nearly 23 million (73%) were
property crimes,  8.1 million (26%) were crimes of violence, and
1% were personal thefts. 

*  Murders, as measured by law enforcement data provided to the
FBI's Uniform Crime Reports, were the least frequent violent
victimization.  There were about 6 murder victims per 100,000
persons in 1998, the lowest rate per capita since detailed
recording began in 1976. 

*  In 1998 for every 1,000 persons age 
12 or older, there occurred --
   -- 2 rapes or sexual assaults
   -- 3 assaults with serious injury 
   -- 4 robberies.

Initiated in 1972 and redesigned in 1992, the NCVS is the only
national crime measure that includes both those crimes that
people experience but do not report to law enforcement
authorities and those that they do report.  During a collection
year, data are obtained at 6-month intervals from a nationally
representative sample of roughly 50,000 households, comprising
nearly 100,000 persons, on the impact, frequency, and
consequences of criminal victimization in the United States.  

The survey enables BJS to estimate the likelihood of
victimization for segments of the population such as the elderly
or city dwellers.  The NCVS is the only national forum for
victims to describe the consequences of crime and the
characteristics of violent offenders.  

Forthcoming and recent reports 
*  Black Crime Victims, expected release 10/00 (NCJ 176354)
*  Criminal Victimization and Perceptions of Community Safety in
   12 Cities, 1998, released 6/99 (NCJ 173940)
*  Criminal Victimization in the United States, 1998, released
   5/00 (NCJ 181585 - electronic only)
*  Criminal Victimization 1998: Changes 1997-98 with Trends
   1993-98, released 7/99 (NCJ 176353)
*  Crimes Against Persons Age 65 or Older, 1992-97, released
   1/00 (NCJ 176352)
*  Injuries from Violent Crime, 1992-98, expected release 10/00
   (NCJ 168633)
*  Sexual Victimization of College Women: Findings from Two
   National-level Studies (joint NIJ/BJS publication), expected
   release 8/00 (NCJ 182369)

Crime Victimization Survey software is now available to help
communities conduct local crime and attitudinal surveys.  The
Crime Victimization Survey (CVS) software package, designed by
BJS and the Office of Community Oriented Policing Services
(COPS), allows communities to conduct their own telephone
surveys of residents to collect data on crime victimization,
attitudes toward policing, and other community issues.  

Using the established methods and questions of the National
Crime Victimization Survey, this software allows communities to
generate crime and victimization estimates that facilitate
comparisons among similar jurisdictions. The software is
available free of charge from the BJS website at <www.ojp.usdoj.
gov/bjs/abstract/cvs.htm> or from NCJRS for a small shipping
and handling fee by calling 1-800-851-3420.  


In addition to the software, both the online file and the CD-ROM
include the CVS Software User's Manual, released 10/99 (NCJ
176361) and Conducting Community Surveys: A Practical Guide for
Law Enforcement Agencies, released 10/99 (NCJ 178246), which is
a brief overview of the issues related to conducting local
surveys. The CD-ROM version comes with printed copies of both
documents.  

Agencies or communities that are interested in conducting local
victimization surveys are encouraged to contact local
universities or research organizations.  Assistance in
developing supplemental questions and in selecting the sample
size will likely increase survey effectiveness.  BJS will also
assist researchers and statisticians with specific software
support and sampling issues.  In addition, the Office for
Victims of Crimes (OVC) plans to make financial assistance
available to interested States, through their VOCA
Administrators, to conduct local victimization surveys for
improving victim services planning. 

School crime 

BJS, in collaboration with the National Center for Education
Statistics (NCES), periodically collects data on aspects of
school crime through a supplement to the NCVS.  From January 1,
1999, to July 31, 1999, household members age 12 or older who
attended school were asked questions about their school
environment.  These data represent about 25 million students.  

Information was obtained on the availability of drugs at school,
existence of street gangs, prevalence of gang fights, presence
of guns at school, victimizations, and fear of being attacked or
harmed.  The results of the 1999 School Crime Supplement will be
included in the joint BJS/NCES publication, Indicators of School
Crime and Safety, 2000, which is the third in an annual series
of reports and is expected to be released in Fall 2000. 

Latest data are available in Indicators of School Crime and
Safety, 1999, released 9/99 (NCJ 178906) and Students' Report of
School Crime: 1989 and 1995, released 4/98 (NCJ 169607).

Victimization of the disabled

In fiscal year 2000, BJS initiated efforts to establish a data
collection program to measure victimization of disabled persons
in the United States.  These efforts will begin to address the
requirements of the Crime Victims with Disabilities Awareness
Act of 1998, which calls for BJS to collect these data on an
ongoing basis.  Currently, there is no systematic and recurring
collection of national information on criminal victimization of
persons with disabilities.  

BJS is working closely with other agencies and organizations
that have an interest in disabled persons and a responsibility
to address their problems.  The Federal Government, by the use
of consistent definitions and measurement techniques among
statistical agencies, will be able to provide a comprehensive
statistical portrait of disabled citizens and the challenges
that confront them.

Collaborative activities underway 
include the following:   

*  The Interagency Subcommittee on Disability Statistics is an
organization comprised of representatives of Federal and
international agencies and co-chaired by the Interagency
Committee on Disability Research and the National Center for
Health Statistics.  The subcommittee addresses the task of
developing a concise battery of questions to identify persons
with developmental disabilities.  The BJS representative
contributes to discussions of issues related to identifying and
measuring the characteristics of persons with disabilities. 

*  The National Institute of Justice (NIJ) has funded a
methodological initiative by the National Academy of Sciences'
National Research Council.  The council will carry out a study
required by the Crime Victims with Disabilities Awareness Act. 
This initiative will be coordinated with BJS efforts to measure
crimes affecting the disabled population.

*  BJS sponsored a working group to encourage discussion among
interest groups and relevant Federal agencies.  The discussion
centered on measurement of criminal victimization among the
disabled population.

*  Beginning July 1, 2000, BJS fielded, for an anticipated
6-month period,  preliminary questions to learn if an NCVS
victims of crime had poor health, impairments, or other
disabilities affecting everyday life.  These responses will be a
field test of potential items for future administrations of the
questionnaire.  In addition, BJS will develop a data collection
instrument and sample to obtain crime victimization data from a
known population of the developmentally disabled.

Cybercrime statistics

With increasing Internet use and  electronic transmission of
personal and financial information, individuals, businesses, and
governments are challenged to protect public safety from new
kinds of electronic crime.  In 2000 BJS will begin development
of a comprehensive statistical program to measure changes in the
incidence, magnitude, and consequences of electronic or
cybercrime.

Cybercrime statistics will include data on both personal and
property crimes, ranging from e-mail threats and harassment to
illegal use of or access to networks to commit fraud or theft. 
BJS plans to hold a focus group in October 2000.  The group,
including staff from BJS and the Census Bureau as well as
representatives from businesses and universities, will explore
issues and design an agenda for the collection of cybercrime
statistics. 

In the future BJS will work with the Census Bureau to
operationalize this plan for collecting data on electronic
crime.  There may be supplements to ongoing commercial and
household surveys and enhancements of periodic collections from
law enforcement agencies and the courts.

Summary findings --

*  In 1998 women experienced an estimated 876,340 rape, sexual
assault, robbery, aggravated assault, and simple assault
victimizations at the hands of an intimate, down from 1.1
million in 1993.  Males experienced intimate partner violence at
similar rates in 1993 and 1998.

*  Between 1976 and 1998, the number of male victims of intimate
partner homicide fell an average 4% per year and the number of
female victims fell an average 1%. 

*  Intimate violence is primarily a crime against women. In 1998
females were 75% of the victims of intimate murders and about
85% of the victims of nonlethal intimate violence. 

*  Between 1993 and 1998 women age 16 to 24 experienced the
highest per capita rates of intimate violence. 

Data and trends in intimate partner victimization are collected
as part of the NCVS, which asks victims of violence about the
offender, their relationship to the offender, and
characteristics of the victimization incidents.  Asking the
victim about his/her relationship to the offender is critical to
determining whether the crime occurred between intimates
(current or former spouses, girlfriends, or boyfriends).

Using data from the NCVS and the FBI's Supplementary Homicide
Reports, BJS published Intimate Partner Violence in May 2000
(NCJ 178247).  The report presents trends in intimate violence,
characteristics of victims (race, gender, age, income,
ethnicity, and whether the victims live in urban, suburban, or
rural areas), type of crime (physical assault or verbal
threats), and trends for reporting to police.  Intimate
victimizations measured include murder, rape, sexual assault,
robbery, aggravated assault, and simple assault. 

Domestic Violence Workshop sponsored by BJS, the NIJ, and VAWO,
will bring together researchers who have been evaluating the
impact of funding by the Violence Against Women Act of 1994
(VAWA).  The workshop will contribute to the development of a
national agenda for domestic violence data collection, defining
the direction that the Department of Justice should take.  The
agenda will include a long-term plan for comprehensive analyses
of data.

Tracking homicide 

Homicide trend data are continually updated on the BJS website. 
Homicide is of interest not only because of its severity but
also because it is a reliable barometer of trends in violence. 
Among the most important and well-recorded data on crime are the
incident-level Supplementary Homicide Reports (SHR) collected by
the FBI on each recorded homicide.

Each month State and local law enforcement agencies submit
supplemental data about homicide incidents.  These data include
detail on location, victim, and offender characteristics; the
age, race, and gender of homicide victims and offenders; and the
relationship of the victim to the offender.  Topics covered on
the BJS website include long-term trends, demographic trends,
multiple victims and offenders, infanticide, eldercide,
homicides by intimates, law enforcement officers killed, weapons
trends, regional trends, and trends by city size. 

In March 2000, BJS released Homicide Trends in the United
States: 1998 Update (NCJ 179767), which presents the primary
findings of newly available data.  The BJS site on homicide
trends is located at <www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/homicide/homtrnd.htm>. 

Developing a NIBRS-Compatible Homicide Database: A Multistate
Pilot Test will examine the feasibility and cost of obtaining
more complete data about homicides, including an incident number
which permits linking the record to other information such as
gun-tracing or ballistics information.
*  impediments to NIBRS-compliant reporting of homicides
*  reductions in missing and unreported data
*  possible inclusion of suicide data 
*  linking NIBRS homicide reports to other State data files.

The justice system

Law enforcement

BJS collects data about Federal, State, and local law
enforcement agencies and their activities.  

Recent findings include --

* As of June 1998, Federal agencies employed about 83,000
full-time personnel authorized to make arrests and carry
firearms.  Of all Federal officers, 14.2% were women, and 29.4%
were members of a racial or ethnic minority. 

*  As of June 1997, local police departments had an estimated
531,496 full-time employees, including about 420,000 sworn
personnel. Sheriffs' departments had 263,427 full-time
employees, including about 175,000 sworn personnel.  From 1987
to 1997 minority representation among local police officers
increased from 14.5% to 21.5%. In sheriffs' departments,
minorities accounted for 19% of sworn personnel in 1997 compared
to 13.4% 10 years earlier. 

*  In 1995 BJS surveyed campus law enforcement agencies serving
4-year universities and colleges with 2,500 or more students. 
More than 9 in 10 public institutions used sworn police
officers, compared to less than half of the private
institutions.   

Census of State and Local Law Enforcement Agencies collects data
from all State and local law enforcement agencies employing one
or more persons with general arrest powers.  This data
collection provides the Nation's most complete enumeration of
police agencies, including information about community policing,
personnel, operations, and the use of information systems.  The
2000 census is currently being conducted.  Latest data are
available in Census of State and Local Law Enforcement Agencies,
1996, released 6/98 (NCJ 164618).

Law Enforcement Management and Administrative Statistics (LEMAS)
survey collects data from over 3,000 State and local law
enforcement agencies, including all those that employ 100 or
more sworn officers and a nationally representative sample of
smaller agencies.  Data are obtained on the organization and
administration of police and sheriffs' departments, including
agency responsibilities, operating expenditures, job functions
of sworn and civilian employees, and officer salaries and
special pay.  Also collected is information on demographic
characteristics of officers, sidearms and nonlethal weapons,
education and training requirements, computers and information
systems, vehicles, special units, community policing activities,
and agencies' written policies.

Findings from the 1999 LEMAS will be released in spring 2000.  
The latest published data available on local policing in the
U.S. can be found in the following BJS publications: Sheriffs'
Departments, 1997, released 2/00 (NCJ 173428); Local Police
Departments, 1997, released 2/00 (NCJ 173429); and Law
Enforcement Management and Administrative Statistics, 1997: Data
for Individual State and Local Agencies with 100 or More
Officers, released 4/99 (NCJ 171681).

Survey of Campus Law Enforcement Agencies provides data
describing nearly 600 campus law enforcement agencies serving
4-year universities or colleges with 2,500 or more students. 
Data are collected on agency personnel, expenditures and pay,
operations, equipment, computers and information systems,
policies, and special programs.  

Federal Law Enforcement Agency Census provides national data on
Federal law enforcement agencies with arrest and firearms
authority.  Data collected include the number of officers
working in the areas of criminal investigation and enforcement,
police patrol and response, security and protection, court
operations, and corrections, by agency and State.  Data for race
and gender of officers were collected for the first time in 1996.

Police Public Contact Survey represents a second stage in the
development of a recurring statistical collection on citizen
contact with the police.   This supplemental survey to the NCVS
addresses the mandate set forth by  the Violent Crime Control
and Law Enforcement Act of 1994 to collect, evaluate, and
publish data on the use of excessive force by law enforcement
personnel.  

Between July 1, 1999, and December 31, 1999, BJS conducted the
nationwide Police Public Contact Survey of approximately 90,000
persons age 16 or older to learn about their contacts with the
police.  The survey uses an improved version of the
questionnaire field tested in May 1996.  The 1999 questionnaire
captured more detailed information about the nature of the
police-citizen contact, respondent perceptions as to whether any
force encountered was excessive, and any provocative actions
that the respondent may have initiated during the encounter.  In
addition, the questionnaire included a new section  to gather
information on police-initiated stops for routine traffic
violations.  Findings from the 1999 data collection are expected
to be released in late 2000.

Policing and homicide study provides data on justifiable
homicides by police reported under the FBI's Supplementary
Homicide Reporting Program, including annual trends from 1976 to
1996 in two types of homicide:  justifiable homicides of felons
by police and murders of police officers by felons.  Findings
include the number and rate of justifiable homicides by police,
demographic characteristics of officers who justifiably kill,
characteristics of felons who are justifiably killed (gender,
race, and age), the number and rate of murders of police
officers, demographic characteristics of the murdered officers,
and characteristics of felons who murdered officers (gender,
race, and age).  Also included are descriptions of actual cases
of justifiable homicides by police in 1996 and descriptions of
actual cases of murders of police officers in 1996.  The report,
Policing and Homicide, 1976-96:  Justifiable Homicide of Felons
by Police and Murder of Police by Felons, is scheduled for
release in August 2000 (NCJ 180987).

Survey of DNA Crime Laboratories, collects data from all public
and private DNA laboratories on management and administrative
statistics, including staff size and characteristics, staff
training, budgets, deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) testing
procedures, processing policies, and archival capacity.  The
survey also obtains information on the degree of laboratory
compliance with national standards and participation in the
national database of DNA samples.  

The survey, first carried out in 1998, will be conducted again
in summer 2000.  BJS continues to work closely with the State
and local crime laboratory directors and the FBI's Forensic
Science Systems Unit in the design and conduct of the 2000
survey.  Findings are useful to crime laboratory directors to
compare procedures and capacities among laboratories, as well as
to measure compatibility between the national DNA database,
referred to as CODIS, and State DNA databases.  Latest data are
available in Survey of DNA Crime Laboratories, 1998, released
2/00 (NCJ 179104).

Survey of State Police Agencies Information Inventory collects
data on State police agency policies for recording demographic
information on traffic-related contacts and violations. The
questionnaire, first fielded in March 1999, obtained basic
information from the Nation's State law enforcement agencies on
the circumstances under which demographic data were collected
for traffic-related stops and whether this information was
stored in an electronically accessible format.  Findings are
reported in Traffic Stop and Data Collection Policies for State
Police, 1999, released 2/00 (NCJ 180776).  

Prosecution

BJS collects data on State and Federal prosecutors and the cases 
they prosecute. 

Summary findings --

*  In 1996 half the prosecutors' offices nationwide employed 9
or fewer people and had a budget of $254,000 or less.

*  In 1996, 2,343 State and local court prosecutors' offices
employed about 71,000 attorneys, investigators, and support
staff, a 25% increase from 1992 and 9% from 1994. 

*  Almost three-quarters of the Nation's chief prosecutors
occupied full-time positions compared to about half in 1990.

*  Almost half of the prosecutors' offices had a staff person
who had been threatened or assaulted.

*  Almost half of all offices reported the use of DNA evidence
during plea negotiations or felony trials.

*  Three-fourths of all offices indicated having proceeded
against an estimated 27,000 juveniles in criminal court.

National Survey of Prosecutors collects data on resources,
policies, and practices of local prosecutors from a nationally
representative sample of chief litigating prosecutors in State
court systems.  The survey obtains basic information on staffing
and operations and collects data on current topics such as the
use of innovative prosecution techniques, intermediate
sanctions, juvenile cases transferred to criminal court, and
work-related assaults and threats.  The latest data are
available in Prosecutors in State Courts, 1996 (NCJ 170092). 
The next survey is scheduled for early 2001.

Courts and sentencing

BJS collects data about the Nation's court systems, including
information about both civil and criminal courts, the cases
brought, and their outcomes.  

Summary findings --

Pretrial release and detention

*  Almost two-thirds of defendants charged with a felony in the
75 most populated counties in May 1996 were released from jail
pending disposition of their case. 

*  31% of those who were released were rearrested for a new
offense or did not show up for a court date or violated some
other condition of their pretrial release.

Criminal case processing and sentencing

*  An estimated 54,579 felony cases were filed in the State
courts of the Nation's 75 largest counties during May 1996. 

*  State courts convicted almost 998,000 adults of a felony in
1996, an average growth of approximately 5% every year since
1988 (667,366). 

*  From 1988 to 1996 the number of felony convictions increased
faster than the number of arrests.  Sixty-nine percent of those
convicted in 1996 were sentenced to incarceration.

Civil justice

*  In 1996 in the 75 largest counties in the United States, an
estimated 15,638 tort, contract, and real property cases were
decided by trial.  About 70% of these cases were decided by a
jury.

*  Individuals were plaintiffs in 82% of all trial cases
disposed of during 1996.  Individuals sued businesses in 37% and
other individuals in an additional 34% of all trial cases.

*  Overall, plaintiffs won in 52% of trial cases.  An estimated
$3 billion in compensatory and punitive  damages were awarded to
plaintiff winners in trial cases.

National Judicial Reporting Program (NJRP), conducted every 2
years, surveys a nationwide sample of felony trial courts and
collects detailed information on demographic characteristics of
felons, conviction offenses, type of sentences, sentence
lengths, and amount of time from arrest to conviction and
sentencing.  Findings from the 1998 data collection will be
published in fall 2000.  Latest published data are available in
State Court Sentencing of Convicted Felons, 1996, released 3/00
(NCJ 175708); Felony Sentences in the United States, 1996,
released 7/99 (NCJ 175045); and Felony Sentences in State
Courts, 1996, released 5/99 (NCJ 173939).

State Court Processing Statistics (SCPS) provides data on the
criminal justice processing of persons charged with felonies in
a representative sample of felony defendants in the 75 largest
counties.  These counties account for about half of serious
crime nationwide.  The program tracks felony defendants from
charging by the prosecutor until disposition in their cases or
for a maximum of 12 months.

Data are obtained on demographic characteristics, arrest
offense(s), criminal justice status at time of arrest, prior
arrests and convictions, bail and pretrial release decisions,
court appearance record, re-arrest while on pretrial release,
type and outcome of adjudication, and type and length of
sentence if convicted.  Recent data are included in Felony
Defendants in Large Urban Counties, 1996, released 10/99 (NCJ
176981).

State Court Statistics Project, conducted by the National Center
for State Courts, provides data on State appellate and trial
court caseloads for the 50 States, District of Columbia, and
Puerto Rico.  Information is reported on case type, case
filings, case processing, disposition, and appellate opinions. 
Data on State appellate caseloads are divided into mandatory and
discretionary cases.

Data on trial court caseloads include information about criminal
cases, non-domestic civil cases, domestic cases, juvenile cases,
and cases involving traffic and other violations of local
ordinance.  Data will be collected for reference year 2000 in
summer 2000.  Latest data are available in State Court Caseload
Statistics, 1998, (National Center for State Courts, 1999) and
Examining the Work of State Courts, 1998 (NCJ 181783).

Collecting BJS data on the web

New capabilities, emerging technologies, more efficient computer
languages, and improved standards offer promising improvements
for the way BJS collects justice statistics.  In 2000 BJS began
experimental use of the web to collect administrative data from
selected State and local criminal justice agencies.  

BJS currently maintains over 2 dozen different data collection
programs that obtain information describing the workload of the
approximately 50,000 Federal, State and local agencies, offices,
and institutions.  Until now, all BJS collection efforts sent
paper questionnaires to law enforcement agencies, prosecutor's
offices, probation offices, local jails, courts, pretrial
release agencies, public defender offices, and prison and parole
authorities. 

Like many other governmental and private-sector data managers,
BJS has begun the transition from paper-based data collection to
direct Internet submission of information to a database.  For
examples of data collections using the Internet see the
descriptions of the Survey of DNA Crime Laboratories, the Census
of State and Local Law Enforcement Agencies, and the Annual
Survey of Jails.

Appropriate safeguards will be put into place.  These include
protections such as client-sided validation of data on
electronic forms, electronic authentication and identification
of respondent agencies, automatic e-mail notification, and
automatic updating of directories and databases collection of
statistical information.  

Compared to current methods, Internet-based data collection will --
-- be easier for the contributors 
-- provide more accurate data
-- cost less than the current process

-- take far less time to prepare the data and produce findings.

Survey of State Court Organization,  conducted by the National
Center for State Courts, provides basic descriptive information
relating to the Nation's State court systems.  Information is
collected on the following aspects --

*  trial courts -- the role of grand juries, peremptory jury
   challenges, jury verdict rules 
*  appellate courts -- case selection, expedited procedures 
*  governance of court systems -- budgets, administration 
*  judges and judicial selection -- numbers of judges, 
mandatory judicial education 
*  processing of criminal cases -- felony definition, 
mandatory minimum, habitual offender sentencing provisions. 

Latest data are available in State Court Organization, 1998,
released 5/00 (NCJ 178932).  New topics covered in this volume
include the proliferation of specialized courts, new legislative
mandates in the adjudication of domestic violence cases, current
standards regarding insanity defense, and efforts in automating
court information systems.  The 1998 volume also expands the
coverage of court administration and court procedure to include
information about judicial compensation commissions, clerks of
court responsibilities for providing services to appellate
courts, and the authority of trial court administrative judges.

Survey of Civil Trial Cases in State Courts collects civil trial
caseload data for a 1-year period from a representative sample
of the Nation's 75 largest counties.  Data include case type,
outcome, jury awards, type of litigants, legal representation,
and dates of filing and disposition. 

Latest findings are reported in Tort Trials and Verdicts in
Large Counties, expected release 7/00 (NCJ 179769); Contract
Trials and Verdicts in Large Counties, 1996, released 4/00 (NCJ
179451); and Civil Trial Cases and Verdicts in Large Counties,
1996, released 9/99 (NCJ 173426).

Survey of Indigent Defense Systems will measure how States and
localities provide legal services for indigent criminal
defendants, their caseloads, and related costs, policies, and
practices.  BJS has been working closely with the American Bar
Association, the National Association of Criminal Defense
Lawyers, the National Legal Aid and Defenders Association, and
other indigent defense providers to identify important areas for
data collection, which began in August 1999. The first report
detailing the findings is expected to be released in late 2000.

Federal justice statistics 

BJS collects annual data on workload, activities, and case
outcomes in the Federal justice system. 

Summary findings -- 

Prosecution 
*  U.S. attorneys opened matters for investigation against
115,692 suspects during 1998.

*  Of the 106,022 suspects in matters concluded during 1998,
72.8% were referred for prosecution either before a U.S.
district court judge (61.3%) or a U.S. magistrate (11.5%). 
Nearly all (97.2%) of those investigated for immigration
offenses were referred for prosecution. 

Pretrial 
*  More than half (53.7%) of defendants charged with a Federal
offense were released following the initial court appearance,
provided that any court-imposed conditions were satisfied.

*  Most (83.5%) defendants released before trial completed their
pretrial release without violating the release conditions; 6.2%
had their release revoked. 

*  Defendants charged with violent or drug offenses were less
likely to satisfactorily complete the period of pretrial release
without a violation (82% and 73.6%, respectively) than other
defendants. 

Adjudication 
*  During 1998, criminal cases were commenced against 78,172
defendants in U.S. district court. Most (82.9%) were charged
with a felony offense. Cases were terminated against 69,769
defendants during 1998. Most (87.4%) defendants were convicted.

Sentencing 
*  Of the 60,958 defendants convicted and sentenced during 1998,
69.6% were sentenced to a term of imprisonment (either alone or
in conjunction with probation), 19.9% were sentenced to
probation (either alone or with incarceration), and 5.2% were
sentenced to pay a fine alone. 

Corrections 
*  During 1998 the Federal Bureau of Prisons received 42,613
inmates from U.S. district courts; an additional 15,602 inmates
were received from other sources such as community supervision
violations; 48,545 inmates were released during the year.  As
of September 30, 1998, 107,912 sentenced offenders were under
the jurisdiction of the Federal Bureau of Prisons. 

Federal Justice Statistics Program reports on all aspects of
processing in the Federal justice system, including the number
of persons investigated, prosecuted, convicted, incarcerated,
sentenced to probation, released pretrial, and under parole or
other supervision; initial prosecution decisions; referrals to
magistrates; court dispositions; sentencing outcomes; sentence
length; and time served.  The data are available for online
analysis at <www.fjsrc.urban. org>.  The series also describes
the processing of civil cases characteristics and outcomes in
the Federal courts.  

Recent and forthcoming reports include --

*  Federal Justice Statistics Program, 1997, CD-ROM, released
7/00 (NCJ 179086)
*  Prosecuting Firearm Offenders in Federal Courts, 1992-98,
with preliminary data 1999, released 6/00 (NCJ 180795)
*  Compendium of Federal Justice Statistics, 1998, released 5/00
(NCJ 180258)
*  Civil Rights Complaints in U.S. District Courts, 1990-98,
released 1/00 (NCJ 173427) 
*  Federal Enforcement of Environmental Laws, 1997, released
11/99 (NCJ 175686) 
*  Compendium of Federal Justice Statistics, 1997, released
10/99 (NCJ 176328)
*  Federal Tort Trials and Verdicts, 1996-97, released 3/99 (NCJ
172855)
*  Federal Pretrial Release and Detention, 1996, released 1/99
(NCJ 168635). 

Juvenile defendants

Summary findings --

Juvenile defendants in criminal courts 
*  Under certain circumstances, juveniles (as defined by State
law) can be tried in criminal court. An estimated 7,110 juvenile
defendants were charged with felonies in the State criminal
courts of the Nation's 75 largest counties during May of 1990,
1992, and 1994. 

*  Juvenile felony defendants handled as adults in criminal
courts represented about 1% of all felony defendants. Two-thirds
of the juvenile felony defendants handled in adult court had
been charged with a violent offense. 

Juvenile defendants in juvenile courts 
*  An estimated 24% of the 370,000 persons in juvenile courts in
a selected number of the Nation's 75 largest counties from 1990,
1992, and 1994 were referred for violent offenses; 46% for
property offenses; about 18% for public order offenses; and 13%
for drug-related offenses. 

*  55% of the juvenile defendants formally processed in juvenile
courts in the Nation's 75 largest counties were adjudicated
delinquent. 

*  Among juvenile defendants adjudicated delinquent, 40%
received a disposition of residential placement, and 50%
received probation supervision in the community. 

Juveniles in Federal court
*  During 1995, 468 juveniles were referred to Federal
prosecutors for investigation -- 49% of these cases were
declined for further action.  During 1995, 122 juveniles were
adjudicated as delinquent in the Federal courts --  47% for
either a violent or drug offense. 

Juvenile offenders in State prison
*  The number of offenders under age 18 admitted to State prison
has more than doubled from 3,400 in 1985 to 7,400 in 1997,
consistently representing about 2% of new admissions in each of
the 13 years. 

*  In 1997, 61% of persons admitted to State prison under age 18
had been convicted of a violent offense compared to 52% in 1985.

The State Court Processing Statistics (SCPS) program obtains
data on juvenile felony defendants tried as adults in criminal
courts in the Nation's 75 largest counties, including offense
characteristics, pretrial release and detention, offender
demographics, adjudication outcomes, and sentencing.  The
Federal Justice Statistics Program  (FJSP) describes juvenile
offenders processed in the Federal criminal justice system,
including the number of juveniles charged with acts of
delinquency, the offenses for which they were charged, the
proportion adjudicated delinquent, and the sanctions imposed. 
For more information on the SCPS program and the FJSP, refer to
descriptions on pages 13 and 16, respectively.   

Methodologies for Studying of Racial Disparities in Processing
Juvenile Offenders, a new fiscal year 2000 effort, will examine
how juvenile records can be used to better understand racial
disparities in arrests and confinement of juveniles and the
impact of such disparities on subsequent processing of the same
individuals if they enter the adult criminal justice system.  

While many studies evaluate racial disparities in various stages
of juvenile justice processing, few use and document rigorous
statistical methodologies.  Moreover, little research examines
the extent to which racial disparities in handling by the
juvenile justice system may explain some subsequent disparate
treatment of adults in criminal courts. 

This study will seek to design a methodology that could be used
to answer the question of whether a youth's juvenile record
acquired through disparate treatment has a carry-over effect on
subsequent adult-level encounters with the criminal justice
system.  

Latest available data -- 

*  Profile of State Prisoners under Age 18, 1985-97, 
released 2/00 (NCJ 176989)
*  Juveniles Prosecuted in State Criminal Court, released 4/97
(NCJ 164265) 
*  Juvenile Felony Defendants in Criminal Courts, released 10/98 
(NCJ 165815)
*  Juvenile Delinquents in the Federal Criminal Justice System,
released 2/97 (NCJ 163066). 

Corrections

BJS collects data about the Nation's correctional system from
over 1,500 Federal and State adult correctional facilities,
3,300 local jails, and 5,800 probation and parole agencies and
offices.  By extracting comparable data over time, these
programs provide measures of how these correctional populations
and agencies have changed. 

Summary findings --

*  6.3 million adults were on probation, in jail or prison, or
on parole at yearend 1999 -- 3.1% of all U.S. adult residents.

*  State and Federal prison authorities had 1,284,894 inmates
under their jurisdiction at yearend 1999.

*  Local jails held or supervised 596,485 adults awaiting trial
or serving a sentence at midyear 1999.

*  Between 1990 and midyear 1999, the jail and prison population
nationwide grew an average 5.7% annually.  Population growth
during the 12-month period ending December  31, 1999, was
significantly lower in local jails (up 2.1%) than in previous
years.  The Federal prison population rose by 13.4% (up 14,889
prisoners), the largest 12-month gain ever reported.

Annual Count of Deaths Occurring in Law Enforcement Custody, a
voluntary annual reporting system of deaths of persons while in
law enforcement custody will be expanded during calendar year
2000.  When fully implemented, the collection will include
annual reports of deaths in local jails and State and Federal
prisons by cause.  

BJS is developing a new annual data collection of deaths in
local jails to supplement existing collections in State and
Federal prisons.  Data elements will include the deceased
inmate's date of birth, gender, race/ethnic origin, admission
date, legal status at time of death, and offenses.  Data on
circumstances surrounding the death will include cause, date,
and time of death, whether the cause was the result of a
pre-existing medical condition,  whether the inmate received
medical treatment for the condition, where the death occurred,
and whether the death resulted from an incident while in
custody.  Data collection procedures will be tested extensively
during the summer of 2000.  Data collection in jails will begin
in December 2000 for deaths occurring in calendar year 2000.

BJS is also developing methods to collect data on other deaths
in custody.  To capture the multiple circumstances under which
persons may die while in custody, BJS is undertaking an analysis
of vital statistics records maintained by the National Center
for Health Statistics.  The results of this analysis will help
BJS to establish the best means of collecting these data  
nationwide.

National Prisoner Statistics Program produces yearend and
midyear National- and State-level data on the numbers of
prisoners in State and Federal prison facilities.  It also
provides data on the number of admissions and releases during
the year, the race and Hispanic origin of inmates, the number of
inmate deaths by cause, and the number known to be HIV positive.
Prisoners in 1999 (NCJ 183476) is expected to be released in 
August 2000. 

Capital Punishment Series yields annual National- and
State-level data on persons sentenced to death and those
executed.  Data collected include offender demographic
characteristics, prior criminal history, criminal justice system
status at the time of the capital offense, and date of sentence.
Data are available on executions since 1930 and on sentencing
since 1973.  The data series also includes annual information
from each jurisdiction on statutory changes relating to the
death penalty, including changes involving additional
aggravating or mitigating circumstances, procedural amendments,
and revisions to capital offenses.  Recent data are reported  
in Capital Punishment 1998, released 12/99 (NCJ 179012).

National Corrections Reporting Program annually collects
individual-level data on prison admissions and releases and on
parole entries and discharges in participating jurisdictions. 
Demographic information, conviction offense, sentence length,
minimum time to be served, credited jail time, type of
admission, type of release, and time served are collected from
individual prisoner records.  The latest data will be available
on CD-ROM:  National Corrections Reporting Program, 1997 (NCJ
180796), expected release 9/00.

Annual Probation Data Survey and Parole Data Survey collect data
on persons under Federal, State, and local probation or parole
supervision.  Key data elements include the number on probation
and parole at yearend, number of entries and exits (by type),
offender demographic characteristics, severity of offense, type
of supervision, and special programs.  Latest data are available
in the release of statistical data for probation and parole,
1999, released 7/00 (NCJ 183508).

Annual Survey of Jails provides estimates of the number of
inmates by gender, race, Hispanic origin, conviction status, and
juvenile/adult status.  It also collects information on the
rated capacity of facilities in each jurisdiction, and separate
counts of offenders under community supervision by jail staff,
including those under electronic monitoring and home detention,
in alternative work programs, day-reporting programs, community
service or weekender programs, or other alternative programs. 
The latest data are available in Prison and Jail Inmates at
Midyear 1999, released 4/00 (NCJ 181643).

Survey of Jails in Indian Country obtains baseline
characteristics of Indian country detention facilities and the
inmates housed in them.  The 1999 survey included questions on
the number of inmates, staffing, and facility characteristics. 
Detailed information was collected on the age of the facility,
the rated capacity, renovation plans, crowding, and special
facility and program needs.  The report, Jails in Indian
Country, 1998 and 1999 (NCJ 173410), was released in July 2000. 

Surveys of Inmates in State and Federal Correctional Facilities
provide detailed data on individual characteristics of prison
inmates, current offenses and sentences, characteristics of
victims, criminal histories, family background, gun possession
and use, prior drug and alcohol use and treatment, and
educational programs and other services provided while in
prison. 

Last conducted in 1997, the surveys obtained data from personal
interviews with a nationally representative sample of about
14,300 State prison inmates and 4,000 Federal inmates in about
275 State prisons and 40 Federal prisons.  Numerous reports
presenting the 1997 data have been released.  BJS expects to
release Incarcerated Parents and Their Children, 1997, (NCJ
182335) in August 2000.

Survey of Inmates in Local Jails collects data on the local jail
population, including the personal and family characteristics of
jail inmates, current offenses, sentences and time served,
criminal histories, jail activities, conditions and programs,
prior drug and alcohol use and treatment, and health care
services provided while in jail.  BJS expects to release Legal
Counsel in Criminal Cases (NCJ 179023) in September 2000.

Survey of Adults on Probation provides detailed information on
the background and characteristics of a representative national
sample of probationers under supervision in the community. 
Specific areas of inquiry include criminal history, prior drug
and alcohol use, participation in drug and alcohol treatment
programs, use of firearms, the conditions of supervision, and
the extent of contact with probation authorities.

Census of Jails obtains information on the inmate population,
including inmates supervised in the community, persons held for
other authorities, admissions and discharges, and inmate
programs, health services, and screening for HIV and
tuberculosis infection, and inmate deaths; staff characteristics
and reports of inmate assaults on staff; and facility
characteristics, including function and construction and
renovation data. Initial findings from the 1999 census were
released in Prison and Jail Inmates at Midyear 1999 (NCJ 181643)
in April 2000. More detailed findings from the 1999 data
collection will be available in late 2000.

Census of State and Local Probation and Parole Agencies is a
complete census of Federal, State, and locally operated
probation and parole agencies.  The census gathers data on
staffing, expenditures, program operation and participation
levels, and drug and HIV-testing policies and programs. The
census serves as the sampling frame for the national Survey of
Adults on Probation.

Census of State and Federal Correctional Facilities provides
detailed information on facility characteristics, including
design and rated capacity, construction and renovation, and
facilities under court order for conditions of confinement;
inmate counts, persons under age 18 and over age 55, inmate
housing arrangements, and inmates being held for other
authorities; facility operations and security, misconduct
reports, and grievances filed; inmate health, including
procedures for suicide prevention and screening for HIV and
tuberculosis; facility programs, such as work, education, and
counseling; and staff characteristics, including occupation and
ethnicity.  The 2000 census, with a reference data of June 30,
is currently underway.

Inventory of State and Federal Corrections Information Systems
collected basic data on State and Federal offender-based
corrections information systems, including a description of the
capabilities of the information systems for producing data
extracts, linking records, and exchanging information
electronically.  The inventory establishes a basis for improving
the capacity to provide comparable data and to facilitate
cross-jurisdictional research. 

The inventory was conducted by the Urban Institute with
sponsorship from BJS, the National Institute of Justice, and the
Corrections Program Office, and with assistance from the
State-Federal Committee of the Association of State Corrections
Administrators.  Findings were reported in State and Federal
Corrections Information Systems, released 10/98 (NCJ 170016).

Association of State Court 

Administrators (ASCA) Performance Measures Project, sponsored by
BJS, National Institute of Justice, and the OJP Corrections
Program Office, will undertake a 2- year effort to improve
correctional information systems.  The project will build upon
the inventory and State and Federal Corrections Information
Systems.  The report provided a baseline for developing outcome
measures and an assessment of the capacity of existing systems
to produce accurate, comparable data.

As a followup, this project will identify approximately eight
correctional performance measures and select a subset of up to
four measures for development and improvement.  A project
consultant and advisory panel will assist ASCA members to reach
common definitions for the categories being measured and to
restructure data collection processes, as needed.

National Recidivism Study, conducted by BJS in collaboration
with the Corrections Program Office and the FBI, is currently
analyzing a sample of State prison releases with oversampling of
violent offenders, particularly those convicted of sexual
assault and crimes against children.  Fifteen States are
participating: Arizona, California, Delaware, Florida, Illinois,
Maryland, Michigan, Minnesota, North Carolina, New Jersey, New
York, Ohio, Oregon, Texas, and Virginia.  Collectively, these 15
States accounted for over half of all releases from prisons
throughout the nation in 1994.

BJS will track released prisoners for 3 years using State and
Federal criminal history records.  An initial report giving
results of the 3-year recidivism study is expected in November
2000.

Forthcoming and recent reports 
dealing with  corrections issues --

*  National Corrections Reporting Program, 1997 CD-ROM, expected
release 9/00 (NCJ 180796)
*  Correctional Populations in the United States, 1997, expected
release 9/00 (NCJ 177613)
*  Veterans in Prison or Jail, released 1/00 (NCJ 178888) 
* HIV in Prisons and Jails, 1996, released 6/98 (NCJ 174437) 
*  Mental Health and Treatment of Inmates and Probationers,
released 7/99 (NCJ 174463) 
*  DWI Offenders under Correctional Supervision, released 6/99
(NCJ 172212) 
*  Prior Abuse Reported by Inmates and Probationers, released 3/99 
(NCJ 172879)

Expenditure and employment

BJS provides expenditure and employment data from Federal,
State, and local criminal justice agencies nationwide.  These
data provide critical information to the formula-based programs
within OJP that allocate funds based on State and local criminal
justice spending.

Summary findings --

*  States now spend more on criminal justice than
municipalities, counties, or the Federal government.  Direct
expenditures for each of the major criminal justice functions
(police, corrections, judicial) are increasing. 

*  In fiscal year 1996 Federal, State, and local governments
spent more than $120 billion for civil and criminal justice, a
73% increase over 1995. The three levels of government together
spent a total of $454 per resident. 

*  In fiscal year 1996 State and local governments combined
spent 85% of all justice dollars; the Federal government spent
the rest. 

*  The Federal Government alone spent more than $23 billion on
criminal and civil justice in 1996, compared to almost $48
billion by State governments, $30 billion by counties, and $34
billion by municipalities. 

Justice Expenditure and Employment Extracts series obtains data
extracted from the Census Bureau's Annual Government Finance
Survey and Annual Survey of Public Employment.  This series
includes National and State-by-State estimates of government
expenditures and employment for the following justice
categories: police protection, all judicial (including
prosecution, courts, and public defense), and corrections. (Only
limited judicial data are available for 1980 and 1981.)  Federal
data for the same categories are also included, as are data for
the largest local governments (counties with populations of
500,000 or more and cities with populations of 300,000 or more). 

The latest data are available in 1996 Justice Expenditure and
Employment Extracts, released 5/00 (NCJ 180883).

Justice Expenditure and Employment Survey (also referred to as
Justice Assistance Data Survey) collects detailed information on
the costs of the justice system, including police protection,
courts, prosecution, public defense, and corrections. This
survey, funded by the Bureau of Justice Assistance (BJA), is the
only source of the variable pass-through data (VPT) required by
the States for their allocation of the BJA Edward Byrne Memorial
State and Local Law Enforcement Grant Program. 

These VPT data prescribe the minimum amount of each State's
block grants that, under law, are to be "passed-through" to
local governments in the State. The VPT is based on the ratio of
State to local spending for criminal justice from "own revenue
sources;" that is, expenditures from tax receipts, user fees,
bond distributions, and so on, are included, but expenditures
from funds received from other governments such as Federal grant
programs are excluded.  The 1997 VPT will be available to BJA
for use in administering the fiscal year 2001 block grants.

Expenditure and employment data from other BJS sources include
those BJS series that collect agency-based employment and
expenditure data to develop workload measures, ratios of
employees to clients, and ratios of dollars per service
delivered. These include Law Enforcement Management and
Administrative Statistics, National Survey of Prosecutors,
various court statistics series, the Census of Local Jails, and
the Census of State and Federal Correctional Facilities.  The
estimates produced from these sources may differ from those
produced by the CJEE because of distinct collection methods,
units of analysis, and data collection purposes.

Drugs, alcohol, and crime

Many of BJS's ongoing statistical data series collect drug-and
alcohol-related information. 

Summary findings --

*  Based on victim perceptions, about 2.7 million violent crimes
occurred each year in which victims said that the offender had
been drinking.  For about 1 in 5 of these violent victimizations
involving alcohol use by the offender, victims believed the
offender was also using drugs at the time of the offense. 

*  Among probationers surveyed in 1995, 14% reported they were
on drugs when they committed their offense. 

*  33% of State prisoners and 22% of Federal prisoners said they
had committed their current offense while under the influence of
drugs, as reported in 1997.  Drug offenders (42%) and property
offenders (37%) reported the highest incidence of drug use at
the time of the offense. 

*  36% of convicted jail inmates said they were using drugs at
the time of their offense in 1996.  Those jail inmates convicted
of drug trafficking (60%), drug possession (57%), fraud (45%),
or robbery (44%) were most likely to have reported to be using
drugs at the time of the offense. 

*  In 1996, 16% of convicted jail inmates said they had
committed their offense to get money for drugs. Of convicted
property and drug offenders, about 1 in 4 had committed their
crimes to get money for drugs.

*  In 1997, 19% of State prisoners and 16% of Federal inmates
said they committed their current offense to obtain money for
drugs.  

*  Drug prosecutions comprised an increasing proportion of the
Federal criminal caseload -- from 21% of defendants during 1982
to 35% during 1998.  In 1996 drug offenders comprised a third of
all persons convicted of a felony in State courts. Drug
traffickers accounted for 21% of all convicted felons; drug
possessors also accounted for 14% of all convicted felons. 

Drug- and alcohol-related data from ongoing 
BJS statistical series 

The National Crime Victimization Survey (NCVS) asks victims of
personal crimes if the offenders had been using drugs, alcohol, 
or an unknown substance.  

Law Enforcement Management and Administrative Statistics (LEMAS)
obtains information on drug-related programs of State and local police
agencies. 

The Federal Justice Statistics Program publishes detailed data
on drug law violators in the Federal justice system. 

The National Judicial Reporting Program (NJRP) provides
information on adjudication and sentencing of drug offenders at 
the State level.

State Court Processing Statistics reports drug law violators'
criminal histories and status at time of arrest, pretrial 
release/detention status, trial appearance, and type and length 
of sentence if convicted.

The National Survey of Prosecutors examines current topics such
as the use of innovative prosecution techniques, including those 
that affect drug law violators.

National Prisoner Statistics collects information on admissions
to and releases from State and Federal prisons of those convicted 
of drug offenses and obtains data on persons under parole supervision 
who were convicted of drug offenses.  

The Census of State and Federal Correctional Facilities collects
data on inmate participation in drug and alcohol rehabilitation
programs and drug testing for inmates and employees in State and 
Federal prison facilities. 

The Census of Jails collects data on drug testing policies and
practices. 

The Survey of Inmates in Local Jails collects data on past drug
and alcohol use, substance use at the time of the offense, and
participation in substance abuse treatment programs. 

The Surveys of Inmates in State Correctional Facilities/Federal
Correctional Facilities provide information on prior drug and
alcohol use, experiences while under the influence, substance 
use at offense, and substance abuse treatment history.  

The Survey of Adults on Probation provides information on prior
drug and alcohol use, experiences while under the influence of alcohol 
or drugs, substance use at the time of the offense, and participation 
in drug and alcohol treatment programs.

The Probation Data Survey and Parole Data Survey report on the
number of people convicted of drug offenses or on probation for DWI.    

The Sourcebook of Criminal Justice Statistics presents data on
drug use in the general population, on public opinion toward
drugs and enforcement of drug laws. 

Recent reports --
*  Drug Use, Testing, and Treatment in Jails, released 5/00 (NCJ
   179999)
*  Substance Abuse and Treatment, State and Federal Prisoners,
   1997, released 1/99 (NCJ 172871)

A complete online reference to statistics on drugs and crime is
accessible on the BJS website at <www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs> under 
"Drugs and Crime Facts" or by calling the BJS Clearinghouse at 
1-800-732-3277.

International statistics

Through the International Statistics Program BJS cooperates with
other countries and the United Nations to improve the collection
of statistics on crime and criminal justice systems.  A
long-term goal is to enable cross-national comparisons and
examination of the relationship between crime trends in the
United States and  those in other countries.  

BJS funds international studies that compare the operations of
the U.S. criminal justice system with that of other countries. 
In 2000 BJS will sponsor a comparative analysis of international
crime and punishment trends as part of the NIJ Crime and Justice
book series.  Statistical crime data from the United States,
England and Wales, Sweden, Scotland, the Netherlands, Germany,
Australia, Canada, Switzerland, and Finland will be assembled,
focusing on six serious offenses.  Cross-cutting issues will be
examined with the similarities and differences among these
countries highlighted.   

Recent comparative analyses are presented in Crime and Justice
in the United States and England and Wales, 1981-96, released
10/98 (NCJ 169284), which compares crime in the United States
and England with respect to crime rates (as measured both by
victimization surveys and police statistics), conviction rates,
incarceration rates, and length of sentences.  This study was
conducted as part of the BJS Visiting Fellow Program.

World Factbook of Criminal Justice Systems at <www.ojp.usdoj.gov/
bjs/abstract/wfcj.htm> provides narrative descriptions of the criminal 
justice systems of countries around the world.  These descriptions, 
available electronically through the BJS Internet site, are written 
to a common template to facilitate comparisons.  In 2000 BJS will 
expand the World Factbook with system profiles of four additional Latin
American countries and will revise the current template to include more
information on crime and justice.

Methodological research and studies

BJS conducts, supports, and implements methodological research
and initiatives designed to improve the quality of justice
statistics, records, and information systems.  

Improving measurement methods

Under the aegis of the American Statistical Association, BJS has
launched a grant program designed to foster improvements in the
methods used to obtain, analyze, and report national-level data
on crime and criminal justice.  In 2000 BJS is supporting the
following studies designed to yield new insights to affect
current practice.  

Improvements to the FBI's UCR Program.  A challenging problem
faced by users of summary crime data compiled under the FBI's
Uniform Crime Reporting Program is that not all jurisdictions
fully report their crime data.  As a result, the FBI must
estimate the volume of crime occurring in those cities and
counties to produce a national crime rate.  This research will
examine alternative ways to improve crime estimates for those
jurisdictions with missing data.  

Specifically, the researchers will explore such concerns as
seasonality, techniques for multi-year estimates, and patterns
of stability in the prior reports of "missing-data"
jurisdictions.  The research should be of significant benefit to
the FBI in considering new ways of addressing missing and
incomplete data from law enforcement agencies.

Impact of respondent recall problems. This methodological
research addresses respondent memory and willingness to report
victimization experiences to interviewers for the NCVS.  The
researchers will use the longitudinal features of the NCVS to
examine under- and overreporting of victimization experiences.

A person victimized by a crime is more likely to be victimized
again than is someone who has never experienced a crime to be
victimized a first time.  Yet, it is possible that recall
problems of those repeat victims affect victimization rates.  A
victim who has willingly described a past victimization to a
survey interviewer may be less willing to report a second or
third or fourth victimization.  Understanding this reluctance
and its effects on estimates of national rates of victimization
is the first step toward revising procedures and trying to
reduce this type of survey error. 

Impact of community policing on violent crime and new uses for
BJS administrative data on law enforcement. This study of 190
cities with populations greater than 100,000 residents will link
police administrative data drawn from the BJS LEMAS Program with
Census Bureau economic and social data and FBI UCR data.  Those
data will be used to examine the impact of municipal  police
operational strategies on the rate of violent crime.

Using these datasets, researchers will be able to take into
account economic and social characteristics of cities while
comparing differences in crime rates against differences in
police administration.  This study will demonstrate a new use
for BJS jurisdiction-level data when combined with data from
other sources and will provide new knowledge about operational
strategies for addressing violent crime.

General criminal justice statistics


BJS produced a number of statistical documents and other
products that cover more than one criminal justice topic.  

Sourcebook of Criminal Justice Statistics, first published in
1972, is compiled annually from more than 150 separate sources. 
Almost all data are nationwide in scope and, where possible, are
displayed by region, State, and city for comparative analyses. 
The Sourcebook can be accessed online at <www.albany.edu/sourcebook>
and is updated as new information becomes available.  Multi-year 
CD-ROMs are also available.

Criminal Justice Agency Survey List is an updated directory of
various State and local jurisdictions and criminal justice
agencies from which sample surveys are selected. 

Visiting Research Fellowship Program

Under BJS sponsorship, researchers selected as BJS Visiting
Fellows come to Washington, D.C., to conduct studies on topics
of their own choosing. While in Washington, fellows use BJS
office space and have access to the agency's rich array of
datasets and software. They interact with BJS staff and gain
first-hand knowledge of some of the most recent developments in
the field of criminal justice research. In addition to carrying
out their research, fellows also have opportunities to
contribute in other significant ways. 

For example, recent fellows have --

*  Briefed the Attorney General on latest trends in youth
   violence
*  Collaborated on the creation of a BJS homicide statistics
   website
*  Helped design a BJS survey on police use of force
*  Explored new methods for visualizing BJS data 
*  Compared crime rates between the U.S. and England. 

The BJS Visiting Fellowship Program is open to senior-level
social science researchers whose work on crime-related subjects
has been extensively published. Some fellows remain on-site at
BJS for the entire duration of their project. Others make only
occasional visits to accommodate their schedules. At the close
of their visit, fellows prepare a research report summarizing
results and policy implications of their project.

Support to State and local governments

State Justice Statistics Program for 
Statistical Analysis Centers

The State Justice Statistics Program provides support to State
Statistical Analysis Centers (SAC's) to collect, analyze, and
report statistics on crime and justice to Federal, State, and
local levels of government. BJS works in conjunction with the
Justice Research and Statistics Association (JRSA) and selected
SAC directors to identify particular criminal justice topics of
concern and significance to criminal justice practitioners. 
SAC's are encouraged to conduct statistical research and
in-depth analysis and to publish findings on these issues.  

In fiscal year 2000, BJS is encouraging SAC's to -- 

*  Conduct local crime victimization surveys using software
developed by BJS and COPS for local law enforcement organizations

*  Carry out special analyses utilizing criminal history records
to better understand certain types of criminal behavior or to
evaluate the State's use of such record systems

*  Undertake comprehensive studies of domestic and sexual
violence and the response of the criminal justice system 

*  Examine the relationship between drugs and crime and the
management of drug offenders by the justice system

*  Maximize access to reports and other criminal justice
information via the Internet 

*  Conduct research using incident-based data obtained from
local law enforcement agencies

*  Promote research to better understand the impact of
corrections policies and practices

*  Foster new research examining juvenile violence and trends in
juvenile offending.  

Further information on the fiscal year 2000 program and selected
issues have been announced in the publication State Justice
Statistics Program for Statistical Analysis Centers: 
Program Application Guidelines, Fiscal Year 2000, released 4/00
(NCJ 180969). 

Through the JRSA, BJS offers technical assistance to the State
SAC's in the development, collection, analysis, use, and
dissemination of criminal justice statistics.  JRSA, formerly
the Criminal Justice Statistics Association, was organized in
1974 by the directors of the State SAC's.  It was formed to
promote cooperation among States and the exchange of
information, statistics, and technology.  In providing technical
services and liaison to the SAC's for BJS, JRSA maintains a
criminal justice information clearinghouse; provides online
access to the Database of State Activities and Research and the
Firearms Research Information System (FARIS); and holds an
annual conference on justice statistics, research, and policy
analysis. 

Criminal records systems 
improvement and policy 

BJS supports several programs aimed at improving criminal
records.  Criminal history records are fingerprint cards or
their electronic counterparts, linked with information about
arrests, convictions, and sentences when available.  Records are
inaccessible electronically to other States if they are not
automated or if a State does not participate in the national
system referred to as the Interstate Identification Index.  

Records without dispositions delay inquiries and handicap law
enforcement.  The records are used in identifying individuals
with a prior conviction and those who are prohibited from
purchasing a firearm, are subject to domestic violence
protective orders, or are ineligible to hold positions of
responsibility involving children, the elderly, or the disabled. 

Criminal Records Policy Program supports surveys, studies,
conferences, and technical assistance on issues relating to
criminal justice records. Primary emphasis is on accuracy and
completeness of records, limitations on dissemination,
commingling of juvenile and adult records, data auditing
techniques, and the interstate exchange of records. Under this
program, the 50-State Survey of Criminal History Information
Systems is conducted, providing information on the technology,
policy, and legislative status of criminal history records.  

Recent reports include: 

*  Survey of State Procedures Related to Firearm Sales, Midyear
   1999, released 3/00 (NCJ 179022)
*  Survey of State Criminal History Information Systems, 1997,
   released 4/99 (NCJ 175041)
*  National Crime Prevention and Privacy Compact: Resource
   Materials, released 7/98 (NCJ 171671)

National Criminal History Improvement Program (NCHIP), since
1995, has helped States join with the FBI to build an accurate
and useful national system of criminal records for improved
identification of the criminal background of individuals. 
Interstate availability of complete computerized criminal
records is increasingly vital for criminal investigations,
prosecutorial charging, sentencing decisions, correctional
supervision and release, community notification, and background
checks for those applying for licenses, firearm purchases, and
work involving the safety and well-being of children, the
elderly, and the disabled.  NCHIP is an umbrella program that
assists States in addressing the expanding range of
technology-based criminal justice information, identification,
and communications needs.

NCHIP-2000 continues and expands upon the existing NCHIP program
to meet the goals of the Crime Identification Technology Act of
1998 (CITA).  Program priorities for 2000 include:

*  Establishing the infrastructure to support full
implementation of the National Instant Criminal Background Check
System (NICS), including full participation in the Interstate
Identification Index (III)

*  Supporting efforts to develop court record systems

*  Encouraging States to focus on upgrading the quality of State
and local protection order systems, ensuring that such systems
are capable of supplying data on a real time basis to the FBI's
Protection Order File, and ensuring that States have the
capacity to initiate or enhance efforts to collect and flag
misdemeanor records that involve domestic violence

*  Supporting State efforts to enhance access to criminal
records for noncriminal justice purposes, including
implementation of the Interstate Crime Prevention and Privacy
Compact. 

For further details, refer to the National Criminal History
Improvement Program: Fiscal Year 2000 Program Announcement,
released 4/00 (NCJ 181463).

Firearm Inquiry Statistics Project (FIST) is designed to collect
annual data describing the number of inquiries made in
connection with presale handgun checks and the number and basis
for rejection of such applicants. 

Data collection procedures are adjusted to reflect the differing
presale check procedures under the permanent system (which
became effective on 11/30/98) and the interim period (02/28/94 -
11/29/98).  As the permanent system requires a check on all
firearms (including handguns), subsequent annual releases will
include data on both long guns and handguns. 

Findings describing background checks for firearm transfers
conducted in 1999 were published in Background Checks for
Firearms Transfers, 1999, released 6/00 (NCJ 180882).  Other
recent data are available in Presale Handgun Checks, the Brady
Interim Period, 1994-98, released 6/99 (NCJ 175034). 

National Technical Assistance and Evaluation Program, a
component of the NCHIP program, provides technical assistance to
States under NCHIP through a wide range of technology-based,
criminal justice information, identification, and communications
services.  The program also helps States and localities in
meeting requirements associated with participation in
FBI-administered programs such as the National Instant Criminal
Background Check System (NICS) and the Interstate Identification
Index (III).  BJS has funded a grant to SEARCH to provide
on-site and telephone assistance to States that have received
funds to upgrade record systems. 

BJS made an award to Queues Enforth Development (QED) to conduct
an ongoing comprehensive evaluation of the NCHIP, the
predecessor Criminal History Record Improvement (CHRI), and
Byrne 5% Set-aside programs to assess the impact of these
programs in individual States, particularly regarding the
accuracy, completeness, and timeliness of criminal history
record information in central repositories.  In February 2000,
BJS published Continuing Criminal History Records Improvement
Evaluation: Final 1994-98 Report (NCJ 179768) that describes the
results of this ongoing evaluation of State activity relating to
improvement of criminal records. 

National Incident-Based Reporting 
System (NIBRS)

The FBI's Uniform Crime Reporting (UCR) program, which began in
1929, collects information about crimes reported to the police. 
In 1982 BJS and the FBI sponsored a study of the UCR Program
with the objective of revising it to meet law enforcement needs
into the 21st century.  A 5-year redesign effort to provide more
comprehensive and detailed crime statistics resulted in the
National Incident-Based Reporting System (NIBRS), which collects
data on each reported crime incident.  The UCR Program is
currently being converted to NIBRS. 

Currently under the summary program, law enforcement authorities
aggregate the number of incidents by offense type monthly and
report these totals to the FBI. Under incident-based reporting,
agencies will provide an individual record for each crime
reported. 

The summary UCR Program collects offense information on the
eight Part I crimes of homicide, forcible rape, robbery,
aggravated assault, burglary, larceny-theft, motor vehicle
theft, and arson. It provides limited information about
offenses, victims, and offenders, and includes reported arrests
for 21 additional crime categories. 

Under NIBRS, law enforcement authorities will provide
information to the FBI on each criminal incident in 22 broad
categories of offenses that occur in their jurisdiction. NIBRS
includes details about each incident, including information
about multiple victims and offenders.  The requirements for
compatibility with NIBRS and the relaxed standards for NIBRS
compliance can be found at the FBI website
<www.fbi.gov/publish/nibrs/nibrs.htm>.

BJS has participated in the design and development of NIBRS and
supports several related efforts to encourage the use of
incident-based data 

NIBRS Implementation Program is intended to improve the quality
of crime statistics in the United States by implementing NIBRS. 
The Crime Identification Technology Act (CITA) provides funding
to States (in conjunction with units of local government) and
tribes that want to participate in the FBI's new approach to
uniform crime reporting, NIBRS. 

Under this program, awards will be made to States applying on
behalf of one or more cities or counties in the State,
regardless of whether the State maintains a UCR program. Within
the State, requests may be made on behalf of one or more
jurisdictions or a collaboration of jurisdictions. In addition,
a State can apply for funding to be used at the State level,
provided that the State also applies for funds on behalf of a
city or county jurisdiction.  

A complete description of requirements and programs funded under
CITA is available at the OJP CITA website
<www.ojp.usdoj.gov/cita>.

Demonstrating the Utility of NIBRS BJS and SEARCH, the National
Consortium for Justice Information and Statistics, are
conducting a project to identify promising and cost-effective
approaches to encourage wider adoption of NIBRS, including
demonstrating how local agencies can or do use NIBRS data at the
local level for crime analysis, resource allocation, and other
purposes; identify the most significant impediments to NIBRS
participation in large local law enforcement agencies
nationwide; assess technical issues relating to data elements,
software, and data input; and provide technical assistance to
local agencies in record system upgrades and NIBRS
implementation.

Showcasing Modern Law Enforcement Records Management Systems
assists large- and medium-sized jurisdictions in acquiring said
systems, documenting successful experiences, and demonstrating
the feasibility for large- and medium-sized law enforcement
agencies to develop NIBRS-compliant systems.  BJS is funding
three cities -- Chicago, Wichita, and Charlotte-Mecklenburg --
to implement automated NIBRS-compliant records management
systems.  Eight other jurisdictions committed to implementing
NIBRS have been selected to observe the three in their
step-by-step progress, including Los Angeles County, CA;
Washington, DC; New Castle, DE; Honolulu, HI; Jefferson Parish,
LA; Suffolk County, NY; Austin, TX; and Seattle, WA.

NIBRS comprehensive step-by-step guide, sponsored by BJS and FBI
and to be developed by Mitretek, will assist law enforcement
agencies in the implementation of NIBRS-compliant records
management systems.  The manual will be available electronically
and will include information on RFP preparation, Federal
funding, purchasing and leasing, vendors, and quality control. 
It will also include lessons learned by agencies that have been
through the automation process, and an updated interactive cost
model with new cost factors.

Data Systems for Policing in the 21st Century, a multifaceted
project to be conducted by the Police Executive Research Forum,
will provide information to law enforcement executives regarding
the utility of incident-based reporting systems and how to
implement such systems.  A survey of police executives will be
conducted to determine the major factors that impede
implementation of incident-based systems and to identify
agencies that have successfully implemented such systems.  In
addition, a technical assistance symposium for local level
police executives, systems administrators, and crime analysts
will be held.

Justice Research and Statistics Association (JRSA)
Incident-Based Reporting Resource (IBR) Center, located at
<www.jrsa.org/ibrrc>, provides comprehensive information on
accessing and using incident-based law enforcement data for the
analysis of crime and reporting of justice statistics.

The goal of the website is to facilitate the use of State
incident-based reporting (IBR) systems and the National
Incident-Based Reporting System (NIBRS) by crime analysts,
researchers, and other justice professionals. The Center,
supported by BJS, seeks to put practical analytical information
and tools into the hands of analysts who want to work with
incident-based data and to provide a forum where analysts can
exchange information and ideas about using IBR data.

NIBRS and COMPASS (Community Mapping, Planning, and Analysis for
Safety Strategies)  Incident-based crime statistics and
NIBRS-compliant record management systems are also a central
component of the OJP- initiative called COMPASS.  

Seattle, Washington, was selected as the pilot site for COMPASS,
which seeks to use a data-driven approach for enhancing
community safety through strategic problem-solving.  This
approach begins with the integration of current statistics
collected from a variety of sources, including incident-based
crime, public safety, demographic, social, and environmental
data.  BJS, NIJ, and their partners will select a second pilot
site for fiscal year 2000.  If funding is available in fiscal
year 2001, an additional 8-10 sites will be considered for
participation in COMPASS.  For additional information on
COMPASS, go to <www.ojp.usdoj.gov/nij/ compasslet.htm>.

BJS guidance To assist in the development and presentation of
incident-based crime data, BJS staff developed a series of
standardized incident-based tables. Based on several evaluations
and on the commendations from the law enforcement community and other
criminal justice representatives, 21 tables were identified as
measures that could provide policy-relevant criminal
information. Once finalized, BJS plans to provide recodes and
related syntax to create these tables from NIBRS datasets.
Suggested table shells are available for download at <www.ojp.
usdoj.gov/bjs/nibrs.htm>.

How to use BJS services

From the BJS website

The BJS World Wide Web site is located at <www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/>.

Providing information on the Internet has proven to be the most
efficient way BJS can make its data accessible to those who need
it instantly.  BJS information is updated continuously.  For a
report on the latest updates and additions to materials on the
BJS Website, refer to the Guide to the BJS Website, Second
Edition, released 5/00 (NCJ 180771).  

Visit these areas on the website --

Statistics about -- Summary findings and statistical graphics
are presented by crime and justice topics -- crime and victims;
criminal offenders; justice system components including
prosecutors, courts and sentencing, and corrections; and special
topics.  Descriptions of the data collections and additional
work by BJS staff are listed under each topic.  Nearly 20 survey
questionnaires are now available.

Crime and justice data from other sources -- The BJS website
provides links to data from other sources, including the Federal
Bureau of Investigation and other Federal agencies. It also
provides links to juvenile justice statistics and international
crime statistics.

What's new at BJS  -- The most recent information from BJS is
highlighted in this section, including announcements, releases,
solicitations, and the latest data available on the BJS website. 

Key Facts at a Glance -- This area presents trends in crime and
justice in 36 charts that are updated as new data become
available.  Small versions of the charts and brief statements of
findings are presented with links to full-size charts,
additional information about the charts and findings, and the
data that support the chart.

Publications -- Every BJS report produced by BJS since 1994,
when the website was launched, is available electronically.  The
electronic versions of BJS publications are presented in two
formats: in ASCII without formatted graphics and in portable
document format (.pdf) as published with graphics and tables
(viewable on any computer and printable on any printer). BJS
also provides data from the tables of most BJS publications in
spread-sheet format.  Over 1,265 spreadsheets are available on
the website.  

Tables from various BJS series that were printed in the past are
now being offered exclusively online in spreadsheets.

Press releases -- The most recent press releases from BJS are
published on the website at the press release section of the BJS
home page.

Data for analysis -- Spreadsheets, datasets, and on-line
tabulation capabilities can be accessed from this section of the
website, including:

Crime and Justice Electronic Data Abstracts are a series of
spreadsheets that contain data from a wide variety of published
sources, usually by jurisdiction and over time.  These
spreadsheets, updated as new data become available, can be used
to answer particular informational questions, or may be used to
support other analyses or graphics.

Datasets and codebooks are archived, documented, and made
available over the Internet through the National Archive of
Criminal Justice Data of the Inter-university Consortium for
Political and Social Research (ICPSR) at the University of
Michigan. BJS reports are linked to the raw data used in the
report, which can be downloaded from the archive.

On-line tabulation capabilities are available using the Data
Analysis System maintained at the National Archive of Criminal
Justice Data website and at the Federal Justice Statistics
Resource Center which provides on-line access to the BJS Federal
Justice Statistics Program (FJSP) database. Through the FJSRC,
users may generate customized statistics and download datasets
for more detailed analyses.

Justice records funding information
-- Information is provided on various funding programs designed
to assist State and local agencies in the areas of criminal
history record improvement, development and enhancement  of sex
offender registries, and implementation of  incident-based
reporting. 

Related sites -- This section provides links to related Federal
Government sites and BJS partners.

About BJS -- An overview of BJS is provided, describing its
mission and responsibilities, criminal justice areas covered by
data collection programs, grant programs, and dissemination
programs maintained.  BJS encourages all users of its Internet
site to send comments, suggestions, and information inquiries to
<askbjs@ojp.usdoj.gov>.

Dissemination Programs

Bureau of Justice Statistics Clearinghouse, a component of the
National Criminal Justice Reference Service (NCJRS), provides
information about crime and justice statistics and disseminates
BJS reports. The Clearinghouse offers products and services
tailored to the needs of the criminal justice professional. 

Clearinghouse staff who specialize in BJS statistical resources
can assist you in locating data that best meet your particular
information needs. BJS specialists can also direct users to a
variety of other criminal justice data.

By contacting the NCJRS Justice 
Information Center, you can receive --

*  BJS reports and BJS mailing list information 
*  Criminal justice statistics over the phone 
*  Custom literature searches of the National Criminal Justice
   Reference Service (NCJRS) 
*  Database referrals to other sources of crime data 
*  Data assistance from information specialists. 

The BJS Clearinghouse responds 
to data requests from a variety of audiences --

*  Federal policymakers and practitioners 
*  State and local criminal justice practitioners 
*  Private organizations 
*  Faculty and students 
*  Media and the public.

The Clearinghouse has developed several products to assist
researchers, policymakers, and other professionals --

*  CD-ROM's 
*  statistical information packages 
*  slide presentations 
*  topical searches 
*  topical bibliographies. 

Contact the Clearinghouse to request information or to order
publications and products by --

Internet:  <www.ncjrs.org>
E-mail:  <askncjrs@ncjrs.org>

Mail:   BJS Clearinghouse/NCJRS
        P.O. Box 179
        Annapolis Junction, MD
        20701-0179

Visit:  BJS Clearinghouse/NCJRS
        1600 Research Boulevard
        Rockville, MD 20850
 
Call:   1-800-732-3277 

FAX orders:  1-410-792-4358

Access fax-on-demand system: 
1-301-519-5550 

National Archive of Criminal Justice Data, on behalf of BJS,
archives data files, documents them, and makes them available to
researchers, scholars, journalists, and other users. Established
in 1978, NACJD headquarters are located with the central staff
of the Inter-university Consortium for Political and Social
Research (ICPSR) in the Institute for Social Research at the
University of Michigan. 

The central mission of NACJD is to facilitate and encourage
research in the field of criminal justice through the sharing of
data resources. 
Specific goals include --

*  Providing machine-readable data for the quantitative study of
crime and the criminal justice system through the development of
a central data archive.

*  Supplying technical assistance in analyzing data collections
and selecting the computer hardware and software for analyzing
data efficiently and effectively. 

*  Offering training in quantitative methods of social science
research to facilitate secondary analysis of criminal justice
data. 

NACJD routinely receives data from four agencies within the U.S.
Department of Justice: BJS, the National Institute of Justice,
the Office of Juvenile Justice and Delinquency Prevention, and
the Federal Bureau of Investigation.  Individual scholars and
researchers in the criminal justice field may also deposit data
with NACJD, and interested individuals should contact NACJD
staff for more information on this process.

Data files that are maintained by the NACJD are available at no
charge for search and download from the NACJD website located at
<www.icpsr.umich.edu/nacjd/>. 

Write or call: National Archive 
of Criminal Justice Data
      ICPSR
      Institute for Social Research 
      P.O. Box 1248
      Ann Arbor, MI 48106
      1-800-999-0960
      1-313-763-5011 

Ask Archive staff questions via e-mail 
at <nacjd@icpsr.umich.edu>.

National Clearinghouse for Criminal 
Justice Information Systems, located at 
<www.search.org/clearinghouse/>, has a new look and URL. 
Sponsored by BJS and operated by SEARCH, The National Consortium
for Justice Information and Statistics, the Clearinghouse has
evolved into a national, centralized resource to criminal
justice agencies and professionals that provides on-line
Internet access to a host of justice-related information,
including impartial data on available software solutions and a
comprehensive, interactive database of justice agency requests
for proposals. The Clearinghouse provides access to the
following:  

*  The Automated Index of Criminal Justice Information Systems,
a database about criminal justice software and agencies that
have practical experience with automated systems. 

*  IT Acquisition Database, a database containing information
technology (IT) procurement documents issued by States to
vendors for wide dissemination and for use as models by other
justice agencies. 

*  Integrated Justice Information Systems, a site that provides
policy, operational, technical, and research information to the
justice community about integrating their automated systems. It
offers access to a database of State integration activities and
information on best practices, case studies, Federal activities,
technical solutions and other resources. 

For more information about the Clearinghouse call 916-392-2550,
or send e-mail to <webmaster@search.org>.

Justice, E-Government, and the Internet, a national conference
cosponsored by BJS and SEARCH, was held in Dallas, Texas, on
June 26-28, 2000.  The conference brought together
practitioners, executives, subject matter experts, government
officials, and industry leaders from throughout the Nation. 
They participated in interactive discussions on a variety of
issues associated with the Internet and World Wide Web, the
fundamental changes in the way both private industry and
government do business, and the implications for justice
agencies.

Sourcebook of Criminal Justice Statistics, compiled and
maintained by the State University of New York at Albany, is
available online at <www.albany.edu/sourcebook> with
continuously updated data from more than 150 sources.

Database of State Activities and Research, maintained by the
Justice Research and Statistics Association (JRSA), covers the
activities of State criminal justice statistical agencies,
including current Statistical Analysis Center (SAC) activities,
research efforts and statistical programs, abstracts of SAC
publications, information on publications in the JRSA library,
and data from the SAC Skills Survey.  

The JRSA staff can search the database for specific topics using
key words and provide printouts of search results. 

Contact JRSA by  --

Internet at <www.jrsainfo.org/>
e-mail to <cjinfo@jrsa.org>
telephone: 202-842-9330

Firearms Research Information 
System (FARIS)

Also maintained by JRSA, FARIS contains abstracts of unpublished
firearms-related information from surveys, research, evaluations
and statistical reports. The purpose of FARIS is to provide
researchers with information pertaining to ongoing firearms
studies. The abstracted information contains key findings and
summarizes issues examined. FARIS contains over 120 records.

American Statistical Association's Guide to Abstracts and
Bibliographies, located at <www.la.utexas.edu/
research/crime_criminaljustice_ research/>, is designed to
inform researchers and statisticians about BJS datasets they can
use in their research.  Abstracts and bibliographies of many
studies that used BJS datasets are available on this site. 

To order BJS products

Publications

You may order single-copy paper versions of BJS publications
through the Bureau of Justice Statistics Clearinghouse, a
component of the National Criminal Justice Reference Service
(NCJRS). The latest BJS data releases are available 24 hours a
day through the Internet and other electronic means. 

Order online

If you have a forms-compatible browser, you can place your order
directly through the Internet at the Online Order Form located at
<www.ncjrs.org/statordr.htm>.

Order via Internet e-mail

Send a message with the name of the publication, the NCJ number,
and your  mailing address to <askncjrs@ ncjrs.org>.

Order by telephone

In the United States, the BJS Clearinghouse offers toll-free
access at 1-800-732-3277.

Order via Fax-on-Demand System

Call 301-519-5550 to order from a touchtone menu that
automatically faxes your selection to you. (Only shorter
publications are on this system.) 

Order by FAX

FAX your order to the clearinghouse at 1-410-792-4358 (include
name, address, title, and NCJ number) or download an order form
in Acrobat format, print it off, complete it, and FAX it to the
clearinghouse. 

Data files and codebooks 

Data files and codebooks are maintained at the National Archive
of Criminal Justice Data and are available at no charge for
search and download from the NACJD site on the Internet at
<www.icpsr.umich.edu/nacjd/>.

In addition to online Internet access, data files and codebooks
can be requested by telephone or mail from the National Archive
of Criminal Justice Data. 

Call or write --
     National Archive of Criminal Justice Data 
     ICPSR 
     Institute for Social Research
     P.O. Box 1248
     Ann Arbor, MI 48106
     1-800-999-0960  
     1-313-763-5011 

Ask Archive staff questions via e-mail 
at <cdunn@icpsr.umich.edu>.

U.S. Department of Justice
Bureau of Justice Statistics

Jan M. Chaiken, Ph.D.
Director

Maureen A. Henneberg, Associate Director, 
prepared this report with the assistance 
of BJS program managers.  Ellen Goldberg, 
Tom Hester, and Tina Dorsey edited
and produced it.




End of file
8/24/00 ih




