U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Programs
Bureau of Justice Statistics

-------------------------------------------------------
This file is text only without graphics and many of the
tables. A Zip archive of the tables in this report in
spreadsheet format (.csv) and the full report including
tables and graphics in .pdf format are available on BJS
website at: 
http://www.bjs.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbdetail&iid=5136


-------------------------------------------------------

Special Report	

Crimes Against the Elderly, 2003–2013

Rachel E. Morgan, Ph.D., BJS Statistician, 
and Britney J. Mason, BJS Intern

For the period 2003–13, elderly persons age 65 or older experienced 
nonfatal violent crime victimizations at lower rates (3.6 
victimizations per 1,000 persons age 65 or older) than younger 
persons ages 12 to 24 (49.9 per 1,000), persons ages 25 to 49 
(27.6 per 1,000), and persons ages 50 to 64 (15.2 per 1,000) 
(figure 1). Nonfatal violent crime includes rape or sexual 
assault, robbery, aggravated assault, and simple assault. Each 
year, the elderly accounted for approximately 2% of violence and 
2% of serious violence, which equals 136,720 violent crimes and 
47,640 serious violent crimes. However, the elderly made up 
about 21% of the population age 12 or older during this time 
period. The rate of property crime was also lower compared to 
younger persons.

This report uses data from the National Crime Victimization 
Survey (NCVS) to provide detailed information on nonfatal 
violent victimization and property victimization against the 
elderly, including victim and incident characteristics. Findings 
in this report are also supplemented by data from the 2012 
Identity Theft Supplement (ITS) to the NCVS. In addition, the 
primary source of information on homicides was obtained from 
mortality data based on death certificates in the National Vital 
Statistics System of the National Center for Health Statistics 
(NCHS), Centers for Disease Control and Prevention’s (CDC) Web-
based Injury Statistics Query and Reporting System (WISQARS). 
These mortality data include causes of death reported by 
attending physicians, medical examiners, and coroners, and 
demographic information about decedents reported by funeral 
directors who obtain information from family members and other 
informants. The NCHS collects, compiles, verifies, and prepares 
these data for release to the public.

In this report, elderly persons are defined as persons age 65 or 
older. This definition is consistent with definitions of elderly 
used by other federal governmental agencies, such as the U.S. 
Census Bureau (see figure 2). Comparison age groups include 
persons ages 12 to 24, 25 to 49, and 50 to 64. Trend estimates 
from the NCVS are based on 2-year rolling averages centered on 
the most recent year. For example, estimates reported for 1994 
represent the average estimates for 1993 and 1994. For ease of 
discussion, the report refers to all 2-year estimates by the 
most recent year. Other data in this report focus on the most 
recent 11-year aggregate period from 2003 through 2013, referred 
to throughout the report as 2003–13. Both approaches--using 
rolling averages and aggregating years--increase the reliability 
and stability of estimates and facilitate comparisons of 
detailed victimization characteristics.

***************************************************************
***********
Highlights
***********

This report describes crimes against persons age 65 or older, by 
victim and incident characteristics. Data are from the National 
Crime Victimization Survey (NCVS), the Centers for Disease 
Control and Prevention’s (CDC) Web--based Injury Statistics 
Query and Reporting System (WISQARS), and the U.S. Census 
Bureau. In 2003–13--

* The rates of nonfatal violent crime (3.6 per 1,000 persons) 
and property crime (72.3 per 1,000) against elderly persons were 
lower than those of younger persons.
 
* The ratio of the estimates of property crime to violent crime 
was higher for the elderly (13 to 1) than for younger persons 
ages 25 to 49 (3 to 1) and persons ages 50 to 64 (5 to 1).

* Elderly homicide rates declined 44%, from 3.7 homicides per 
100,000 persons in 1993 to 2.1 per 100,000 in 2011. 

* Persons age 65 or older experienced more incidents of identity 
theft (5.0%) than persons ages 16 to 24 (3.8%), but less than 
persons ages 25 to 49 (7.9%) and ages 50 to 64 (7.8%). 

* Among elderly violent crime victims, about 59% reported being 
victimized at or near their home.

* A smaller percentage of elderly victims (18%) suffered an 
injury during the incident, compared to victims ages 12 to 24 
(30%) and ages 25 to 49 (25%). 

* The elderly (56%) reported incidents of violent crime to 
police more than persons ages 12 to 24 (38%). No differences 
were detected with the elderly and other age groups. 

* About 11% of elderly victims of violent crime received 
assistance from victim service agencies.
****************************************************************

****************************************************************
*********************************
Growth of the elderly population 
in the United States
*********************************

According to the U.S. Census Bureau, the large increases in the 
elderly population that have occurred since 1990 are projected 
to continue through 2020. As many Baby Boomers are currently 
reaching age 65, the elderly population will continue to grow 
and remain an important part of the total U.S. population. In 
2010, about 40.3 million persons were age 65 or older, an 
increase of 5.3 million since 2000 when the elderly population 
totaled about 35 million (figure 2). Among the total U.S. 
population, the percentage of persons age 65 or older increased 
from 12.4% in 2000 to 13.0% in 2010, and is projected to reach 
16.8% by 2020.
****************************************************************

************************************
Elderly persons had lower rates of 
property crime than younger persons
************************************

Like violent crime, the elderly population had lower rates of 
property crime compared to younger persons from 2003 to 2013. 
Households headed by persons age 65 or older (72.3 per 1,000 
households) experienced property crime at a rate about a quarter 
of that for households headed by persons age 24 or younger 
(262.0 per 1,000) (table 1). Property crime includes household 
burglary, motor vehicle theft, and theft. The elderly 
experienced theft (51.8 per 1,000 households) more than any 
other type of property crime.

During 2003–13, the elderly experienced 1,796,740 property 
crimes annually, compared to 136,720 violent crimes annually 
(table 2). About 93% of all crime experienced by the elderly was 
property crime. The ratio of property crime to violent crime for 
the elderly was higher than for younger persons. In 2003–13, 13 
property crimes were committed against the elderly for every 
violent crime committed against the elderly. In comparison, 
persons ages 25 to 49 experienced three property crimes for 
every violent crime, and persons ages 50 to 64 experienced five 
property crimes for every violent crime. 

****************************************************************

***********************************************
The National Crime Victimization Survey (NCVS)
***********************************************

The NCVS collects information on nonfatal crimes reported and 
not reported to the police against persons age 12 or older from 
a nationally representative sample of U.S. households. It 
produces national rates and levels of violent and property 
victimization, as well as information on the characteristics of 
crimes and victims, and the consequences of victimization. The 
NCVS is based on interviews with victims, it does not measure 
homicide. 

This report examines violent crimes and property crimes. Violent 
crime includes rape or sexual assault, robbery, aggravated 
assault, and simple assault. The Bureau of Justice Statistics 
(BJS) classifies rape, sexual assault, robbery, and aggravated 
assault as serious violent crimes. Property crime includes 
burglary, motor vehicle theft, and other theft. The survey also 
measures personal larceny, which includes pickpocketing and 
purse snatching. For additional estimates not included in this 
report, see the NCVS Victimization Analysis Tool (NVAT) on the 
BJS website. 

Victimization is the basic unit of analysis used throughout this 
report. Victimization is a crime as it affects one person or 
household. For personal crimes, the number of victimizations is 
equal to the number of victims present during a criminal 
incident. The number of victimizations may be greater than the 
number of incidents because more than one person may be 
victimized during an incident. Each crime against a household is 
counted as having a single victim, the affected household. The 
victimization rate is a measure of the occurrence of 
victimizations among a specified population group. For personal 
crimes, this is based on the number of victimizations per 1,000 
residents age 12 or older. For household crimes, the 
victimization rate is calculated using the number of incidents 
per 1,000 households.

The NCVS is administered to persons age 12 or older from a 
nationally representative sample of households in the United 
States. It excludes violence against children age 11 or younger. 
The sample includes persons living in group quarters, such as 
dormitories, rooming houses, and religious group dwellings, but 
excludes persons living in military barracks and institutional 
settings, such as correctional or hospital facilities, and 
persons who are homeless.

****************************************************************

*******************************************
The nonfatal violent crime rate for the 
elderly declined 41% from 1994 to 2013
*******************************************

From 1994 to 2013, the rate of nonfatal violent crime for all 
age groups decreased (figure 3). Overall, the rate of violent 
crime against persons age 65 or older declined 41%, from 7.4 
victimizations per 1,000 persons in 1994 to 4.4 per 1,000 in 
2013. Violent crime committed against the elderly declined at a 
slower rate than violent crime committed against persons ages 12 
to 24 and ages 25 to 49. Since 2003, rates of violent crime have 
increased 27% for the elderly population and 9% for persons ages 
50 to 64. Rates of nonfatal violent crime for persons ages 12 to 
24 declined 37% and persons ages 25 to 49 declined 9% from 2003 
to 2013. However, the elderly continue to have low violent crime 
rates compared to other age groups.

*******************************************
Elderly homicide rates were lower than 
homicide rates for all other ages from 
1993 to 2011
*******************************************

From 1993 to 2011 (most recent data available), homicide rates 
decreased for all age groups (figure 4). The homicide rates for 
the elderly declined 44%, compared to a decline of 55% for 
persons ages 12 to 24, 42% for persons ages 25 to 49, and 36% 
for persons ages 50 to 64. The elderly rate declined from about 
3.7 homicides per 100,000 persons in 1993 to 2.1 homicides per 
100,000 persons in 2011. Similar to nonfatal violent crime, 
homicide rates for persons age 65 or older were consistently 
lower than all other age groups across this period.

Similar to the overall decline in homicide, the firearm homicide 
rate for the elderly population decreased by 41% from 1993 to 
2011 (figure 5). Persons ages 25 to 49 and ages 50 to 64 also 
experienced a 41% decline in homicide. The firearm homicide rate 
for the elderly declined from about 1.4 per 100,000 persons age 
65 or older in 1993 to 0.8 per 100,000 in 2011. Since 2003, the 
rates of firearm homicide increased for the elderly population 
(up 9%) and for persons ages 50 to 64 (up 1%). However, the 
elderly continued to have relatively low rates overall.

From 1993 to 2011, the rates of nonfirearm homicide decreased 
for all age groups. The rates for the elderly declined by 46%, 
compared to a decline of 51% for persons ages 12 to 24, 44% for 
persons ages 25 to 49, and 28% for persons ages 50 to 64 (figure 
6). The rate for the elderly declined from about 2.2 per 100,000 
in 1993 to 1.2 per 100,000 in 2011. 

*******************************************
Property crime committed against the elderly 
decreased by 48% from 1994 to 2013
*******************************************

Similar to violent crime, the rate of property crime for all age 
groups declined from 1994 to 2013 (figure 7). During this 
period, property crime decreased by 48% for the elderly, 
compared to declines of 55% for persons ages 12 to 24, 60% for 
persons ages 25 to 49, and 52% for persons ages 50 to 64. The 
elderly rate declined from about 141.0 victimizations per 1,000 
households in 1994 to 73.9 per 1,000 households in 2013. The 
rates for the elderly were lower than all other age groups 
across this period. Property crime committed against the elderly 
declined by 50% from 2003 to 2013. 

*******************************************
Elderly victims of violent and property 
crimes most often lived in urban areas
*******************************************

Elderly victims of violent and property crimes most often 
resided in urban areas. In 2003–13, elderly persons living in 
urban areas experienced violent crime at a rate of 5.1 per 1,000 
persons age 65 or older, while elderly persons living in 
suburban (3.2 per 1,000) and rural (2.8 per 1,000) areas 
experienced violent crime at lower rates (table 3). Similarly, 
elderly victims living in urban areas had a higher rate of 
property crime (88.7 per 1,000 households) compared to those 
living in suburban areas (65.2 per 1,000 households) and rural 
areas (66.6 per 1,000 households) (table 4). 

In 2003–13, about 59% of nonfatal violent crime against persons 
age 65 or older occurred at or near their homes, 6% occurred at 
or near a friend, neighbor, or relative’s home, and about 35% 
occurred at other locations, including commercial places, 
parking lots or garages, schools, open areas, and public 
transportation (table 5). A greater percentage of victimization 
against the elderly compared to all other age groups occurred at 
or near their homes. 

****************************************************************

*******************************************
About 2.1 million elderly persons were 
victims of identity theft in 2012
*******************************************


Identity theft victims are defined as persons age 16 or older 
who experienced one or more of the following incidents:

* Unauthorized use or attempted use of an existing account, such 
as credit or debit card, checking, savings, telephone, online, 
or insurance account (referred to as fraud or misuse of an 
existing account).

* Unauthorized use or attempted use of personal information to 
open a new account, such as a credit or debit card, telephone, 
checking, savings, loan, or mortgage account (referred to as 
fraud or misuse of a new account).

* Misuse of personal information for a fraudulent purpose, such 
as getting medical care, a job, or government benefits; renting 
an apartment or house; or providing false information to law 
enforcement when charged with a crime or traffic violation 
(referred to as fraud or misuse of personal information). 

Approximately 2.1 million persons age 65 or older (5%) were 
victims of one or more incidents of identity theft in 2012 
(table 6). Among elderly identity theft victims, existing credit 
card (3.2%) or bank accounts (1.4%) were the most common types 
of misused information. This distribution was similar across age 
groups. Generally, persons age 65 or older experienced more 
incidents of identity theft (5.0%) than persons ages 16 to 24 
(3.8%), but fewer than persons ages 25 to 49 (7.9%) and ages 50 
to 64 (7.8%).

****************************************************************

*******************************************
Domestic violence was a smaller percentage 
of violent crimes committed against elderly 
persons than against persons ages 25 to 49 
and ages 50 to 64
*******************************************

From 2003–13, the elderly (49%) were equally likely to know 
their offenders as persons ages 25 to 49 and ages 50 to 64, but 
were less likely than persons ages 12 to 24 (57%) (table 7). 
About 43% of violent victimizations against the elderly were 
committed by strangers. 

A smaller percentage of violent crimes committed against persons 
age 65 or older (14%) were crimes of domestic violence, compared 
to persons ages 25 to 49 (26%) and ages 50 to 64 (20%). Domestic 
violence includes rape, sexual assault, robbery, and aggravated 
and simple assault committed by intimate partners, immediate 
family members, or other relatives. As with any source of 
information, there are limitations with the current data that 
should be recognized. Because the nature of the victim–offender 
relationship is defined by the victim, the characteristics of 
intimate partner violence in this report may differ based on how 
the respondent perceived their relationship with the offender. 
To some victims, intimate relationships with offenders may 
be primarily restricted to current or former boyfriends or 
girlfriends. Others may describe those offenders as friends or 
acquaintances rather than boyfriends or girlfriends. 

While 43% of violent crimes against the elderly were committed 
by a stranger, the elderly accounted for 2% of all stranger 
crime (table 8). The majority of stranger crime was committed 
against persons ages 12 to 24 (37%) and persons ages 25 to 49 
(48%). From 2003–13, the percentage of victimizations that 
involved an intimate partner was lower for the elderly (1%) than 
for persons ages 12 to 24 (28%) and persons ages 25 to 49 (62%), 
and lower than persons ages 50 to 64 (8%). The percentage of 
victimizations committed by immediate family members was lower 
for the elderly (2%) compared to all other age groups. Elderly 
victims accounted for 2.1% of violent crime, 2.4% of crime 
committed by strangers, and 1.4% of domestic violence that 
occurred each year.

Single elderly persons living without children had higher rates 
of victimization compared to married elderly persons living 
without childrenIn 2003–13, the rate of violent victimizations 
against elderly males (4.2 per 1,000 males age 65 or older) was 
slightly higher than the rate for elderly females (3.2 per 1,000 
females) (table 9). There were no statistically significant 
differences in rates of violent crime among the elderly by race.

Among the elderly population and other age groups, rates of 
violent victimization varied by the victim’s marital status. 
Persons age 65 or older who were married (2.6 per 1,000 persons) 
or widowed (2.3 per 1,000 persons) were the least likely to be 
victims of violent crime. Elderly persons who were separated 
(19.6 per 1,000 persons) or divorced (10.8 per 1,000 persons) 
were the most likely to be victimized. Since the NCVS reflects a 
respondent’s marital status at the time of the interview, it is 
not possible to determine whether a person was separated or 
divorced at the time of the victimization or whether separation 
or divorce followed the violence. 

Single elderly victims living without children (5.2 
victimizations per 1,000 persons) were victimized at higher 
rates than married elderly victims living without children (2.4 
per 1,000).

Elderly persons who rented their living quarters had more than 
double the rate of violent crime (7.3 victimizations per 1,000 
persons) than elderly persons who either owned or were buying 
their home (3.0 victimizations per 1,000). 

****************************************************************
*******************************************
There were no statistically significant differences between 
violent crime rates for elderly persons with a disability and 
elderly persons without a disability

The NCVS defines disability as the product of interactions among 
individual’s bodies; their physical, emotional, and mental 
health; and the physical and social environment in which they 
live, work, or play. Disability exists where this interaction 
results in limitations of activities and restrictions to full 
participation at school, work, home, or in the community. 
Disabilities are classified according to six limitations: 
hearing, vision, cognitive, ambulatory, self-care, and 
independent living.
Over the 5-year period from 2008 to 2012, persons age 65 or 
older who had disabilities experienced 284,040 nonfatal violent 
crimes (table 10). However, there were no differences in the 
rate of violence for persons age 65 or older with a disability 
compared to persons age 65 or older without a disability.
****************************************************************

*******************************************
Elderly persons who were not employed 
were more likely to experience violent 
nd property crime victimization than 
elderly persons who were employed 
*******************************************

Employment status affects both nonfatal violent and property 
crime rates for persons age 65 or older. For both types of 
crime, persons who were not employed were more likely to be 
victimized than employed persons. In 2003–13, the rate of 
violent crime against elderly persons who were not employed or 
were retired (2.8 per 1,000) was 9 times higher than the rate 
for elderly persons who were employed (0.3 per 1,000) (table 
11). The rate of property crime against persons age 65 or older 
who were not employed or were retired (53.5 per 1,000 persons) 
was 12 times higher than the rate for persons age 65 
or older who were employed (4.3 per 1,000). 

*******************************************
Elderly violent crime victims were as 
likely to encounter a weapon as persons 
of other ages
*******************************************

Though the elderly were victimized at a lower rate, when 
victimized they were as likely to encounter a weapon and a 
firearm as persons of other ages. About 1 in 5 (20%) violent 
victimizations against the elderly involved a weapon (i.e., a 
firearm, knife, or other object) (table 12). A firearm was used 
in about 8% of violent crimes against elderly victims. Knives 
were used in about 4% of violent victimizations against persons 
65 or older, while about 6% involved other types of weapons.

*******************************************
Of the elderly who were injured during 
violent crime incidents, most reported 
bruises or cuts
*******************************************

A smaller percentage of elderly victims suffered an injury 
(18%), compared to younger victims ages 12 to 24 (30%) and ages 
25 to 49 (25%) (table 13).  Among the elderly who were injured, 
most reported bruises or cuts. Approximately 45% of elderly 
victims who were injured received some type of treatment. Of 
those treated, about 55% of persons age 65 or older received 
treatment in a doctor’s office, hospital emergency room, or 
overnight in a hospital. About 45% of injured elderly victims 
were treated at the scene of the crime, in their home, the home 
of a neighbor or friend, or other location. No statistically 
significant differences were detected among age groups in the 
percentage treated for injury or location of treatment.

*******************************************
The elderly reported 56% of violent crime 
and 38% of property crime to police
*******************************************

In 2003–13, the elderly (56%) were more likely to report violent 
crime to the police than persons ages 12 to 24 (38%) (table 14). 
There were no differences in reporting between the elderly and 
persons of other ages. A slightly higher percentage of elderly 
serious violent crime victims (64%) reported the incident to the 
police, compared to elderly victims of simple assault (52%). 
Persons age 65 or older reported about 38% of property crime to 
police.  In comparison to household burglary (50%) and motor 
vehicle theft (83%), theft (32%) was the property crime least 
likely to be reported to police by persons age 65 or older. This 
was also true for the other age groups.

*******************************************
About 21% of elderly victims of serious violent crime sought 
assistance from victim service agencies
*******************************************

Victim service agencies are publicly or privately funded 
organizations that provide victims with support and services to 
aid their physical and emotional recovery, offer protection from 
future victimizations, guide them through the criminal justice 
system process, and assist them in obtaining restitution. 
Similar to other age groups, about 1 in 10 (11%) elderly violent 
crime victims received assistance from victim service agencies 
(table 15). Serious violent crime victims age 65 or older 
received more assistance (21%), compared to persons ages 12 to 
24 (10%) and ages 50 to 64 (10%) and slightly more assistance 
than persons ages 25 to 49 (13%).

************
Methodology
*************

Estimates in this report are based primarily on data from the 
Bureau of Justice Statistics’ (BJS) National Crime Victimization 
Survey (NCVS), including data from the Identity Theft Supplement 
(ITS). Additional data come from the Centers for Disease Control 
and Prevention’s (CDC) Web-based Injury Statistics Query and 
Reporting System (WISQARS).

Survey coverage
******************

The NCVS is an annual data collection conducted by the U.S. 
Census Bureau for BJS. The NCVS is a self-report survey in which 
interviewed persons are asked about the number and 
characteristics of victimizations experienced during the 
prior 6 months. The NCVS collects information on nonfatal 
personal crimes (rape or sexual assault, robbery, aggravated and 
simple assault, and personal larceny) and household property 
crimes (burglary, motor vehicle theft, and other theft) both 
reported and not reported to police. In addition to providing 
annual level and change estimates on criminal victimization, the 
NCVS is the primary source of information on the nature of 
criminal victimization incidents.

Survey respondents provide information about themselves (e.g., 
age, sex, race and Hispanic origin, marital status, education 
level, and income) and whether they experienced a victimization. 
For each victimization incident, information is collected about 
the offender (e.g., age, sex, race and Hispanic origin, and 
victim–offender relationship), characteristics of the crime 
(including time and place of occurrence, use of weapons, nature 
of injury, and economic consequences), whether the crime was 
reported to police, reasons the crime was or was not reported, 
and experiences with the criminal justice system.

The NCVS is administered to persons age 12 or older from a 
nationally representative sample of households in the United 
States. The NCVS defines a household as a group of members who 
all reside at a sampled address. Persons are considered 
household members when the sampled address is their usual 
place of residence at the time of the interview and when they 
have no usual place of residence elsewhere. Once selected, 
households remain in the sample for 3 years, and eligible 
persons in these households are interviewed every 6 months 
either in person or over the phone for a total of seven 
interviews. 

Generally, all first interviews are conducted in person. New 
households rotate into the sample on an ongoing basis to replace 
outgoing households that have been in the sample for the 3-year 
period. The sample includes persons living in group quarters, 
such as dormitories, rooming houses, and religious group 
dwellings, and excludes persons living in military barracks 
and institutional settings, such as correctional or hospital 
facilities, and persons who are homeless. (For more information, 
see the Survey Methodology for Criminal Victimization in the 
United States, 2008, NCJ 231173, BJS web, May 2011.)

Limitations of the estimates
*****************************

The NCVS was designed to measure the incidence of criminal 
victimization against the U.S. civilian household population, 
excluding persons who live in institutions and the homeless. In 
this report, institutions refer to adult correctional 
facilities, juvenile facilities, nursing facilities or skilled 
nursing facilities, in-patient hospice facilities, residential 
schools for people with disabilities, and hospitals with 
patients who have no usual home elsewhere. The measures of crime 
against persons age 65 or older cover only elderly persons who 
are living among the general population in household settings. 
Subsequently, there is some coverage error in using just the 
noninstitutionalized population. For example, according to the 
U.S. Census, about 3.1% of the elderly population were living in 
nursing homes in 2010. Because persons in these facilities would 
not be covered in the NCVS, estimates of violence against these 
persons are not counted. The lack of information from the 
institutions will result in an undercount of violence 
against persons age 65 or older. Additionally, some care should 
be taken when comparing victimization rates within the elderly 
population. Data from the U.S. Census Bureau indicate that an 
estimated 0.9% of the U.S. population ages 65 to 74 lived in a 
nursing home in 2010, compared to 3.2% of the population ages 75 
to 84 and 11.2% of the population age 85 or older.

Weighting adjustments for 
estimating personal victimization
*****************************************

In 2013, 90,630 households and about 160,040 persons age 12 or 
older were interviewed for the NCVS. Each household was 
interviewed twice during the year. The response rate was 84% for 
households and 88% for eligible persons. Victimizations that 
occurred outside of the United States were excluded from this 
report. In 2013, less than 1% of the unweighted victimizations 
occurred outside of the United States and were excluded from the 
analyses.

Estimates in this report use data primarily from the 1993 to 
2013 NCVS data files weighted to produce annual estimates for 
persons age 12 or older living in U.S. households. Because the 
NCVS relies on a sample rather than a census of the entire U.S. 
population, weights are designed to inflate sample point 
estimates to known population totals and to compensate for 
survey nonresponse and other aspects of the sample design.

The NCVS data files include both household and person weights. 
The household weight is commonly used to calculate estimates of 
property crimes, such as motor vehicle theft or burglary, which 
are identified with the household. Person weights provide an 
estimate of the population represented by each person in the 
sample. Person weights are most frequently used to compute 
estimates of crime victimizations of persons in the total 
population. After proper adjustment, both household and person 
weights are also used to form the denominator in calculations of 
crime rates.

The victimization weights used in this analysis account for the 
number of persons present during an incident and for repeat 
victims of series incidents. The weight counts series incidents 
as the actual number of incidents reported by the victim, up to 
a maximum of 10 incidents. Series victimizations are 
victimizations that are similar in type but occur with such 
frequency that a victim is unable to recall each individual 
event or to describe each event in detail. Survey procedures 
allow NCVS interviewers to identify and classify these similar 
victimizations as series victimizations and collect detailed 
information on only the most recent incident in the series. In 
2013, about 1% of all victimizations and 4% of all violent 
victimizations were series incidents. Weighting series incidents 
as the number of incidents up to a maximum of 10 produces more 
reliable estimates of crime levels, while the cap at 10 
minimizes the effect of extreme outliers on the rates. 
Additional information on the series enumeration is detailed in 
Methods for Counting High Frequency Repeat Victimizations in the 
National Crime Victimization Survey (NCJ 237308, BJS website) 
April 2012.

Standard error computations
*******************************

When national estimates are derived from a sample, as with the 
NCVS, caution must be taken when comparing one estimate to 
another estimate or when comparing estimates over time. Although 
one estimate may be larger than another, estimates based on a 
sample have some degree of sampling error. The sampling error of 
an estimate depends on several factors, including the amount of 
variation in the responses, and the size of the sample. When the 
sampling error around an estimate is taken into account, the 
estimates that appear different may not be statistically 
different. 

One measure of the sampling error associated with an estimate is 
the standard error. The standard error can vary from one 
estimate to the next. Generally, an estimate with a small 
standard error provides a more reliable approximation of the 
true value than an estimate with a large standard error. 
Estimates with relatively large standard errors are associated 
with less precision and reliability and should be interpreted 
with caution. 

To generate standard errors around numbers and estimates from 
the NCVS, the Census Bureau produced generalized variance 
function (GVF) parameters for BJS. The GVFs take into account 
aspects of the NCVS complex sample design and represent the 
curve fitted to a selection of individual standard errors based 
on the Jackknife Repeated Replication technique. The GVF 
parameters were used to generate standard errors for each point 
estimate (i.e., counts, percentages, and rates) in this report. 

BJS conducted tests to determine whether differences in 
estimated numbers and percentages in this report were 
statistically significant once sampling error was taken into 
account. Using statistical programs developed specifically for 
the NCVS, all comparisons in the text were tested for 
significance. The Student’s t-statistic was the primary test 
procedure, which tests the difference between two sample 
estimates.

Data users can use the estimates and the standard errors of the 
estimates provided in this report to generate a confidence 
interval around the estimate as a measure of the margin of 
error. The following example illustrates how standard errors can 
be used to generate confidence intervals:

* In 2003–13, according to the NCVS, the rate of nonfatal 
violent crime against persons age 65 or older was 3.6 per 1,000 
(see table 2). Using the GVFs, it was determined that the 
estimate has a standard error of 0.3 (see appendix 
table 1). A confidence interval around the estimate was 
generated by multiplying +/- 1.96 (the t-score of a normal, two-
tailed distribution that excludes 2.5% at either end of the 
distribution). Therefore, the 95% confidence interval around the 
3.6 estimate from 2013 is 3.6 +/- (0.3 X 1.96) or (3.0 to 4.3). 
In other words, if different samples using the same procedure 
were taken from the U.S. population in 2003–13, 95% of the time 
the rate of nonfatal violent crime against persons age 65 or 
older would be between 3.0 and 4.3 per 1,000 persons age 65 or 
older.

In this report, BJS also calculated a coefficient of variation 
(CV) for all estimates, representing the ratio of the standard 
error to the estimate. CVs provide a measure of reliability and 
a means to compare the precision of estimates across measures 
with differing levels or metrics. In cases where the CV was 
greater than 50%, or the unweighted sample had 10 or fewer 
cases, the estimate was noted with a “!” symbol. (Interpret data 
with caution. Estimate based on 10 or fewer sample cases, or the 
coefficient of variation is greater than 50%.)

Data Collection for 
Disability Statistics 
************************

In 2007, the NCVS adopted questions from the U.S. Census 
Bureau’s American Community Survey (ACS) to measure the rate of 
victimization against people with disabilities. The NCVS does 
not identify persons in the general population with 
disabilities. The ACS Subcommittee on Disability Questions 
developed the disability questions based on questions used in 
the 2000 Decennial Census and earlier versions of the ACS. The 
questions identify persons who may require assistance to 
maintain their independence, be at risk for discrimination, or 
lack opportunities available to the general population 
because of limitations related to a prolonged (6 months or 
longer) sensory, physical, mental, or emotional condition. More 
information about the ACS and the disability questions is 
available on the U.S. Census Bureau website at 
http://www.census.gov/acs/www/. 

Changes to the disability questions 
in the NCVS and ACS in 2008
************************************

In 2008, the U.S. Census Bureau changed some of the disability 
questions on the ACS. The question about sensory disability was 
separated into two questions about blindness and deafness, and 
the questions about physical disability were asked only about 
serious difficulty walking or climbing stairs. Also, questions 
on employment disability and going outside of the home were 
eliminated in 2008. Census Bureau analysis of 2007 and 2008 ACS 
disability data revealed significant conceptual and measurement 
differences between the 2007 and 2008 disability questions. The 
Census Bureau concluded that data users should not compare the 
2007 estimates of the population with disabilities and those of 
later years. Because the 2007 and 2008 NCVS disability questions 
mirrored the ACS, estimates of victimization of people with 
disabilities from the 2007 and 2008 NCVS should not be compared. 
As a result, the 2007 disability data are not presented in this 
report. Further explanation about incomparability of the 2007 
and 2008 ACS disability data is available at 
http://www.census.gov/acs/www/Downloads/methodology/content_test
/P4_Disability.pdf.

Definitions of disability types
********************************

Disabilities are classified according to six limitations: 
hearing, vision, cognitive, ambulatory, self-care, and 
independent living.

* Hearing limitation entails deafness or serious difficulty 
hearing.

* Vision limitation is blindness or serious difficulty seeing, 
even when
wearing glasses.

* Cognitive limitation includes serious difficulty in 
concentrating, remembering, or making decisions because of a 
physical, mental, or emotional condition.

* Ambulatory limitation is difficulty walking or climbing 
stairs.

* Self-care limitation is a condition that causes difficulty 
dressing or bathing.

* Independent living limitation is a physical, mental, or 
emotional condition that impedes doing errands alone, such as 
visiting a doctor or shopping.

Data Collection for Identity 
Theft Statistics
****************************

From January 1, 2012, through June 30, 2012, the Identity Theft 
Supplement (ITS) was administered at the end of the NCVS 
interview to persons age 16 or older in sampled NCVS households. 
Proxy responders and those who completed the NCVS interview in a 
language other than English were not eligible to receive the 
ITS. All NCVS and ITS interviews were conducted in a computer-
assisted personal interviewing (CAPI) environment. Interviews 
were conducted by telephone or by personal visit.  A final 
sample size of 69,814 of the original NCVS-eligible respondents 
completed the ITS questionnaire, resulting in a response rate of 
91.9%. The combined overall NCVS-ITS unit response rate 
for NCVS households, NCVS persons, and ITS persons was 68.2%. 
Because of the level of nonresponse, a bias analysis was 
conducted. To the extent that those who responded to the survey 
and those who did not differ in important ways, there is 
potential for bias in estimates from the survey data. However, 
the result of the nonresponse bias analysis suggested that there 
was little or no bias of substantive importance due to 
nonresponse in the ITS estimates.

The ITS collected individual data on the prevalence of and 
victim response to the attempted or successful misuse of an 
existing account, misuse of personal information to open a new 
account, or misuse of personal information for other fraudulent 
purposes. Respondents were asked whether they had experienced 
any of these types of misuse during the 12 months prior to the 
interview. For example, persons interviewed in July 2012 were 
asked about identity theft incidents that occurred between July 
2011 and June 2012. To simplify the discussion of the findings, 
this report refers to all identity theft experienced during the 
12 months prior to the interviews as occurring in 2012.

Persons who reported one or more incidents of identity theft 
during 2012 were then asked more detailed questions about the 
incident and response to the incident, such as how the identity 
theft was discovered; financial, credit, and other problems 
resulting from the incident; time spent resolving problems 
associated with the theft; and reporting to police and credit 
bureaus. For most sections of the survey instrument, victims who 
experienced more than one incident during the 12-month reference 
period were asked to think about only the most recent incident 
when answering questions. Victims who experienced multiple 
incidents of identity theft during the year were asked to report 
on the total financial losses suffered as a result of all 
incidents.

Both victims and nonvictims were also asked a series of 
questions about experiences with identity theft outside of the 
12-month reference period and about measures taken to avoid or 
minimize the risk of becoming an identity theft victim.

For more information on crimes against the elderly, see previous 
BJS publications: 

* Crimes Against Persons Age 65 or Older, 1992–1997, NCJ 176352, 
January 2000

* Crimes Against Persons Age 65 or Older, 1993–2002, NCJ 206154, 
January 2005

* Violent Crimes Against the Elderly Reported by Law Enforcement 
in Michigan, 2005–2009, NCJ 238546, June 2012


***************************************************************T
The Bureau of Justice Statistics of the U.S. Department of 
Justice is the principal federal agency responsible for 
measuring crime, criminal victimization, criminal offenders, 
victims of crime, correlates of crime, and the operation of 
criminal and civil justice systems at the federal, state, 
tribal, and local levels. BJS collects, analyzes, and 
disseminates reliable and valid statistics on crime and justice 
systems in the United States, supports improvements to state and 
local criminal justice information systems, and participates 
with national and international organizations to develop and 
recommend national standards for justice statistics. William J. 
Sabol is acting director.

This report was written by Rachel E. Morgan, Ph.D., and Britney 
J. Mason, BJS intern. Barbara A. Oudekerk, Ph.D., verified the 
report.

Jill Thomas and Lynne McConnell edited the report. Barbara Quinn 
and Tina Dorsey produced the report.

November 2014, NCJ 248339
***************************************************************

*****************************************************
Office of Justice Programs
Innovation * Partnerships * Safer Neighborhoods
www.ojp.usdoj.gov
*****************************************************

***********************
11/04/2014/JER/3:00pm revised 2:25pm
***********************
