U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Programs
Bureau of Justice Statistics

------------------------------------------------------

This file is text only without graphics and many of 
the tables. A Zip archive of the tables in this report 
inspreadsheet format (.csv) and the full report 
includingtables and graphics in .pdf format are 
available on BJS website at 
http://www.bjs.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbdetail&iid=5844

This reports is one in series. More recent editions 
may be available. To view a list of all reports in the 
series go to http://www.bjs.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbse&sid=65
------------------------------------------------------ 

Crime Against Persons with Disabilities, 2009–2014 - 
Statistical Tables

Erika Harrell, Ph.D., BJS Statistician

The rate of violent victimization against persons with 
disabilities (31.7 victimizations per 1,000 persons age 12 or 
older) was 2.5 times higher than the age-adjusted rate for 
persons without disabilities (12.5 per 1,000) in 2014 (figure 1). 
In every other year examined, the rate of violent victimization 
against persons with disabilities was at least twice the age-
adjusted rate for persons without disabilities. For both persons 
with and without disabilities, the rate of violent victimization 
increased from 2011 to 2012 and remained steady through 2014.

This report details the rates of nonfatal violent victimization 
against persons with and without disabilities, describes the 
types of disabilities, and compares victim characteristics. 
Nonfatal violent crimes include rape or sexual assault, robbery, 
aggravated assault, and simple assault. The findings are based on 
the Bureau of Justice Statistics’ (BJS) National Crime 
Victimization Survey (NCVS), a household survey that collects 
data on U.S. residents age 12 or older (excluding those living in 
institutions).

The NCVS adopted survey questions from the U.S. Census Bureau’s 
American Community Survey (ACS) to identify crime victims with 
disabilities. The NCVS defines disability as the product of 
interactions among individuals’ bodies; their physical, 
emotional, and mental health; and the physical and social 
environment in which they live, work, or play. A disability 
exists where this interaction results in limitations of 
activities and restrictions to full participation at school, at 
work, at home, or in the community. Disabilities are classified 
according to six limitations: hearing, vision, cognitive, 
ambulatory, self-care, and independent living.

Data from the ACS were used to estimate age-adjusted victimization 
rates for persons without disabilities. Unless noted, all rates 
for persons without disabilities are age-adjusted. Victimization 
rates were generated by using the ACS population estimates for 
persons with disabilities. See appendix table 18. The Methodology 
further details data sources, computational procedures, and data 
limitations.

*****************
List of tables
*****************

Table 1. Rate of violent victimization and average annual number 
of persons, by victim's disability status and age, 2010–2014

Table 2. Rate of violent victimization against persons with and 
without disabilities, by type of crime, 2010–2014

Table 3. Rate of violent victimization against persons with and 
without disabilities, by victim characteristics, 2010–2014

Table 4. Rate of violent victimization against persons with 
disabilities, by disability type and type of crime, 2010–2014

Table 5. Rate of violent victimization against persons with 
disabilities, by disability type and sex, 2010–2014

Table 6. Percent of violent crime against persons with 
disabilities, by type of crime and number of disability types,
2010–2014

Table 7. Rate of violent victimization, by number of disability 
types and type of crime, 2010–2014

Table 8. Victim-offender relationship, by victim's disability 
status, 2010–2014

Table 9. Time violent crime occurred, by victim's disability 
status, 2010–2014

Table 10. Percent of violent crime reported to police, by 
victim’s disability status and disability type, 2010–2014

Table 11. Person who notified police of violent crime, by 
victim's disability status, 2010–2014

Table 12. Reasons for not reporting violent crime to police, by 
victim's disability status, 2010–2014

Table 13. Percent of violent victimizations in which assistance 
from a nonpolice victim services agency was received, by victim's 
disability status, 2010–2014

*************************
List of appendix tables
*************************

Appendix table 1. Rates and standard errors for figure 1:
Rate of violent victimization, by disability status, 2009–2014

Appendix table 2. Standard errors for table 1: Rate of violent 
victimization and average annual number of persons, by victim's 
disability status and age, 2010–2014

Appendix table 3. Standard errors for table 2: Rate of violent 
victimization against persons with and without disabilities, by 
type of crime, 2010–2014

Appendix table 4. Standard errors for table 3: Rate of violent 
victimization against persons with and without disabilities, by 
victim characteristics, 2010–2014

Appendix table 5. Standard errors for table 4: Rate of violent 
victimization against persons with disabilities, by disability 
type and type of crime, 2010–2014

Appendix table 6. Standard errors for table 5: Rate of violent 
victimization against persons with disabilities, by disability 
type and sex, 2010–2014

Appendix table 7. Standard errors for table 6: Percent of violent 
crime against persons with disabilities, by type of crime and 
number of disability types, 2010–2014

Appendix table 8. Standard errors for table 7: Rate of violent 
victimization, by number of disability types and type of crime, 
2010–2014

Appendix table 9. Standard errors for table 8: Victim-offender 
relationship, by victim's disability status, 2010–2014

Appendix table 10. Standard errors for table 9: Time violent 
crime occurred, by victim's disability status, 2010–2014

Appendix table 11. Standard errors for table 10: Percent of 
violent crime reported to police, by victim’s disability status 
and disability type, 2010–2014

Appendix table 12. Standard errors for table 11: Person who 
notified police of violent crime, by victim's disability status, 
2010–2014

Appendix table 13. Standard errors for table 12: Reasons for not 
reporting violent crime to police, by victim's disability status, 
2010–2014

Appendix table 14. Standard errors for table 13: Percent of 
violent victimizations in which assistance from a nonpolice 
victim services agency was received, by victim's disability 
status, 2010–2014

Appendix table 15. Unadjusted rates and standard errors of 
violent victimization against persons without disabilities, 2009–
2014

Appendix table 16. Unadjusted rates and standard errors for 
violent victimization against persons without disabilities, by 
type of crime, 2010–2014

Appendix table 17. Unadjusted rates and standard errors for 
violent victimization against persons without disabilities, by 
victim characteristics, 2010–2014

Appendix table 18. U.S. population, according to the U.S. Census 
Bureau's American Community Survey Public Use Microdata Sample 
data, by disability status and demographic characteristics, 2010–
2014

********************************
Violent crime by victim’s age 
and disability status
*******************************

* In 2010-14, for each age group measured except persons age 65 
or older, the rate of violent victimization against persons with 
disabilities was at least double the rate for those without 
disabilities (table 1). Among persons age 65 or older, there was 
no statistically significant difference between the rates of 
violent victimization by disability status.

* Among those with disabilities, persons ages 12 to 15 had a 
higher rate of violent victimization than all other age groups, 
except persons ages 16 to 19. There was no statistically 
significant difference between the rates of violent victimization 
against persons with disabilities ages 12 to 15 and ages 16 to 
19.

*********************************************************
******************************************
Disability population in the United States
******************************************

From 2010 to 2014, about 14% of the U.S. population age 12 or 
older living outside of institutions had a disability, according 
to the American Community Survey (ACS). Characteristics of the 
populations with and without disabilities are compared in 
appendix table 18. In 2010-14, among noninstitutionalized persons 
with disabilities, 47% were male and 53% were female. Whites 
accounted for about 70% of the population with disabilities, 
blacks accounted for 14%, and persons of two or more races 
accounted for 2%. An estimated 11% were Hispanic. About 42% of 
the population with disabilities was age 65 or older, compared to 
about 12% of the population without disabilities. The 2010-14 ACS 
population estimates of persons by disability status were 
generated from Public Use Microdata Sample (PUMS) data.

*******************************************
Crime Victims with Disabilities Awareness
Act (Public Law 105-301), 1998
*******************************************

The Crime Victims with Disabilities Awareness Act mandates that 
the National Crime Victimization Survey (NCVS) include statistics 
on crimes against people with disabilities and the 
characteristics of these victims. The act was designed “to 
increase public awareness of the plight of victims of crime with 
developmental disabilities, to collect data to measure the 
magnitude of the problem, and to develop strategies to address 
the safety and justice needs of victims of crime with 
developmental disabilities.” Section 5 of the act directed the 
Department of Justice to include statistics relating to “the 
nature of crimes against people with developmental disabilities; 
and the specific characteristics of the victims of those crimes” 
in the NCVS. This report is a part of the Bureau of Justice 
Statistics’ (BJS) series on crime against people with 
disabilities. More information can be found on the BJS website.

*******************************
The use of age-adjusted rates
*******************************

The differences in age distributions between the persons with and 
without disabilities must be taken into account when making 
direct comparisons of the violent victimization rate between the 
two populations. The age distribution of persons with 
disabilities differs considerably from that of persons without 
disabilities, and violent crime victimization rates vary 
significantly with age.

According to the U.S. Census Bureau’s American Community Survey, 
persons with disabilities are generally older than persons 
without disabilities. For example, in 2010-14, about 42% of 
persons with disabilities were age 65 or older, compared to 12% 
of persons without disabilities (appendix table 18). The age 
adjustment standardizes the rate of violence against persons 
without disabilities to show what the rate would be if persons 
without disabilities had the same age distribution as persons 
with disabilities.

*********************************************************

********************************
Violent crime by type of crime
********************************

* The rate of violent victimization against persons with 
disabilities (30.7 per 1,000) was more than twice the rate for 
persons without disabilities (12.8 per 1,000) in
2010-14 (table 2).

* The rate of serious violent crime (rape or sexual assault, 
robbery, and aggravated assault) for persons with disabilities 
(12.7 per 1,000) was more than three times the rate for persons 
without disabilities (3.9 per 1,000).

* The rate of simple assault against persons with disabilities 
(18.0 per 1,000) was more than twice the rate for persons without 
disabilities (8.8 per 1,000).

* Serious violent crime accounted for a greater percentage of 
violence against persons with disabilities (41%) than violence 
against persons without disabilities (31%) (not shown).

* One in 5 violent crime victims with disabilities believed they 
were targeted due to their disability (not shown). 

************************************
Violent crime by sex and race 
and Hispanic origin 
************************************

Sex
***


* For both males and females in 2010-14, the rate of violent 
victimization was higher for persons with disabilities than for 
those without disabilities (table 3).

* The rate of violent victimization against males with 
disabilities was 31.2 per 1,000, compared to 14.8 per 1,000 for 
males without disabilities.

* For females with disabilities, the rate of violent 
victimization was 30.3 per 1,000, compared to 11.0 per 1,000 
females without disabilities.

* Among persons with disabilities, no statistically significant 
difference by sex was found in the rate of violent victimization. 
However, among those without disabilities, males (14.8 per 1,000) 
had a higher rate than females (11.0 per 1,000).

Race and Hispanic origin
**************************

* For each racial and ethnic group measured, persons with 
disabilities had higher violent victimization rates than persons 
without disabilities in 2010-14.

* Among the racial groups examined, persons of two or more races 
had the highest rates of violent victimization among persons with 
disabilities (101.4 per 1,000) and without disabilities (30.4 per 
1,000).

* There was no statistically significant difference between the 
victimization rates of whites (29.7 per 1,000), blacks (28.8 per 
1,000), Hispanics (28.6 per 1,000), and persons of other races 
(28.0 per 1,000) with disabilities.

* Among persons without disabilities, blacks (18.8 per 1,000) had 
a higher age-adjusted rate of violent victimization than whites 
(12.1 per 1,000), Hispanics (13.0 per 1,000), and persons of 
other races (7.1 per 1,000).

*********************
Types of disability
*********************

* In 2010-14, persons with cognitive disabilities had the highest 
rates of total violent crime (56.6 per 1,000), serious violent 
crime (24.0 per 1,000), and simple assault (32.6 per 1,000) among 
the disability types measured (table 4).

* Persons with hearing disabilities (15.5 per 1,000) had the 
lowest rates of total violent victimization among the disability 
types examined.

* Persons with vision, ambulatory, self-care, and independent 
living disabilities had similar rates of serious violent crime 
and simple assault.

* Among both males (55.1 per 1,000) and females (58.0 per 1,000), 
those with cognitive disabilities had the highest rate of total 
violent victimization among the disability types measured (table 
5).

* Males and females had similar rates of total violent 
victimization in every disability type measured except vision 
disabilities.

* Among those with vision disabilities, males (22.8 per 1,000) 
had a lower rate of total violent victimization than females 
(31.9 per 1,000).

***************************************************************
**************************************
Disability types used in this report
*************************************

* Hearing limitation entails deafness or serious difficulty 
hearing.

* Vision limitation is blindness or serious difficulty seeing, 
even when wearing glasses.

* Cognitive limitation includes serious difficulty in 
concentrating, remembering, or making decisions because of a 
physical, mental, or emotional condition.

* Ambulatory limitation is difficulty walking or climbing stairs.

* Self-care limitation is a condition that causes difficulty 
dressing or bathing.

* Independent living limitation is a physical, mental, or 
emotional condition that impedes doing errands alone, such as 
visiting a doctor or shopping.

***************************************************************

********************************************
Violent crime by number of disability types
*********************************************

* Fifty-three percent of violence against persons with 
disabilities occurred against those with multiple disability 
types (table 6).

* An estimated 69% of rapes or sexual assaults against persons 
with disabilities were committed against those with multiple 
disability types, the highest percentage among the crime types 
examined.

* There was no statistically significant difference between the 
rates of total violent victimization against persons with a 
single disability type (28.6 per 1,000) and persons with multiple 
disability types (32.8 per 1,000) (table 7).

* The rate of serious violence against persons with a single 
disability type (11.1 per 1,000) was lower than the rate for 
persons with multiple disability types (14.4 per 1,000).

* Persons with a single disability type (1.1 per 1,000) had a 
lower rate of rape or sexual assault than those with multiple 
disability types (2.4 per 1,000).

* Rates of robbery, aggravated assault, and simple assault did 
not differ significantly by the number of disability types.

******************************
Victim-offender relationship
******************************

* A higher percentage of violence against persons with 
disabilities (40%) was committed by persons the victim knew well 
or who were casual acquaintances than against persons without 
disabilities (32%) (table 8).

* A lower percentage of total violence against persons with 
disabilities (30%) was committed by strangers than against 
persons without disabilities (39%) in 2010-14.

* There was no statistically significant difference in the 
percentage of total violence committed by intimate partners for 
victims with (14%) and without disabilities (13%).

* Other relatives (including parents, children, and other 
relatives) accounted for a higher percentage of total violence 
against persons with disabilities (11%) than persons without 
disabilities (7%).

***************
Time of crime
***************

* For 2010–14, the rates of violent victimization against persons 
with disabilities that occurred in the daytime (after 6 a.m. to 6 
p.m.) and nighttime (after 6 p.m. to 6 a.m.) were higher than 
those found for persons without disabilities (not shown).

* For violent crime victims with and without disabilities in 
2010-14, a higher percentage of the total violence occurred 
during the daytime than during the nighttime (table 9).

* Persons with disabilities (59%) experienced a higher percentage 
of total violence during the daytime than persons without 
disabilities (53%).

* Persons with disabilities (36%) experienced a lower percentage 
of nighttime total violence than persons without disabilities 
(43%).

*******************
Police reporting
*******************

* There was no statistically significant difference in the 
percentages of total violent crime reported to police for victims 
with (47%) and without disabilities (47%) in 2010-
14 (table 10).

* The percentage of total violence reported to police did not 
vary by the number of disability types.

* Total violence against persons with ambulatory disabilities 
(51%) was more likely to be reported to police than violence 
against persons with vision (39%) or self-care (44%, 90% 
confidence level) disabilities.

* The majority of total violent crime against persons with
(62%) and without disabilities (61%) reported to the police was 
reported by the victim (table 11).

* A household member other than the victim reported 6% of 
violence against persons with disabilities to police, which was 
smaller than the percentage reported for persons without 
disabilities (10%).

* Victims with and without disabilities offered similar reasons 
for not reporting to police (table 12).

* Forty percent of violence against persons with disabilities was 
not reported to police because it was dealt with in another way.

* Twenty percent of unreported violence against persons with 
disabilities was not reported because it was not important enough 
to the victim. Twenty-two percent was not reported because the 
victim did not think the police would help.

*****************
Victim services
*****************

* In 2010-14, a greater percentage of violence against persons 
with disabilities (13%) involved receipt of assistance from a 
victim service agency than violence against persons without 
disabilities (8%) (table 13).

**************
Methodology
**************

Survey coverage
*****************

The National Crime Victimization Survey (NCVS) is an annual data 
collection conducted by the U.S. Census Bureau for the Bureau of 
Justice Statistics (BJS). The NCVS is a self-report survey in 
which interviewed persons are asked about the number and 
characteristics of victimizations they experienced during the 
prior 6 months. The NCVS collects information on nonfatal 
personal crimes (rape or sexual assault, robbery, aggravated 
assault, simple assault, and personal larceny) and household 
property crimes (burglary, motor vehicle theft, and other theft) 
both reported and not reported to police. In addition to 
providing annual level and change estimates on criminal 
victimization, the NCVS is the primary source of information on 
the nature of criminal victimization incidents.

Survey respondents provide information about themselves (e.g., 
age, sex, race and Hispanic origin, marital status, education 
level, and income) and whether they experienced a victimization. 
The NCVS collects information for each victimization incident 
about the offender as perceived by the victim (e.g., age, race 
and Hispanic origin, sex, and victim offender relationship), 
characteristics of the crime (including time and place of 
occurrence, use of weapons, nature of injury, and economic 
consequences), whether the crime was reported to police, reasons 
the crime was or was not reported, and experiences with the 
criminal justice system.

The NCVS is administered to persons age 12 or older from a 
nationally representative sample of households in the United 
States. The survey defines a household as a group of persons who 
all reside at a sampled address. Persons are considered household 
members when the sampled address is their usual place of 
residence at the time of the interview and when they have no 
usual place of residence elsewhere. Once selected, households 
remain in the sample for 3 years, and eligible persons in these 
households are interviewed every 6 months either in person or 
over the phone for a total of seven interviews.

Generally, all first interviews are conducted in person, with 
subsequent interviews conducted either in person or by phone. New 
households rotate into the sample on an ongoing basis to replace 
outgoing households that have been in the sample for a 3-year 
period. The sample includes persons living in group quarters 
(such as dormitories, rooming houses, and religious group 
dwellings) and excludes persons living in military barracks and 
institutional settings, (such as correctional or hospital 
facilities) and persons who are homeless.

In 2007, the NCVS adopted questions from the U.S. Census Bureau’s 
American Community Survey (ACS) to measure the rate of 
victimization against people with disabilities. The NCVS does not 
identify persons in the general population with disabilities. The 
ACS Subcommittee on Disability Questions developed the disability 
questions based on those used in the 2000 Decennial Census and 
earlier versions of the ACS. The questions identify persons who 
may require assistance to maintain their independence, be at risk 
for discrimination, or lack opportunities available to the 
general population because of limitations related to a prolonged
(i.e., 6 months or longer) sensory, physical, mental, or 
emotional condition. More information about the ACS and the 
disability questions is available on the U.S. Census Bureau’s 
website at 
https://www.census.gov/people/disability/methodology/acs.html.

Changes to the disability questions 
in the NCVS and ACS in 2008
************************************

In 2008, the U.S. Census Bureau changed some of the disability 
questions on the ACS. The question about sensory disability was 
separated into two questions about blindness and deafness, and 
the questions about physical disability asked only about serious 
difficulty walking or climbing stairs. Also, questions on 
employment disability and going outside of the home were 
eliminated in 2008. Analysis of 2007 and 2008 ACS disability data 
by the U.S. Census Bureau revealed significant conceptual and 
measurement differences between the 2007 and 2008 disability 
questions. The U.S. Census Bureau concluded that data users 
should not compare the 2007 estimates of the population with 
disabilities to those of later years. Because the 2007 and 2008 
NCVS disability questions mirrored the ACS disability questions, 
estimates of victimization of people with disabilities from the 
2007 and 2008 NCVS should not be compared. As a result, the
2007 disability data are not presented in this report. Further 
explanation about incomparability of the 2007 and 2008 ACS 
disability data is available at https://www.census.gov/people/
disability/files/2008ACS_disability.pdf.

Definitions of disability types
*********************************

Disabilities are classified according to six limitations: 
hearing, vision, cognitive, ambulatory, self-care, and 
independent living.

* Hearing limitation entails deafness or serious difficulty 
hearing.

* Vision limitation is blindness or serious difficulty seeing, 
even when wearing glasses.


* Cognitive limitation includes serious difficulty in 
concentrating, remembering, or making decisions because of a 
physical, mental, or emotional condition.

* Ambulatory limitation is difficulty walking or climbing stairs.

* Self-care limitation is a condition that causes difficulty 
dressing or bathing.

* Independent living limitation is a physical, mental, or 
emotional condition that impedes doing errands alone, such as 
visiting a doctor or shopping.

Disability questions included in the 
NCVS from 2009 through 2014
**************************************

Questions 169a through 173

169a. Are you deaf or do you have serious difficulty hearing?

169b. Are you blind or do you have serious difficulty seeing even 
when wearing glasses?

170a. Because of a physical, mental, or emotional condition, do 
you have serious difficulty--

* concentrating, remembering, or making decisions?

* walking or climbing stairs?

* dressing or bathing?

170b. Because of a physical, mental, or emotional condition, do 
you have difficulty doing errands alone, such as visiting a 
doctor’s office or shopping?

171. Is “Yes” marked in any of 169a-170b? (That is, has the 
respondent indicated that he/she has a health condition or 
disability?)

172. During the incident you just told me about, do you have 
reason to suspect you were victimized because of your health 
condition(s), impairment(s), or disability(ies)?

173. What health conditions, impairments, or disabilities do you 
believe caused you to be targeted for this incident?

Age limitation on independent living
**************************************

In the ACS, persons ages 12 to 14 are not asked about having an 
independent living disability and are, therefore, excluded in the 
populations with independent living disabilities. Even though 
crime victims ages 12 to 14 receive this question in the NCVS 
(question 170b), victims ages 12 to 14 who respond affirmatively 
are excluded from rates of violent victimization against persons 
with an independent living disability to match the age 
limitations for having an independent living disability in the 
ACS (age 15 or older). In this report, rates of violence against 
persons with an independent living disability are per 1,000 
persons age 15 or older, compared to rates per 1,000 persons age 
12 or older for other disability types. Also, violent crime 
victims ages 12 to 14 who report in the NCVS that they have an 
independent living disability and no other disability type are 
classified as not having a disability to be compatible with age 
limits on disability definitions in the ACS.

Limitations of the estimates
******************************

The NCVS was designed to measure the incidence of criminal 
victimization against the U.S. civilian household population, 
excluding persons who live in institutions and the homeless. 
Institutions include adult correctional facilities, juvenile 
facilities, nursing or skilled nursing facilities, inpatient 
hospice facilities, residential schools for people with 
disabilities, and hospitals with patients who have no usual home 
elsewhere. The measures of crime against persons with 
disabilities (as measured by the NCVS) cover only people with 
disabilities who are living among the general population in 
household settings. Subsequently, there is some coverage error in 
using just the noninstitutionalized population. For example, 
according to the ACS, about 95% of the 1.3 million people age 65 
or older living in institutions had disabilities in 2014 (not 
shown). Because persons in these facilities would not be covered 
in the NCVS, estimates of violence against these persons are not 
counted. The lack of information from the institutions will 
result in an undercount of violence against persons with 
disabilities.

Certain aspects of the NCVS design can also contribute to 
underestimating the level or type of violence against persons 
with disabilities. For example, the survey instruments, modes of 
interview, and interviewing protocols used in the NCVS may not be 
suited for interviewing people who have difficulty communicating, 
especially by telephone. Some people have disabilities that limit 
their verbal communication and use technology to enhance their 
ability to communicate, but many people do not have access to 
such technology.

Proxy interviews may also lead to an underestimate of violence 
against persons with disabilities. The survey requires direct 
interviews with eligible respondents but allows the use of proxy 
interviews with a caregiver or other eligible party in a limited 
set of circumstances. A proxy interview is allowed when a 
respondent is physically or mentally incapable of responding. The 
survey restrictions on proxy interviews were instituted because 
someone else may not know about the victimization experiences of 
the respondent, and because the person providing the information 
via proxy may be the perpetrator of the violence experienced by 
the respondent. Because proxy respondents may be more likely to 
omit crime incidents or may not know some details about reported 
incidents, the number or types of crimes against persons with 
disabilities may be underestimated.

In 2014, information from about 5% of violent crime incidents 
against persons with disabilities was obtained from proxy 
interviews. In addition, 62% of the reports of violent incidents 
against persons with disabilities obtained through proxy 
interviews were for simple assault, compared to about 57% of 
reports of violent incidents against persons with disabilities 
obtained through nonproxy interviews (not shown).

Public Use Microdata Sample data
***********************************

To generate populations by disability status for 2008 through 
2014, PUMS data from the U.S. Census Bureau’s ACS were used to 
calculate populations by disability status. The ACS PUMS dataset 
is a sample of population and housing unit records from the ACS. 
Usually, the PUMS files include only about two-thirds of the 
cases contained in the larger, complete confidential dataset. The 
ACS PUMS files include the actual responses collected in ACS 
questionnaires, although some responses have been edited to 
protect the confidentiality of respondents. The ACS PUMS file 
included sample weights for each person and housing unit, which 
were applied to the individual records to expand the sample to 
estimate totals and percentages of the full population. For more 
information on ACS PUMS data from the U.S. Census Bureau, see 
https://www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs/
technical-documentation/pums.html.

Direct standardization
***********************

The method used to generate age-adjusted rates of violent 
victimization of persons without disabilities was direct 
standardization with the population with disabilities as the 
standard population.***Footnote 1 1For more information on direct 
standardization, see Curtin, L. R. & Klein, R. J. (1995). Direct 
standardization (age-adjusted death rates). Healthy People 2000: 
Statistical Notes, 6 Revised. Available at http://www.cdc.gov/
nchs/data/statnt/statnt06rv.pdf. This procedure eliminates the 
problem of different age distributions between and within groups.
In general, persons with disabilities are an older population 
than persons without disabilities. Because crime rates vary by 
age, direct standardization produces age-adjusted rates for 
persons without disabilities that would occur if the population 
without disabilities had the same age distribution as the 
population with disabilities.

The age-adjusted violent victimization rate, using direct 
standardization (Rd), is calculated as—

Rd = Σ (wa * ra)

Where

Rd = age-adjusted rate of violent victimization of the population 
without disabilities calculated using direct standardization

wa = weight calculated from the population with disabilities for 
age-group a

ra = unadjusted rate of violent victimization of persons without 
disabilities in age-group a

d = direct standardization.

The weight (wa) for age-group a is calculated as--

wa = na / N

where

wa = weight calculated from the population with disabilities for 
age-group a

na = number of persons in age-group a in the population with 
disabilities

N = total number of persons in the population with disabilities.

This method produces rates of violent victimization as if the 
population without disabilities had the same age distribution as 
the population with disabilities.

In figure 1, for each year, unadjusted rates were calculated for 
persons with disabilities. For persons without disabilities, 
rates were age-adjusted to the population with disabilities for 
that year. For example, the 2013-14 rate of violent victimization 
against persons with disabilities was unadjusted. The 2013-14 
rate of violent victimization against persons without 
disabilities was age-adjusted using the 2013-14 population with 
disabilities as the standard population.

Change in direct standardization calculations
***********************************************

In previous BJS reports about crimes against persons with 
disabilities, several different methods were used to calculate 
age-adjusted rates. More specifically, changes in the standard 
population were made. Over the years, the population without 
disabilities and the 2000 U.S. standard population generated by 
the U.S. Census Bureau have both been used as the standard 
population in calculating age-adjusted rates for persons with and 
without disabilities. Each time a change was made to the standard 
population, rates for all years were recalculated using the new 
standard population. This resulted in previous years having 
different rates from earlier reports.

Nonresponse and weighting adjustments
****************************************

In 2014, about 90,380 households and 158,090 persons age 12 or 
older were interviewed for the NCVS. Each household was 
interviewed twice during the year. The response rate was 84% for 
households and 87% for eligible persons. Victimizations that 
occurred outside of the United States were excluded from this 
report. In 2014, less than 1% of the unweighted victimizations 
occurred outside of the United States and were excluded from the 
analysis.

Estimates in this report use data from the 2008 to 2014 NCVS data 
files weighted to produce annual estimates for persons age 12 or 
older living in U.S. households. Because the NCVS relies on a 
sample rather than a census of the entire U.S. population, 
weights are designed to inflate sample point estimates to known 
population totals and to compensate for survey nonresponse and 
other aspects of the sample design.

The NCVS data files include both household and person weights. 
The household weight is commonly used to calculate estimates of 
property crimes, such as motor vehicle theft or burglary, which 
are identified with the household. Person weights provide an 
estimate of the population represented by each person in the 
sample. Person weights are most frequently used to compute 
estimates of crime victimizations of persons in the total 
population. After proper adjustment, both household and person 
weights are also used to form the denominator in calculations of 
crime rates.

The victimization weights used in this analysis account for the 
number of persons present during an incident and for repeat 
victims when a series of incidents occurs. The weighting counts a 
series of incidents as the actual number of incidents reported by 
the victim, up to a maximum of 10 incidents. Series 
victimizations are victimizations that are similar in type but 
occur with such frequency that a victim is unable to recall each 
individual event or to describe each event in detail. Survey 
procedures allow NCVS interviewers to identify and classify these 
similar victimizations as series victimizations and collect 
detailed information on only the most recent incident in the 
series. In 2014, series incidents accounted for about 1% of all 
victimizations and 4% of all violent victimizations. The approach 
to weighting series incidents as the number of incidents up to a 
maximum of 10 produces more reliable estimates of crime levels, 
while the cap at 10 minimizes the effect of extreme outliers on 
the rates. Additional information on the series enumeration is 
detailed in the report Methods for Counting High Frequency Repeat
Victimizations in the National Crime Victimization Survey
(NCJ 237308, BJS web, April 2012).

Standard error computations for 
percentages and unadjusted rates
************************************

When national estimates are derived from a sample, as is the case 
with the NCVS, caution must be taken when comparing one estimate 
to another or when comparing estimates over time. Although one 
estimate may be larger than another, estimates based on a sample 
have some degree of sampling error. The sampling error of an 
estimate depends on several factors, including the amount of 
variation in the responses, the size of the sample, and the size 
of the subgroup for which the estimate is computed. When the 
sampling error around the estimates is taken into consideration, 
estimates that appear different may not be statistically 
different.

One measure of the sampling error associated with an estimate is 
the standard error. The standard error can vary from one estimate 
to the next. In general, for a given metric, an estimate with a 
smaller standard error provides a more reliable approximation of 
the true value than an estimate with a larger standard error. 
Estimates with relatively large standard errors are associated 
with less precision and reliability and should be interpreted 
with caution.

To generate standard errors around numbers and estimates from the 
NCVS, the U.S. Census Bureau produces generalized variance 
function (GVF) parameters for BJS. The GVFs take into account 
aspects of the NCVS complex sample design and represent the curve 
fitted to a selection of individual standard errors based on the 
Jackknife Repeated Replication technique. The GVF parameters were 
used to generate standard errors for each point estimate (such as 
counts, percentages, and unadjusted rates) in this report. For 
estimates, standard errors were based on the ratio of the sums of 
victimizations and respondents across years.

BJS conducted tests to determine whether differences in estimated 
numbers, percentages, and unadjusted rates in this report were 
statistically significant once sampling error was taken into 
account. Using statistical programs developed specifically for 
the NCVS, all comparisons in the text were tested for 
significance. The primary test procedure was the Student’s t-
statistic, which tests the difference between two sample 
estimates. Unless otherwise noted, the findings described in this 
report as higher, lower, or different passed a test at the 0.05 
level of statistical significance (95% confidence level). 
Findings that passed a test at the 0.10 level of significance are 
noted as such in the text, i.e. (90% confidence level). Caution 
is required when comparing estimates not explicitly discussed in 
this report.

Data users can use the estimates and the standard errors of the 
estimates provided in this report to generate a confidence 
interval around the estimate as a measure of the margin of error. 
The following example illustrates how standard errors can be used 
to generate confidence intervals:

According to the NCVS, from 2010 to 2014, 50.7% of simple 
assaults against persons with disabilities involved victims 
with multiple disability types (see table 6). Using the GVFs, 
BJS determined that the estimate has a standard error of 2.39% 
(see appendix table 7). A confidence interval around the 
estimate was generated by multiplying the standard error by 
±1.96 (the t-score of a normal, two-tailed distribution that 
excludes 2.5% at either end of the distribution). Therefore, 
the confidence interval around the 50.7% estimate is 50.7% ± 
2.39% * 1.96 (or 45.98% to 55.36%). In other words, if we used 
the same sampling method to select different samples and 
computed an interval estimate for each sample we would expect 
the true population parameter (percent of simple assaults 
against persons with disabilities in which the victim had 
multiple disability types) to fall within the interval 
estimates 95% of the time.

In this report, a coefficient of variation (CV), representing the 
ratio of the standard error to the estimate, was also calculated 
for all estimates. CVs provide a measure of reliability and a 
means for comparing the precision of estimates across measures 
with differing levels or metrics. In cases where the CV was 
greater than 50%, or the unweighted sample had 10 or fewer cases, 
the estimate was noted with a “!” symbol (Interpret data with 
caution. Estimate based on 10 or fewer sample cases, or 
coefficient of variation is greater than 50%.)

Standard error computations and statistical
significance for age-adjusted rates
*********************************************

Due to the complexity in generating age-adjusted rates of violent 
crime, other methods were used to compute standard errors and 
determine statistical significance. ***Footnote 2 For more 
information on computing standard errors for age-adjusted rates, 
see Anderson, R. N., & Rosenberg, H. M. (1998). Age 
standardization of death rates: Implementation of the year 2000 
standard. National Vital Statistics Reports, 47 (3). Available at 
http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/nvsr/nvsr47/nvs47_03.pdf.*** The 
standard error for age-adjusted rates of violent victimization 
against persons without disabilities was calculated as—

Sd = √Σ (wa^2 * va)

where

Sd = standard error for an age-adjusted rate of violent 
victimization against persons without disabilities that
was computed using direct standardization

wa = weight calculated from the population with disabilities for 
age-group a

va = variance calculated for an unadjusted rate of violent 
victimization of persons without disabilities for age group a 
using information from the generalized variance function (GVF) 
parameters that the Census Bureau produced for the NCVS.

To calculate statistical significance among two age-adjusted 
rates, the standard errors for the two rates were calculated 
using the formula above. A Student’s t-statistic also was 
calculated, which tests the difference between two sample 
estimates. Unless otherwise noted, the findings described in
this report as higher, lower, or different passed a test at the 
0.05 level of statistical significance (95% confidence level).
Findings that passed a test at the 0.10 level of significance are 
noted as such in the text, i.e. (90% confidence level).

*********************************************************
The Bureau of Justice Statistics of the U.S. Department of 
Justice is the principal federal agency responsible for measuring 
crime, criminal victimization, criminal offenders, victims of 
crime, correlates of crime, and the operation of criminal and 
civil justice systems at the federal, state, tribal, and local 
levels. BJS collects, analyzes, and disseminates reliable and
valid statistics on crime and justice systems in the United 
States, supports improvements to state and local criminal justice 
information systems, and participates with national and 
international organizations to develop and recommend national 
standards for justice statistics. Jeri M. Mulrow is
Acting Director.

These statistical tables were prepared by Erika Harrell. Jennifer 
Truman provided verification.

Brigitte Coulton and Morgan Young edited the report. Tina Dorsey
produced the report.

November 2016, NCJ 250200

**********************************************************

***********************************************
Office of Justice Programs
Building Solutions | Supporting Communities | Advancing Justice
www.ojp.gov
***********************************************
**************************
11/8/2016/ JER/ 3:30AM
**************************

