U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Programs
Bureau of Justice Statistics

********************************************************
This file is text only without graphics and many of the
tables. A Zip archive of the tables in this report in
spreadsheet format (.csv) and the full report including
tables and graphics in .pdf format are available on BJS
website at: http://bjs.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbdetail&iid=5368

*********************************************************
Bulletin

Criminal Appeals in State Courts 

Nicole L. Waters, Ph.D., and Anne Gallegos, M.P.A., National 
Center for State Courts James Green, M.A., and Martha Rozsi, 
Westat

In 2010, an estimated 69,348 criminal appeals were resolved in 
the 143 appellate courts with criminal jurisdiction in the United 
States. Nearly two-thirds (63%) of appeals were reviewed on the 
merits of the case, and a majority (81%) of these appeals upheld 
or affirmed the trial court decision (figure 1). Overall, more 
than half (52%) of all appeals resulted in an affirmation of the 
trial court decision. Appellate decisions were only considered 
affirmed when the appellate court upheld the entire trial court 
decision. In 12% of appeals, appellate courts reversed, remanded, 
or modified a component of the trial court decision.

More than a third (37%) of appeals were not reviewed on the 
merits. Appellate courts with discretionary jurisdiction can 
decide not to grant a petition to review a case or to dismiss the 
appeal (30% of appeals filed). The appellate court can dismiss a 
case or deny a review of a case on its merits if the court does 
not have jurisdiction over a case, if a procedural error prevents 
the review of a case (e.g., untimely filing of documents), or if 
the notice of appeal does not allege any reviewable errors. An 
estimated 7% of appeals were withdrawn by the petitioner or 
appellant, and less than 1% were transferred or certified to 
another appellate court. A transfer or certification to the court 
of last resort (COLR) occurs when an intermediate appellate court 
(IAC) appeal is reviewed by the COLR, which addresses errors or 
outcomes with important questions of law or to secure uniformity 
in case law.

**********************************************************
**************
HIGHLIGHTS
**************

* In 2010, an estimated 69,348 criminal appeals were resolved in 
the 143 state appellate courts with criminal jurisdiction.

*In 2010, 38 states had both intermediate appellate courts and 
courts of last resort, while 12 states had courts of last resort 
only.

* Of the cases reviewed on the merits, 81% were affirmed.  More 
than half (52%) of all appeals, the appellate court upheld the 
trial court decision.

* About 2% of all intermediate appellate court appeals were 
subsequently reviewed by the court of last resort.

* The most common legal issue appellate courts addressed was 
sufficiency of evidence (15%), followed by excessive or 
inconsistent sentencing (10%).

* Reversal rates were highest for aggravating or mitigating 
factors that might affect the severity of the offense (20%).

* In 2010, appellate courts reversed 23% of appeals for drug 
trafficking, 23% for larceny or theft, 21% for sex offenses, and 
17% for murder.
**********************************************************

State appellate courts were created to detect and correct errors 
in trial court decisions and provide fair, consistent, and timely 
resolutions to all appeals. This report presents data on state 
court criminal appeals, resolution of appeals, and time to 
resolution. Data are from the Bureau of Justice Statistics’ (BJS) 
2010 Survey of State Court Criminal Appeals (SSCCA). The outcomes 
were analyzed by type of court, level of court review, and 
appellate court structure. SSCCA data were collected from a 
nationally representative sample of all criminal appeals disposed 
in all 143 state appellate courts in 2010. This report uses those 
data to provide a national picture of appeals disposed in 2010, 
including rates of reversal and length of time to appeal 
resolution. 

********************************
State appellate court structure
********************************

The appellate court structure used to process and resolve appeals 
varies considerably from state to state. In response to the needs 
of the judiciary and state-specific characteristics, some states 
created a two-tiered structure, adding IACs to accommodate high 
workloads. In 2010, 38 states had IACs and COLRs, and 12 states 
had COLRs only (map 1). In states with a two-tiered system, some 
IACs were established with geographic divisions to increase 
access and distribute workload. To selectively reduce caseloads, 
some states have established strategies (such as discretionary 
jurisdiction) and implemented rules to assign some cases to panel 
review (a smaller subset of judges) rather than an en banc review 
(all judges of a court). See Terms and definitions for more 
information.

Establishing a two-tiered structure has also affected the roles 
and responsibilities of appellate courts. Of the 38 states with 
IACs in 2010, 27 used a two-tiered system of appellate review 
that includes one or more IACs with primarily mandatory review 
and a COLR with primarily discretionary review. In such systems, 
the IAC is mainly responsible for correcting potential errors of 
the trial court and the COLR is responsible for the 
interpretation and development of case law. However, for IACs 
that review appeals by permission (discretionary review) as 
opposed to by right (mandatory review), the IAC was responsible 
for the definition and development of the law, in addition to its 
responsibility to correct errors.

Understanding the organizational structure of the appellate court 
is necessary for comparing appellate cases across jurisdictions 
and drawing accurate conclusions about key case and processing 
characteristics. The nation’s state judiciary has seven basic 
appellate court structures.

**********************************************************

********************************
Appellate court structures
********************************

COLR mandatory--This structure is typically found in states with 
comparatively small volumes of appeals. There is only one 
appellate court, a court of last resort (COLR), and the court 
hears appeals by right.

COLR discretionary--This structure is typically found in states 
with relatively small volumes of appeals. There is only one 
appellate court, a COLR, and the court hears appeals by 
permission.

Deflective structure--In states with this structure, appeals are 
filed and may be fully briefed and submitted with the COLR, which 
then retains select appeals and transfers others to the 
intermediate appellate court (IAC).

COLR discretionary/IAC mandatory—This is the most common 
appellate court structure. The COLR hears appeals mostly by 
permission, and the IAC hears appeals mostly by right.

COLR and IAC discretionary--In states with this structure, both 
the COLR and IAC hear appeals mostly by permission.

IAC by subject matter--States with this structure have more than 
one IAC that is distinguished by subject matter. For example, one 
IAC is specialized for criminal appeals and the other IAC reviews 
civil appeals.

COLR by subject matter--States with this structure have more than 
one COLR that is distinguished by subject matter. For example, 
one COLR is specialized for criminal appeals and the other COLR 
reviews civil appeals.
**********************************************************

Courts of last resort dismissed more appeals 
than intermediate appellate courts
*********************************************

Examining how appeals are resolved by various case 
characteristics provides additional insight into the national 
picture of criminal appeals. COLRs primarily interpret and 
develop case law rather than correct errors in individual cases. 
In 2010, COLRs primarily reviewed appeals by permission (82%), 
while IACs primarily reviewed appeals by right (93%). COLRs 
dismissed more appeals (76%) than IACs (13%), in part due to 
courts’ discretionary jurisdiction (table 1).

Overall reversal rate for intermediate appellate 
courts was higher than for courts of last resort 
*************************************************

In 2010, the overall reversal rate for COLRs was 7% of all 
appeals. Petitions requesting a COLR to review a case more often 
came from the defendant (94%) than the state (4%). When the state 
petitioned the COLR, the court more often reviewed the appeal on 
the merits (49%) than when the defendant petitioned the COLR 
(18%). Also, the state won a reversal of the trial court decision 
more often (40%) than the defendant (5%). Death penalty appeals 
had a higher reversal rate (19%) than both felony (8%) and 
misdemeanor (8%) appeals.

Resolutions from an IAC are different than those from a COLR, 
primarily because one purpose of the IAC is to relieve the 
workload of the COLR and serve as a first review of potential 
trial court error. IACs reviewed appeals on the merits in 80% of 
appeals (table 2). The overall reversal rate for IACs was 14% of 
all appeals. IAC reversal rates were higher for state-initiated 
appeals (38%) than for defendant-initiated appeals (13%). 
However, IACs were nearly as likely to review on the merits a 
state-initiated appeal (75%) as a defendant-initiated appeal 
(80%). Ten death penalty appeals were heard by IACs, all of which 
were reviewed on the merits. Of these 10 appeals, 3 were 
reversed. The reversal rate for nondeath penalty appeals was 15%.
***Footnote 1 in alabama and tennessee, the IAC has jurisdication 
over cases in which the death penalty has been imposed.***

About 2% of all intermediate appellate court appeals were 
subsequently reviewed by the court of last resort 
***********************************************************

After a review by the IAC, appellants may seek subsequent review 
by the COLR. An estimated 29% of IAC appellants sought additional 
review by the state’s COLR. Of those, the COLR granted additional 
review for 6%, or 853 appeals. Nearly three-quarters (73%) of 
those accepted for subsequent review by the COLR arose out of a 
decision by the IAC to affirm the trial court decision (figure 
2). Twenty-three percent sought COLR review following a reversal 
of the trial court decision and 4% following a dismissal by the 
IAC. A reversal may have resulted in only a partial reversal and 
may therefore be appealed. Nearly all of the appeals in which the 
COLR granted subsequent review were initiated by the defendant 
(93%) and were reviewed on the merits (96%) at the IAC.
 
For appeals reviewed on the merits, nearly all opinions 
addressed six or fewer legal issues 
********************************************************

On appeal, the appellants or petitioners present appellate courts 
with alleged trial court errors through the briefing process and, 
if applicable, during oral arguments. In response, appellate 
courts prepare a dispositive opinion when the appeal is reviewed 
on the merits. In that opinion, the appellate court will address 
the legal issues presented and, at times, address additional and 
relevant legal issues.
 
For appeals reviewed on the merits, a majority (97%) of the 
opinions addressed six or fewer legal issues. The most common 
legal issue the appellate courts addressed was sufficiency of 
evidence (15%), or whether the prosecution met the burden of 
providing facts sufficient to satisfy the burden of proof for 
each element of the crime charged. The second most common legal 
issue was excessive or inconsistent sentencing (10%), which 
includes consecutive or concurrent sentencing decisions, 
mandatory minimums, and calculations of time served. The third 
most commonly addressed legal issue was suppression of evidence 
(8%) related to statements, identification, coerced confessions, 
illegal search and seizure, and the denial of other pretrial 
motions requesting the inclusion or exclusion of evidence from 
trial. 

When the appellate court addressed aggravating or mitigating 
factors that might affect the severity of the offense, the court 
found reversible error in 20% of the appeals (figure 3). The 
reversal rate for excessive or inconsistent sentences was 17%, 
and the reversal rate for guilty plea challenges was 13%. The 
court was less likely to reverse legal issues on relevancy or 
prejudicial evidence (3%) or ineffective counsel (4%).

Reversal rates of convictions varied by the most serious 
offense in underlying trial case
********************************************************

Appeals are classified by convictions of the most serious offense 
in the underlying trial case. In 2010, murder convictions were 
most often appealed and resulted in a reversal rate of 17%. 
Appellate courts reversed 23% of appeals for drug trafficking, 
23% for larceny or theft, 21% for sex offenses, 17% for drug 
possession, 16% for burglary, and 16% for aggravated and simple 
assault (figure 4). The top 10 most serious offenses made up 82% 
of known offense types for all cases brought on appeal.

The median time for an appellate court to resolve an 
appeal was approximately 10 months
******************************************************

In 2010, the median time for appellate courts to resolve an 
appeal was 297 days (figure 5). Appeals heard by permission 
underwent an additional step in the appellate process—petitioning 
the court to grant or deny review. The median time for the court 
to grant or deny a review was 92 days. Once an appeal was 
initiated, the median time for completing the record preparation 
was 69 days. The next step was for the petitioner or appellant to 
brief and fully submit the appeal; the median time for this step 
was 81 days. The final step, and the longest, was for the 
appellate court to issue a decision. The median time for the 
court to issue a decision after the appeal was fully briefed and 
submitted (or after oral argument, if held) was 107 days.

Case processing times for cases disposed in 2010 should be used 
with caution when attempting to estimate the case processing 
times of either cases disposed in other years or cases filed in a 
particular year. Case processing times are affected by many 
factors, including existing court rules and guiding legislation, 
which differ across time periods and vary over the lifespan of a 
case.

Court types, court structures, and proportion of caseloads 
undergoing reviews on the merits all contributed to time 
variations
***********************************************************

When examining the total duration of cases, time on appeal varied 
depending on whether or not the court reviewed the case on the 
merits. Excluding death penalty appeals, the median time from the 
start of an appeal to the final resolution was more than 1 year 
(421 days) for appeals reviewed on the merits and about 3.5 
months (104 days) for those without a review on the merits 
(figure 6). Time on appeal also varied by type of court (i.e., 
COLR or IAC). For COLR appeals reviewed on the merits, 50% were 
resolved in about 1 year (360 days). For IACs, 50% of the appeals 
reviewed on the merits were resolved within 1.2 years (426 days).
Differences in the appellate court structures in 2010 defined how 
courts processed appeals. In Iowa, under a deflective appellate 
court structure, briefing was consolidated at the COLR before the 
appeal was assigned to the IAC. In Virginia, both the IAC and the 
COLR had discretionary jurisdiction over the majority of their 
caseloads, and fewer appeals were granted review. The most common 
appellate structure in 2010 occurred when the IAC had mostly 
mandatory review of its caseload and the COLR had mostly 
discretionary review.

The median time--—or the time needed to resolve half (50%) of the 
courts’ appeals—did not vary considerably when comparing 
appellate court structures (figure 7). However, at the 75th and 
95th percentiles, courts with mostly discretionary review 
resolved most appeals in a shorter time than courts with 
mandatory jurisdiction. In states with mandatory review at the 
COLR and without an IAC, a small percentage of appeals (5%) 
remained unresolved until nearly 3 years (1,071 days) after the 
appeal began.

Additionally, court structures with larger percentages of 
caseloads resolved on the merits took longer to resolve appeals. 
Courts without an IAC and a mandatory review by the COLR reviewed 
more than three-quarters (78%) of its caseload on the merits. 
Courts with both an IAC and a COLR with discretionary review 
granted fewer cases overall, and a lower percentage (25%) of its 
caseload was reviewed on the merits (table 3).

A total of 134 death penalty appeals 
were resolved in 2010
******************************************

Appellate courts are expected to review appeals proportionally 
with regard to the complexities of the case. Death penalty 
appeals merit relatively more scrutiny and more time than 
nondeath penalty appeals.

In 2010, a total of 22 courts resolved 134 appeals of death 
penalty cases. Another 14 appellate courts had jurisdiction over 
death penalty appeals, but did not dispose of any such appeals in 
2010. While the majority of death penalty appeals were heard by 
COLRs, Tennessee and Alabama had specialized criminal 
jurisdiction IACs that reviewed these appeals. Florida’s COLR 
resolved the most death penalty appeals (23 appeals), followed by 
California’s COLR (20 appeals). Connecticut, Utah, and Virginia 
COLRs each resolved 1 death penalty appeal in 2010 (table 4).
 
Median time to resolve death penalty appeals was three 
times that of nondeath penalty appeals
*********************************************************

Case processing time in a year should be interpreted with caution 
when attempting to estimate the case processing times of either 
cases disposed in other years or cases filed in a particular 
year. Because death penalty cases take substantially longer than 
other types of cases, death penalty cases that are disposed of in 
a year are initiated across a longer time and therefore have a 
greater potential of being processed under different rules than 
other cases. As such, case processing time for death penalty 
cases should be interpreted with caution.

Death penalty appeals received greater scrutiny by the state’s 
appellate courts than nondeath penalty cases and had different 
case processing rules than those for nondeath penalty appeals. 
For example, many states automatically provide the notice of 
appeal for death penalty cases to the appellate court through the 
trial court clerk instead of requiring the appellant to file a 
notice of appeal. States may also give the petitioner or 
appellant additional time to file documents for death penalty 
appeals. Florida allowed 60 days to file transcripts for a 
nondeath penalty case, but allowed 110 days for a death penalty 
case. Oklahoma allowed 90 days after judgment for transcripts to 
be filed in a nondeath penalty appeal, compared to 6 months after 
sentence for a death penalty appeal.  

Half (50%) of death penalty appeals were resolved in about 2.4 
years (888 days) and three-quarters (75%) were resolved in 3.4 
years (1,224 days). In 5% of appeals, the appellate court 
resolved the appeal in more than 13.9 years or 5,058 days (figure 
8). The duration of death penalty appeals (13.9 years) was much 
longer than that of nondeath penalty appeals (2.3 years for 
misdemeanors and 2.4 years for nondeath penalty felonies) at the 
95th percentile.

Methodology 
**************

Data in this report are from the Bureau of Justice Statistics’ 
(BJS) 2010 Survey of State Court Criminal Appeals (SSCCA). The 
National Center for State Courts, in collaboration with Westat, 
conducted the study. Criminal appeals disposed in 2010 were 
sampled from all 143 appellate courts in the United States that 
have criminal jurisdiction, which included 51 courts of last 
resort (COLR) and 92 intermediate appellate courts (IACs) 
(appendix table 1). The final sample of 5,045 appeals was 
composed of--

* a nationally representative probability sample of all criminal 
appeals in 2010

* a complete census of all death penalty appeals in 2010

*a supplemental oversample of COLR appeals resolved in 2010 
identified in the national sample that were also reviewed by the 
corresponding IAC.

The first component was a sample that included 4,539 criminal, 
nondeath penalty appeals disposed in 2010. The second component 
was a full census (134 appeals) of all death penalty appeals in 
the nation. Combined, these data included 4,673 appeals from 51 
COLRs and 90 IACs, which were the main study data for this 
report. The SSCCA also included a supplemental oversample of 372 
appeals that were heard by both the IAC and COLR. 

While there was no court-level nonresponse, two of the IACs did 
not provide any data for the SSCCA. North Dakota’s COLR had the 
authority to transfer cases to an IAC but had not done so in 
2010. North Dakota’s IAC was authorized as a temporary court of 
appeals that was activated when the COLR reached a certain 
threshold of appeals during the previous year. The threshold was 
not reached in 2009; therefore, its temporary IAC was not active 
in 2010. Two cases were sampled in one of Illinois’ IACs 
(appellate court, fifth district), but were excluded because they 
did not meet the definitional criteria for inclusion in the SSCCA 
(i.e., they were study ineligible). Because these appeals were 
ineligible, appeal-level replacement was not appropriate and was 
not used. Data represent appeals to the appellate court by right 
(usually called an appeal and initiated by a notice of appeal) or 
by permission (usually called a petition and initiated by a 
petition for leave to appeal or a petition for certiorari).

Inclusion criteria were applied to all appeals. The appeals met 
two basic criteria: (1) they arose from a final judgment or 
verdict or sentence in a criminal case, and (2) they were 
disposed by the appellate court in 2010.

Appeals were generally resolved in calendar year 2010. Exceptions 
include courts that used a court term or fiscal year calendar to 
draw the sample or courts that used closure dates other than the 
date of disposition (e.g., Idaho’s sample was drawn from the 
“closed date,” which is the date the court issued a remittitur). 
Regardless of the dates used, all courts represent a full 12 
months of dispositions.

Alternatively, an appeal was ineligible if it involved defendants 
tried as juveniles, was post-conviction in nature, occurred 
pretrial, was interlocutory, contested a probation revocation 
judgment, or contested a civil commitment. 

Determining the eligibility of an appeal often required a full 
review of the issues on appeal. For example, postconviction 
issues (e.g., an application for habeas corpus, making a claim of 
ineffective counsel, or making a claim that the death penalty is 
unconstitutional) filed after an initial direct appeal had been 
decided by the court were excluded. Writs, such as prohibition 
and mandamus (with the exception of writs of certiorari, if the 
court used such a writ to initiate an appeal by permission), were 
also excluded. Interlocutory appeals are appeals filed in 
response to a trial court’s decision on a motion and do not 
result in a final judgment at the trial court. Appeals of these 
interim decisions were also excluded. Finally, violations of 
court orders were excluded when such violations were not new 
criminal charges (e.g., probation violations and violations of 
civil commitment orders). An example of a violation that was 
retained in the sample was failure to register as a sex offender. 
This violation was included because it is a crime to not register 
as a sex offender, making the appeal of the conviction or 
sentence comparable to other direct appeals.

Sampling
**************

Each appellate court compiled a universe list of appeals using 
the inclusion criteria described previously. The data obtained 
for the 2010 SSCCA come from a stratified, single-stage 
probability sample of 5,045 cases derived from the universe list 
of appeals. Appeals were stratified by type of case or type of 
court (i.e., death penalty, COLR, and IAC), and appeals were 
sampled at a fixed overall rate within each stratum. Initial 
sampling rates were calculated for each stratum based on the 
ratios of the target sample size desired to the expected total 
population for each stratum. Appendix table 2 shows the target 
sample sizes and expected total population assumed for each 
stratum and the resulting initial sampling rates. A census was 
taken for death penalty cases.
 
After sampling cases in about half (50%) of the courts, the 
number of cases actually collected (i.e., the actual yield) was 
evaluated. The actual yield was lower than expected, which 
indicated smaller population sizes. Based on this evaluation, the 
sampling rates for the remaining half of courts were increased. 
This increase in rates not only adjusted for the actual yields, 
it also took into account the design effect and therefore the 
reduction in effective sample sizes introduced by changing from 
the initial rates within each stratum. This was done using a 
mathematical program that solved for the new set of rates, taking 
into account the current actual yield, the expected total yield, 
design effects, and effective sample sizes required. Appendix 
table 3 shows the initial sampling rates, revised sampling rates, 
and total actual sample sizes.

In most instances, courts were able to provide clean, study-
eligible lists of cases to which the rates were applied. However, 
some lists provided by appellate courts were known to be 
overinclusive (i.e., the list included study-ineligible cases). 
If a list was overinclusive, a two-part approach was used. First, 
the rate of eligible cases was estimated by reviewing an initial 
sample and a partial sample. Second, a sampling rate that took 
into account the eligible case rate was used for the remaining 
sample.

Data collection and preparation
**********************************

All appeals were coded directly from court records, including the 
appellate court docket, the initial appellant or petitioner 
brief, and the court’s decision or opinion. Court records were 
accessed through various means, such as electronic court records, 
public information access through the court’s website, private 
law libraries, and hard copies (requested through the mail or 
acquired from in-person visits to appellate court clerks’ 
offices).

Based on a review of these documents, the data collection team 
coded each appeal. Each appeal represented one record, except 
when the actions that occurred within an appeal prompted the 
completion of an additional data record. Circumstances that 
resulted in additional records include--

* Consolidated cases—Appeals may be consolidated at various points 
during case processing. If two or more cases were consolidated 
after briefing (i.e., after the parties had filed briefs in the 
individual cases), then each case was coded separately to capture 
all of the issues presented to the court. Cases consolidated 
before briefing were coded together because all issues were 
presented in one brief.

*Cross-appeals—If either party filed a cross-appeal in a case, the 
cross-appeal was coded separately to capture all of the issues 
presented to the court. 

*More than one appeal disposed in 2010—If a sampled appeal 
accompanied an additional appeal from the same underlying trial 
court case that was disposed in 2010, each was coded separately. 
For example, an IAC may have disposed of a case in early 2010 by 
remanding it to the trial court for additional review. The trial 
court decision was made and the case was appealed to the IAC 
again, with a disposition on the new appeal also made in 2010. If 
either of those decisions was selected in the sample, both of the 
cases were coded. Another example is an appeal that was initially 
dismissed (e.g., for procedural error), then later re-filed and 
accepted for review. If both the dismissal and the disposition on 
review occurred in 2010, then both cases were coded, even if only 
one of the cases was on the original sample list.

To determine the legal issues most commonly addressed by the 
appellate courts, these data required a review of all dispositive 
opinions, whether published or not. Data captured the content of 
the first six legal issues addressed by the appellate courts, and 
also captured a count of all legal issues presented in the 
opinion.

Quality assurance
********************

The coding team performed a multi-level quality check. Each 
appeal was coded, reviewed, and then entered into a database, 
with each task performed by a different member of the team. The 
appeals were entered into a data system designed to check for 
logic errors during data entry. As a final stage of quality 
control, the project team cleaned the data by court to uncover 
inconsistent case processing practices within each court. During 
the cleaning stage, data were sorted by coder and date coded. 
Early coding was most likely to contain errors. Therefore, the 
first third of appeals coded by each team member was selected and 
reviewed for errors.

Weighting, estimation, and variance estimation
***********************************************

Because the SSCCA estimates were based on data obtained from a 
probability sample, each sample appeal required the assignment of 
a weight to provide unbiased estimates with measurable precision. 
A base weight was calculated for each appeal as the inverse of 
the overall probability of selection, which reflected stratum 
(i.e., death penalty, COLR, and IAC) and whether the case was 
sampled before or after the rate change. It also determined the 
effects of the two-step process for sampling from overinclusive 
lists. A nonresponse adjustment factor was not required because 
the one unavailable case was handled through substitution. 
Poststratification or raking was inappropriate, as no 
corresponding control totals were available. The sums of the 
resulting weights are the best available estimates of the size of 
the population of inference, either overall or by subgroup. The 
distribution of weights was reviewed overall and by the relevant 
factors (e.g., stratum and before or after rate change), and 
preliminary weighted estimates were produced as part of the 
review. The resulting full sample weights were used for the 
estimates presented.

For variance estimation, a set of 100 balanced repeated 
replication (BRR) replicate weights was produced and used for the 
variance estimates, standard errors, and confidence intervals. 
BRR was chosen because it performs better than the jackknife for 
quantiles such as medians, which are often used with these data 
given the number of dates in the court record. In creating the 
BRR replicate weights, each major analytic domain (i.e., death 
penalty selected with certainty, COLR, and IAC) was spread across 
the 100 replicates, such that they received the appropriate 
maximum number of degrees of freedom. Replicate group assignment 
was carried out through sorting by court and selection order 
within court. The latter maximized the degrees of freedom for 
more detailed estimates (e.g., state and court structure). All of 
the estimates were calculated using WesVar along with the 
corresponding standard error. Numerous methods were available for 
estimating percentiles, and statistical software packages (e.g., 
SAS or SPSS) may use different methods (optional or default), 
which may generate different estimates.

Standard error computations
****************************

Probability sampling implies some imprecision in the estimates 
because the entire population is not enumerated. This imprecision 
is measurable and is reported or reflected in standard errors. 
These measures reflect and convey the imprecision in probability 
sample estimates and allow for inference to the total population, 
comparisons between subgroups, or comparisons across time that 
acknowledge this imprecision.

Variances, standard errors, and confidence intervals depend on 
the estimate involved, the sample design, the sample size, and 
the subgroup sample size (if appropriate). The ratio of the 
standard error for an estimate to the estimate itself is a useful 
way to compare the relative precision of estimates across 
estimates.

In this report, the coefficient of variation (CV) was also 
calculated for all estimates, representing the ratio of the 
standard error to the estimate. If the CV was greater than 50% or 
the estimate was based on 10 or fewer sample cases, the estimate 
is noted with a “!” symbol in the tables and figures, indicating 
the data should be interpreted with caution.

Terms and definitions
**************************

Direct appeal--occurs when the defendant appeals the final 
judgment of a trial court. The appeal can be taken from the final 
judgment of the defendant’s conviction, sentence, or both.  

Discretionary review/appeal by permission--an appeal that the 
court can choose to review. Appeal by permission cases must first 
be either granted or denied by the court. Only granted appeals 
receive further review.

Dispositive opinion--resolves the appeal, resulting in a decision 
by the court.

En banc review--all judges of the appellate court, or the entire 
bench, decide the appeal.

Harmless errors--rulings that, while mistaken, do not require a 
reversal of the judgment by the appellate court or warrant a new 
trial.

Mandatory review/appeal by right--an appeal that the court must 
review.

Panel review--a review of an appeal before a set of judges. Panel 
sizes for appellate courts vary by state.

Postconviction appeals--an application for habeas corpus, making a 
claim of ineffective counsel, or making a claim that the death 
penalty is unconstitutional. These appeals are filed after an 
initial, direct appeal has been decided by the court.

Published opinions--historically available in print and held 
precedential authority. With advances in technology, the term 
published currently implies more than one meaning for appellate 
decisions. For the purposes of this report, all decisions and 
opinions were included, whether or not they held precedential 
authority.

Reviewed on the merits--the appellate court has considered the 
arguments of the parties and made a decision based on the 
substantive legal issues raised on appeal. This occurs following 
oral arguments and/or is based on a review of the briefs.

Reversible error--a finding by the appellate courts that the lower 
court incorrectly resolved the issue, and this error was 
substantial enough to potentially change the outcome of the 
trial.

*******************************************************************
The Bureau of Justice Statistics of the U.S. Department of 
Justice is the principal federal agency responsible for measuring 
crime, criminal victimization, criminal offenders, victims of 
crime, correlates of crime, and the operation of criminal and 
civil justice systems at the federal, state, tribal, and local 
levels. BJS collects, analyzes, and disseminates reliable and 
valid statistics on crime and justice systems in the United 
States, supports improvements to state and local criminal justice 
information systems, and participates with national and 
international organizations to develop and recommend national 
standards for justice statistics. William J. Sabol is director.


This report was written by Nicole L. Waters, Ph.D., and Anne 
Gallegos, M.P.A., National Center for State Courts, and James 
Green, M.A., and Martha Rozsi, Westat. Tracey Kyckelhahn verified 
the report.

Irene Cooperman, Morgan Young, and Jill Thomas edited the report, 
and Barbara Quinn and Tina Dorsey produced the report.

September 2015, NCJ 248874
*******************************************************************

*************************************************
Office of Justice Programs
Innovation * Partnerships * Safer Neighborhoods
www.ojp.usdoj.gov
*************************************************

***************************
8/27/2015 3:50pm JER
***************************
