U.S. Department of Justice
Bureau of Justice Statistics

This report is one in a series.  More recent editions
may be available.  To view a list of all in the series
go to http://www.ojb.usdoj.gov/bjs/pubalp2.htm#cfjs

Jan M. Chaiken, Ph.D., 
Director

Compendium of Federal Justice Statistics, 1994
February 1998, NCJ-163063 

This Bureau of Justice Statistics Report was
prepared by the Urban Institute under the
supervision of Steven K. Smith and John Scalia,
Jr. of the Bureau of Justice Statistics.
The project is supported by BJS grant number
95-BJ-CX-K001. Principal staff for the project
at the Urban Institute were William J. Sabol,
Ph.D., Jeffrey A. Roth, Ph.D., Harvey Meyerson,
William Adams, Yingjie Shu, Pamela Rigby, Chris
Hayes, John McGready, YanYuan, Andrew Scott,
Barbara Parthasarathy, and Katherine Rosich.
Layout and design were by O. Jay Arwood. Tom
Hester of BJS provided editorial review.

This report is made possible through the
cooperation of the following Federal agencies
and their staff: The Administrative  office of
the United States Courts (AOUSC),the Executive
Office for U.S. Attorneys (EOUSA), the U.S.
Bureau of Prisons (BOP), the United States
Sentencing  commission (USSC), and the Federal
Judicial Center (FJC). The staff who provided
expert advice about the source records include:
Steven Schlesinger, Catherine Whitaker, Thomas
Bak, Virginia Salter, Patrick  walker, Pragati
Patrick, and Preston James (AOUSC); Eileen
Menton and Vernlyn Bryant (EOUSA); Gerald Gaes,
Christopher Innes, and Anthony J. Iwaszko (BOP);
Elizabeth McGrath and Richard McNeil (USSC); and
David Rauma and George Cort (FJC).

The contents of this document do not necessarily
reflect  the views or policies of the Bureau of
Justice Statistics or the U.S. Department of
Justice.

BJS authorizes any person to reproduce, publish, 
translate, or otherwise use all or any part of
the copyrighted material in this publication;
citation to source, however, is  appreciated.

A portable document format version of this report 
as well as the Lotus spreadsheets and the
data analyzed in the report may be found on the
Internet at the following address:
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/


Contents

Highlights
Introduction
Organization of the Compendium
Modifications to the 1994 Compendium
Notes to reader
System overview
Chapter 1: Prosecution
   U.S. attorney processing
   Suspects in matters received
   Suspects in matters concluded
   Chapter notes
Chapter 2: Pretrial release
   Release procedures
   Types of pretrial release Factors relating to
    release or detention
   Pretrial outcomes by offense categories
   Pretrial outcomes across demographic groups
   Chapter notes
Chapter 3: Adjudication
   Defendants in cases filed
   Defendants in cases terminated
   Case processing times
   Characteristics of convicted defendants
   Convictions by U.S. magistrates
   Chapter notes
Chapter 4: Sentencing
   Offenders convicted and sentences imposed
   Average prison sentences imposed
   Relationship between sentence imposed and mode
    of conviction
   Characteristics of offenders sentenced to 
    prison
   Chapter notes
Chapter 5: Appeals
   Appeals filed
   Appeals terminated
   Chapter notes
Chapter 6: Corrections
   Supervision
   Probation outcomes
   Parole and supervised release outcomes
   Entrants into supervision
   Characteristics of offenders completing
    supervision
   Federal offenders under supervision
   Federal prisoners: First releases and time
    served
   Admissions, releases, and standing population of
    Federal prisoners
   Characteristics of Federal prisoners Sentences
    imposed and time served until first release
   Chapter notes
Methodology
   The Federal justice database
   Table construction and interpretation
   Offense classifications
Glossary


Highlights

Over the past 12 years the increase in the
number of drug prosecutions  has dramatically
changed the size and offense composition of the
Federal criminal justice system.

The number of drug defendants incases
terminating in U.S. district courts grew from
8,987 during 1987 to 24,127 during 1993 before
declining  to 21,584 during 1994. As a
percentage of all defendants, drug defendants
grew from 21% in 1987 to over 35% during 1994.

Suspects prosecuted

U.S. attorneys investigated 99,251 suspects in
criminal matters and concluded investigations
against 94,980 suspects during 1994. Of the
suspects  in criminal matters concluded, 53%
were prosecuted in U.S. district court, about
10% were handled by U.S. magistrates, and 36%
were declined for prosecution.

The likelihood that a suspect was prosecuted in
U.S. district court during 1994 varied across
major offense categories, with drug offenses
being the most likely to be prosecuted(70%),
while public-order and property offenses were
the least likely(45% and 46%, respectively).

Similarly, the chances that a suspect was
declined for prosecution varied across major
offense categories, as well as within these
categories. Property offenses were the most 
likely to be declined (48%) while drug offenses
were the least likely (23%).Among public-order
offenses, matters involving civil rights
offenses were most likely to be declined for
prosecution (95%).

Matters were declined for prosecution for 
a variety of reasons, such as weak evidence 
(21%) and lack of  criminal intent (12%). 
However, not all suspects whose matters 
were declined by Federal prosecutors 
escaped prosecution. More than 25% of 
the suspects whose matters were declined
for Federal prosecution were referred
to other authorities for prosecution or had
their matters resolved by alternative methods.

Pretrial outcomes

During 1994, 27,607 defendants were released
prior to trial. This number constitutes more
than half of all defendants (45,584) who
terminated pretrial services during 1994.Of the
defendants released, 15% violated the conditions
of their release prior to going to trial and 5%
had their release revoked.

The rates of release of defendants and the use
of the several types of release varied among
offense categories, with property offenders
being the most likely to be released (84%)and
violent offenders the least (38%).These rates
also differed, sometimes quite dramatically,
over certain defendant demographic
characteristics.

During 1994, 26,299 defendants(58% of all
defendants) were detained for all or part of the
time prior to the disposition of their criminal
case. Defendants charged with violent or drug
offenses were more likely to be detained (80%
and 74%, respectively) compared to those charged
with property offenses (27%).

Adjudication

Criminal charges were filed in U.S. district
court against 62,327 defendants during 1994.
More than 75% of the charges were for felony
offenses and 33% were for drug offenses. Cases
were terminated against 61,404 defendants during
1994, 77% of whom were felony defendants.

Of defendants whose cases terminated during
1994, about 85% of felony defendants were
convicted, regardless of offense category.

Of convicted offenders, 85% were  men, 63% were
white, 34% were black, 25% were Hispanic, and
78% were U.S. citizens. Most were over 31 years
of age (59%) and the majority had completed high
school or  higher education (61%). Fewer than
half (48%) had no prior convictions. These
characteristics, however, varied among the
offense types.

Sentencing outcomes

Of the 50,701 offenders sentenced during 1994,
the majority (65%) received a term of
imprisonment. The likelihood of imprisonment
varied across major offense categories, as did
the average length of prison sentences imposed
(figure H.3). Violent offenders, on average,
received the longest prison term (90 months)
while those convicted of property offenses
received the shortest average prison sentence
(26 months).

Of persons sentenced to prison, 85% were men,
63% were white, 34% were black, 25% were
Hispanic, and 78% were U.S. citizens. Lengths of 
prison terms imposed varied with the offense
severity and demographic characteristics,
especially race and education.

Criminal appeals

The U.S. Court of Appeals received 10,674
criminal appeals during 1994. Of the guidelines-
based appeals, more than half (54%) were of both
the sentence and conviction. The overall appeal
rate varied significantly across offense
categories. More  than 77% of offenders
convicted of murder and about 29% of those
convicted of drug offenses filed an appeal. For
other offense types, such as counterfeiting and
embezzlement, the appeal rates were much lower.
During 1994 a total of 11,708 appeals  were
terminated, of which 9,265 (or 79%) were
terminated on the merits. Of the appeals
terminated on the merits, the decision of the
district court was affirmed, at least in part,
in 7,936 (or 86%) cases.

Corrections

During 1994, 20,185 offenders completed 1 or
more terms of active probation, and 19,187
offenders completed terms of either parole or
supervised release. Offenders completing
probation were more  likely to conclude their
term of supervision without a violation (80%)
than offenders completing terms of parole or
supervised release (56%). Offenders completing
probation were most likely to be sentenced for a
misdemeanor offense (43%) while those completing
parole or supervised release were most likely to
be sentenced for a drug offense (43%).

During 1994, 28,069 prisoners were  released for
the first time from the custody of the Federal
Bureau of Prisons (BOP) after serving an average 
of 25 months (89%) of their imposed sentence. An
additional 12,264 prisoners were released from
subsequent commitments, for a total of 40,333
prisoners released. BOP received 44,341
prisoners into its facilities during 1994. Of
the total increase in prisoners (4,008), the
largest were drug (2,539) and public-order
offenders (1,538). The increase in public-order
prisoners is primarily a reflection of an
increase in weapons offenders.


Introduction

This Bureau of Justice Statistics(BJS) report
presents an overview of case processing in the
Federal criminal justice system. The data
presented are compiled from the BJS Federal
Justice Statistics Program (FJSP) database. The
FJSP data-base includes data provided by the 
administrative Office of the U.S. Courts, the
Executive Office for the U.S. Attorneys, the
Federal Bureau  of Prisons, and the U.S.
Sentencing Commission. The Administrative Office
of the U.S. Courts, in addition to providing
data describing defendants in cases processed by
the Federal judiciary, provides data describing
defendants processed by the Federal pretrial
services agencies and the Federal probation and
supervision service. The data provided by the
agencies are archived for public use at the
National Archive of Criminal Justice Data (ICPSR
9296).

While each agency reports on those defendants it
processed during  given year in an annual
statistical report and because many of the case
processing statistics reported vary across
agencies, these annual statistical reports are
often comparable. As reported by an
interagency working group, headed by BJS, the
differences in the case processing statistics
are attributable, in part, to the differing
needs and missions of the agencies. The working
group found that the differences in reported
statistics are attributable to:

*the universe of cases reported during a given
period--some agencies report on those case
processing events that occurred during a
particular period, whereas others report on
those events recorded during a particular
period; and 

*many of the commonly used case processing
statistics--suspect/defendant processed, offense 
committed, disposition, and sentence imposed--
are defined differently across agencies.

BJS, through its Federal Justice Statistics
Program, however, has recognized the lack of 
comparability of these annual statistical
reports and has attempted to reconcile many of
the differences identified by the working group.
For instance, by combining databases from
several years, BJS is able to report on those
cases that actually occurred during the
reporting period. Additionally, commonly used
case processing statistics are made comparable
across stages by applying uniform definitions to
data obtained  from each agency. Because the
definitions used in the Federal Justice
Statistics Program are consistent with those
categories used in other BJS programs describing
the defendants convicted, sentenced, and
imprisoned at the State level, the comparison of
Federal and State case processing statistics is
facilitated.

The 1994 Compendium, ninth in a series which
also includes 1984,1985, 1986, 1988, 1989, 1990, 
1992, and 1993, describes defendants processed
at each stage of the Federal justice system--
investigation and prosecution by the U.S.
attorneys(chapter 1), pretrial release or
detention(chapter 2), adjudication in the U.S.
district courts (chapter 3), sentencing (chapter
4), appeal of the conviction and/or sentence
imposed (chapter 5), and corrections (chapter
6)--for the 12-month period ending September 30,
1994 (the Federal fiscal year). Chapter 5 is new
to the 1994 Compendium; future editions will
incorporate additional data as the data become
available.

Generally, the tables presented include both
individual and organizational defendants.
Organizational defendants are not included in
tables describing pretrial release and detention
or tables showing defendants sentenced to
incarceration. Felony and misdemeanor
distinctions are provided where possible (see
"Table construction and interpretation" in
Methodology).

Organization of the Compendium

Each chapter of the Compendium describes a major
stage in the processing of criminal suspects and
defendants. Each chapter contains Chapter notes
that describe the universes of data used in the
tables and information relevant to the
interpretation of individual tables. The
contents of the Compendium include:

Chapter 1. This chapter describes decisions
taken by Federal prosecutors in screening
criminal matters and the characteristics of
defendants in cases prosecuted or declined for
prosecution.

Chapter 2. This chapter describes the pretrial
release and detention practices of the Federal
judiciary, including the characteristics of
defendants detained or released pending trial.

Chapter 3. This chapter describes actions by the
Federal judiciary in adjudicating defendants in
cases filed by the U.S. attorneys, including the
offense charged and characteristics of
defendants convicted.

Chapter 4. This chapter describes the sentences
imposed by the Federal judiciary on convicted
defendants, including the characteristics of
defendants sentenced.

Chapter 5. This chapter describes appeals of
criminal convictions and sentences imposed in
the Federal courts, including the original
offense charged.

Chapter 6. This chapter describes defendants
under Federal correctional supervision--
probation, parole, and supervised release--
including the outcome of the supervision
(successful completion, any violations, and
revocation), admissions to, and releases from
Federal prison and time served by Federal
inmates.

Methodology. This section describes the
procedures followed in analyzing data and
developing tables.

Glossary. This section contains definitions for
terms used in the Compendium. Since many terms
used in the text and tables have specialized
meanings (either because they refer  to Federal
law or because of reporting procedures by the
Federal agencies supplying the data), readers
are encouraged to check the glossary for exact
definitions of tabulated data.

Comparing Case Processing Statistics.

This document, prepared by an interagency
working group tasked to reconcile differences in
Federal criminal case processing statistics,
identifies and describes the major differences
in the way Federal criminal justice agencies
collect, tabulate, and report criminal case
processing events.

Modifications in the 1994 Compendium

This Compendium incorporates a number of
modifications designed to improve the
understanding of the  federal criminal justice
system and to enhance comparability with other
Federal criminal justice agencies' annual
reports.

The reporting period was changed to reflect the
Federal fiscal year--October 1 through September
30. This represents a departure from previous
editions of the compendium and other BJS
reports. The change to a fiscal year reporting
period was made to facilitate the comparability
of the compendium with the agencies' annual
publications. (All of the agencies whose data
are presented in this report publish an annual
statistical report describing events occurring
or reported, where applicable, between October 1
and September 30.)

In chapter 1, the tables describing defendants
investigated and prosecuted by the U.S.
attorneys were updated to distinguish between
suspects in criminal matters from those in
criminal appeals. Therefore, tables describing
suspects investigated by the U.S. attorneys are
not  directly comparable with prior years'
compendia. However, included in the Chapter
notes are tables describing criminal appeals
handled by U.S. attorneys  to facilitate that
comparison.  

In several tables included in chapter 2, 
the percentages reporting the type of
pretrial release and method of pretrial
detention were calculated from the base of
defendants released or  detained, where
appropriate, rather than all defendants who
terminated pretrial release or detention. 

In chapter 3, a table describing defendants in
criminal cases filed in U.S. district court was
added. Additionally, the table describing
defendants in cases handled by U.S. MAGISTRATES
uses data provided by the Administrative Office
of the U.S. Courts rather than the U.S. attorney.
 The data provided by the U.S. attorneys
includes a substantial number  of fugitive
criminal defendants whose cases were
originally filed before a U.S. magistrate
because the defendant crossed State boundaries
to evade apprehension. Ultimately, these matters
were dismissed by the U.S. attorney, and these
defendants were prosecuted in State courts upon 
their apprehension and extradition. 

A chapter on criminal appeals (chapter 5) was 
added in order to provide more complete coverage 
of the Federal criminal justice system.  Many 
of the tables in chapter 6 describing Federal 
prisoners were expanded to distinguish between 
defendants sentenced pursuant to the provisions 
of the Sentencing Reform Act of 1984 ("new law") 
and the previous sentencing policies ("old law").

Notes to reader

The tables in the Compendium were constructed to
permit valid comparisons within each table and
to allow the reader to compare percentages(but
not raw totals) across tables. It should be
understood, however, that the total number of
subjects or defendants shown in a particular
table may not equal the number of
subjects/defendants involved in a particular
stage of processing, since some records could
not be linked and some data sources did not
include information on particular data elements
classified in a particular table. Data notes
indicate the exact universe for individual
tables.

The Compendium is a statistical presentation of
Federal criminal justice information with
limited analyses of trends or explanatory
factors underlying the statistics. Analyses of
Federal justice statistics may be found in
special reports and other publications, some of
which are cited in the compendium. Assessment of
changing patterns in the compendium tabulations
may depend on detailed examination of
subcategories not shown in the tabulations or
may require other sources of information, such
as knowledge of legislation or Federal agency
procedures.


Chapter 1: Prosecution

Federal criminal cases may be brought by the
U.S. Attorney's Office, by the Criminal Division
of the U.S. Department of Justice, or by other
authorized agencies.

Investigations are most commonly referred to a
U.S. attorney by the Criminal Division, by a
Federal investigative agency (primarily the Drug
Enforcement Administration; the Federal Bureau
of Investigation; the Postal Inspection Service;
the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, and Firearms;
and the Secret Service), or by a State or local
investigative agency. Investigations  may also
be initiated--and cases brought directly--by
U.S. attorneys or by the Criminal Division of
the U.S. Department of Justice. This chapter
reports only on suspects investigated, at least
in part, by U.S. Attorneys.

U.S. attorney processing

After criminal investigations are initiated and
criminal suspects are referred to them, U.S.
attorneys may file charges against defendants in
a U.S. district court or they may decline to
file these charges for reasons such as weak or
insufficient evidence, minimal Federal interest,
lack of resources, or lack of Federal offense or 
criminal intent. Matters that are declined may
be referred to another authority for prosecution
or be settled through alternative resolution
procedures.  The U.S. attorney may also file a case 
before a U.S. magistrate. U.S. magistrates have the 
authority to adjudicate misdemeanor offenses (18 U.S.C. 
Section  3401). Because of the relatively less serious 
nature of these cases, and because they are handled 
by magistrates, the U.S. attorneys count these cases 
as criminal matters disposed by U.S. magistrates. 

U.S. attorneys select offenses for prosecution at 
different rates. In the aggregate, there is little 
difference between the distribution of offenses 
in matters received and matters concluded during 
1994. The similarity masks the differences in 
selection. In general, violent and drug offenses 
are more likely to be prosecuted before U.S. 
district court judges than are property and 
public-order offenses. Violent and drug offenses 
are also less likely to be declined for prosecution 
than property or public-order offenses (figure 1.1). 
Further, those violent and drug offenses that are 
declined for prosecution are more likely to
be referred to other prosecutions; or to be
resolved through restitution, civil procedures,
or administrative procedures; than are property
and public-order offenses, weapons offenses
excepted. Violent and drug offenses are more
likely to be appealed than other offenses.

Differences between matters received and rates
of prosecution may reflect a number of factors
like prosecutorial priorities and laws governing
each type of offense.

Suspects in matters received (table 1.1)

During 1994 there were 99,251 suspects in
matters received by U.S. attorneys.***See
Chapter notes, item 1, p.20. The 1994 data are
not directly comparable to the 1993 or prior
compendia.**** Of these suspects (table 1.1),
about 33% were investigated for property
offenses, 31% for public-order offenses, and 30%
for drug offenses (table 1.1). Just under 6% of
all suspects were investigated for violent
crimes. The relative distribution of offenses
during 1994 were comparable to those during
1993. Relative percentages of offenses reflect
criminal activity as well as Federal
investigative, prosecutorial, and statutory
priorities. For example, during 1994 priority
areas for prosecution by U.S. attorneys included
violent crimes, narcotics prosecutions,
organized crime, white collar crime, and civil
rights. ***Statistical Report, United States
Attorneys' Offices, Fiscal Year 1994. U.S.
Department of Justice, Executive Office for
United States Attorneys, Washington, DC.***

Suspects in matters concluded (tables 1.2 1.5)

Upon receiving a matter, a U.S. attorney will
either immediately decline it for prosecution or
conduct further investigation, which can take
from 1 hour to a few years. A matter may then be
filed as a criminal case in A us. district
court, referred to a U.S. magistrate, or
declined for prosecution. Of the 94,980 suspects
in criminal matters concluded during 1994, about
33% were investigated for property offenses, 31%
for public-order offenses, 29% for drug
offenses, and just under 6% were for violent
offenses (table 1.2). Of the suspects in matters
concluded, about 54% were prosecuted in U.S.
district court, 10% were referred to U.S.
magistrates, and 36% were declined for
prosecution***The number of suspects in criminal
matters concluded is not comparable to 1993 or
prior compendia. See Chapter notes, item 2,
p.20, for details***.

Suspects prosecuted (table 1.2) The likelihood
that a matter was prosecuted varied widely
across offense categories during 1994. Drug and
violent offenses were more likely to be
prosecuted than property or public-order
offenses. U.S. attorneys prosecuted
approximately 70% of drug offenses, 61% of
violent crimes, 46% of property offenses, and
45%of public-order offenses. Differences in
rates of prosecution within specific categories
can be substantial. For  example, among violent
offenses, 76% of robbery suspects were
prosecuted while 57% of murder, 40% of rape, and
47% assault suspects were prosecuted. Among
property offenses, counterfeiting was prosecuted
at a much higher rate than fraud (69% compared
to 44%), and among public-order offenses, tax
law violations were more likely to be prosecuted
than bribery (63% versus 48%).

Suspects in matters declined (tables 1.2 1.4)--
As with the decision to prosecute a case, the
likelihood that a matter is declined for
prosecution varies across offense categories.
Violent offenses are less likely to be declined
for prosecution (34%) than property offenses
(48%) but more likely than drug offenses
(23%).Public-order offenses are only slightly
more likely to be declined for prosecution than
violent offenses (36% compared to 34%).

Suspects accused of civil rights violations were
most likely to have their matters declined for
prosecution (95%). Immigration offenses were the
least likely (6%) of all offenses to be declined
for prosecution. Most civil rights cases were
declined because of weak evidence (30%) or
departmental policy (26%), although a number
were also declined due to the absence of a
Federal offense (11%) and lack of criminal
intent (12%).

The decision to decline prosecution is based on
a number of factors, including the lack of a
prosecutable offense, alternative resolution, or
case-and suspect-related reasons (table 1.3). Of
the 34,424 declinations during 1994, 20% were
declined because there was no crime or criminal
intent was lacking; 25% were declined because of
case-related reasons, mostly due to weak
evidence(22%); and another 25% were declined for
other reasons, such as minimal Federal interest
(6%) or U.S. attorney policy (5%).

The U.S. attorneys also reported that 2,314
cases (7%) were declined due to lack of
resources. Over a third of  these declinations
were fraud cases and almost a fifth were drug
offenses. Additionally, 177 racketeering and
extortion cases, 133 weapons cases, and 113
embezzlement cases were declined due to lack of
resources.

Not all suspects whose matters are declined for
prosecution avoid prosecution. Approximately 20%
of the matters declined for prosecution by U.S.
attorneys were referred to another authority for
prosecution. An additional 6% were settled
through alternative resolution procedures ( 
table 1. 4). Almost 33% of suspects in drug
matters declined for prosecution were referred
or handled in other prosecutions, as were 21% of
suspects in violent offenses, 18% of public-order 
suspects, and 16% of property offense suspects. 
Within major offense categories, specific offenses 
were referred for prosecution by other authorities 
at different rates. For example, about 33% of robbery 
and kidnaping suspects were handled in other 
prosecutions compared to 12% of rapes. Within 
the property offense category, more than 33% 
of persons involved in motor vehicle thefts 
or burglaries were referred too there authorities 
for prosecution, compared to 11% of suspects in 
fraud offenses.

Defendants in cases concluded by U.S.
magistrates (table 1.2)--Cases referred to U.S.
magistrates  are, by statute, misdemeanors.
Overall, U.S. magistrates disposed of  about 10%
of all criminal matters originally handled by
U.S. attorneys. For most offenses, the
likelihood that a U.S. magistrate concluded the
matter is also low. Exceptions include suspects
in the escape and immigration offense
categories. Fifty-eight percent of matters
involving escape offenses and 42% of those
involving immigration offenses were concluded by
U.S. magistrates. Together, these  two
categories accounted for 45% of the 9,754
matters concluded by U.S. magistrates.

Most of the escape violations are against
defendants who have absconded to avoid
prosecution in State courts. These cases are
normally dismissed by U.S. magistrates and
turned over to the State for prosecution on the
original warrant. Other types of offenses having
comparatively high rates of referral to U.S.
MAGISTRATES include assault (14%), regulatory
food and drug offenses(15%), postal law
violations (28%), and conspiracy, aiding and
abetting; traffic; and jurisdictional
offenses(35%).

Processing times (table 1.5)--The  time to
process matters varies with  the outcome of a
matter. Matters  concluded by U.S. magistrates
in  which the suspect was convicted took  the
least amount of time--an average of 1.8 months.
Matters ultimately  declined for prosecution by
U.S. attorneys  took the longest amount of
time--an average of almost 17 months. Matters
prosecuted in U.S. district court generally fell
between  these extremes. While the average
processing time for a conviction by a U.S.
magistrate was 1.8 months, at least 50% of those
convictions occurred in about 3 days. Similarly,
50% of the matters declined for prosecution were
declined in fewer than 13 months.

Overall, suspects in violent and drug offenses
were processed more quickly than suspects in
other types of offenses. For key decisions, such
as whether to file a case or decline a matter
for prosecution, suspects in matters involving
violent offenses were processed more quickly
than those in matters involving drug offenses.
At an average of 14 months, fraudulent property
offenses took longer to process than other
offenses.

Chapter 1 notes

1) Tables 1.1- 1.5 were created from the Central
System data files of  the EOUSA. For table 1.1,
only records which showed a matter received
during fiscal year 1994 were selected. For
tables 1.2 1.5, only records which show a matter
terminated by reason of declination, disposition
by a U.S. magistrate, or filed as a case in U.S.
DISTRICT court from October 1, 1993, through
September 30, 1994, were selected. In all of
these tables, matters "declined immediately"
were excluded.

2) The number of suspects in matters
investigated in table 1.1, and the number of
suspects in matters concluded in tables 1.2 and
1.5 are not directly comparable to previous
compendia counts. In prior years, these
statistics included appellants in appeals filed
or appeals terminated. In table 1.1 of this
Compendium, the number of suspects in matters
received is limited to suspects in criminal
matters that were filed as cases in U.S.
district courts, handled by U.S. magistrates, or
declined for prosecution. In the 1993 and prior
compendia, the number of suspects in criminal
matters received included individuals in those
criminal appeals which involved U.S. attorneys.
To obtain a number of suspects that is
comparable to the statistic reported in 1993
and prior compendia, add to the data in table
1.1 of this Compendium, the number of appellants
in appeals filed which were handled by U.S.
attorneys.  The table below shows these data for
the major offense categories.

                       Number of appellants
Nature of the          in appeals filed &
underlying offense     handled by U.S. attorneys
--------------------------------------------
     All offenses                 9,459

Violent offenses                    704

Property offenses                 1,805
  Fraudulent property             1,473
  Other property                    332

Drug offenses                     4,625

Public-order offenses             2,269

  Regulatory public-order           142
  Other public order              2,127

Unknown or in 
  determinable offenses              56
--------------------------------------------
                   

In tables 1.2 and 1.5 of this Compendium, the
number of suspects in matters concluded also is
limited to those suspects whose matters were
concluded by a case filing in a U.S. district
court, by declination, or by disposition by a
U.S. magistrate. In the 1993 and prior
compendia, this number included appellants in
criminal appeals terminated.

To obtain a number that is comparable to the
number reported in these earlier compendia, the
number of appellants in appeals terminated and
handled by U.S. attorneys needs to be added to
the totals in table 1.2. The table below shows
the number of appellants in appeals cases
terminated during fiscal year 1994.

                       Number of appellants 
Nature of the          in appeals concluded 
underlying offense     by U.S. attorneys
------------------------------------------------     
   All offenses              9,547

Violent offenses               725

Property offenses            1,738
  Fraudulent property        1,484
  Other property               254

Drug offenses                4,840

  Public-order offenses      2,199

  Regulatory public-order      146
  Other public order         2,053

Unknown or 
  indeterminable offenses       45
---------------------------------------------

3) Offenses in the Central System data files are
classified by the title and section of the
United States Code for the most serious offense
investigated, as determined by the assistant
U.S. attorney responsible for the matter. For
tables in this compendium, these citations were
translated into the corresponding four-digit
offense codes used by the Administrative Office
of the United States Courts (AOUSC).These
four-digit codes were then aggregated into the
categories shown in the tables. U.S. Code
citations often do not permit detailed
classification of drug offenses by type of
criminal activity involved. A person charged
with conspiracy is classified under the
substantive offense alleged (for example,
conspiracy to defraud is classified as a fraud)
unless the type of conspiracy cannot be
determined from the U.S. Code citation.
Unclassified conspiracies are included among
"conspiracy, aiding and abetting, traffic, and
jurisdictional offenses" in tables 1.1, 1.2,
1.4, and 1.5.

The most serious offense investigated is based
on the criminal lead charge as determined by the
assistant U.S. attorney responsible for the
criminal matter.

4) In the tables in this chapter, the "all
offenses" row or "total declinations" row (in
table 1.3) includes records whose offense
category (basis for declination) is missing or
indeterminable. The percentage distributions in
these tables, however, are based on the number
of observations with non-missing offenses (basis
for declination) values.  The number of missing
values are reported either on a separate line or
in a footnote.


Chapter 2:  Pretrial release

The Bail Reform Act of 1984 (18 U.S.C. . 3141)
sets the terms for release and detention of
defendants facing charges in Federal courts. At
the time defendants first appear before a
judicial officer, they may be (1) released on
personal recognizance or unsecured bond; (2)
released subject to conditions imposed by the
court, possibly including traditional bail; (3)
temporarily detained without bail (limited to 10
working days) to permit deportation, exclusion,
or the revocation of previously granted
conditional release; or (4) detained without
bail after a hearing ***18 U.S.C. . 3142(e)
(1984)***.

Federal defendants may be detained without bail
if charged with specified categories of
offenses, or if it is determined at a special
hearing that no financial or other conditions
will reasonably assure the required appearance
of the person and/or guarantee the safety of any
other person in the community. Defendants not
detained under these criteria must be released,
either on personal recognizance, unsecured bond,
or such conditions as are necessary to assure
their appearance at trial and the public
safety.***18 U.S.C. . 3142(c) (1984)***
The law explicitly states that the court may not
impose a financial condition that results in the
pretrial detention of the person.

According to statute, a defendant must be
brought before a judicial officer without
"unnecessary delay" upon arrest. The judicial
officer, who maybe a judge but is generally a
U.S. magistrate, determines whether the defendant 
will be released or detained prior to trial. 
If a hearing is required, the release decision 
may be delayed no more than 3 days (or 5 days 
if the defendant requests).

Release procedures

Defendants may be released at anytime before
trial. Some defendants, therefore, are detained
for a time and then released before trial. This
generally occurs when an appeal results in a
lowering of bail conditions or the defendant
requires additional time to arrange compliance
with the originally set terms of release.
Defendants who have been detained prior to their
release are included in tabulations of both
defendants detained and defendants released.

Types of pretrial release

Defendants may be released without financial
conditions according to the following:

Personal recognizance--defendant is released
subject to no financial or other conditions.

Unsecured bond--no money is required to be
posted before release, but defendant is liable
for full bail amount if he or she fails to
appear.

Conditional release--any combination of
restrictions that are deemed necessary to
guarantee the defendant's appearance at trial or
the safety of the community. Non-financial
conditions commonly place restrictions on the
defendant's movements, associations, and/or
actions. They may also involve employment,
education, or treatment for medical,
psychological, or substance abuse conditions.
Defendants may also be released on financial
conditions. Financial conditions include:
(1) deposit bond (the defendant is required to
post a percentage of the total bail amount,
usually 10%), (2) surety bond (the defendant is
released subject to guarantees by a third person
that the full amount will be paid), or (3) a
collateral bond (collateral equal to the full
bail amount is required to be posted by the
defendant prior to release). Financial
conditions may occur in combination with
non-financial conditions.

Factors relating to release or detention 

In deciding whether to release a defendant and
in setting release conditions, the court is
directed to consider the nature and
circumstances of the offense charged, the weight
of evidence against the defendant, the
defendant's character, physical and mental
condition, family ties, employment, financial
resources, length of residence in the community,
community ties, past conduct, history relating
to drug or alcohol abuse, criminal history, and
record concerning appearance at court
proceedings.

During 1994, 27,607 defendants were released
prior to trial (table 2.1). Those defendants
released made up nearly 61% of 45,584 defendants
who terminated pretrial services during 1994. Of
the defendants released, 85% completed pretrial
services without violating the conditions of
their release (table 2.8).

In the same year, 26,299 defendants were
detained for some period of time prior to the
disposition of their case (table 2.3). Those
defendants detained comprised about 58% of all
defendants terminating pretrial services during
1994. Included are those who were detained prior
to having a preliminary hearing with the
magistrate, at which point they could have been
either released or ordered to a have a detention
hearing. Of the 26,299 defendants detained, 54%
were denied bail, which guaranteed that they
would remain detained through their case
disposition.

Pretrial detention hearings were held for 18,608
defendants. Of these, 14,103, or more than 75%,
were ordered detained (table 2.5).

Of the 27,607 defendants released prior to
trial, 15% violated a condition of their release
(table 2.7). The majority(72%) of these
violations were technical violations of the bail
conditions.  Defendants released on financial 
conditions were most likely (24%) to incur some 
violation of the conditions of their release 
(table 2.8). Conversely, defendants given 
conditional release violated their release 
at the lowest rate (4%). Five percent fall 
released defendants had their release revoked.

Pretrial outcomes by offense categories

Releases (table 2.1)--The use of methods of
release varied among major offense categories
(figure 2.1).

Within each offense category, the highest
percentage of defendants released was on
unsecured bond.

Violent offenders were the least likely to be
released prior to criminal trial--only 38% were
released during 1994 (table 2.1). However, among
violent offenders the likelihood of release
varies greatly; 23% of those charged with
robbery were released compared to 70% of those
charged with rape and 90% of those charged with
negligent manslaughter. Of those defendants
released on robbery charges, approximately 26%
were released on personal recognizance. Of those
defendants released on rape charges, 60% were
released on personal recognizance. And of those
defendants released on negligent manslaughter
charges, 72% were released on personal
recognizance.

About half of all drug defendants were released.
Defendants facing non-trafficking charges were
more likely to be released than the more
numerous defendants accused of trafficking
offenses. Moreover, among those released,
defendants charged with drug offenses other than
trafficking were 4 times more likely to be
released on personal recognizance as those
charged with trafficking.

Detentions (tables 2.3 2.6)--Defendants charged
with violent offenses were the most likely to be
detained(table 2.3). Eighty percent of violent
offenders were detained. Violent offenders also
were the most likely to be denied bail (70% of
those detained). Seventy-four percent of
defendants charged with drug offenses were
detained. Of drug offenders detained, 55% were
denied bail. Property and public-order
defendants were less likely to be detained than
violent and drug defendants--55% of public order
and 27% of property defendants were detained.
Fifty percent of those public-order defendants
detained and 44% of those property defendants
detained were denied bail. Of public-order
defendants, those charged with immigration
offenses were the most likely to be detained
(83%).

For 67% of defendants charged with violent
offenses, it was decided at the preliminary
hearing that a detention hearing was warranted
(table 2.5). By comparison, 55% of those charged
with drug offenses, 33% of those charged with
public-order offenses, and 18% of those charged
with property offenses were ordered to have a
detention hearing. Of defendants charged with
violent offenses, those most likely to have a
pretrial detention hearing were those charged
with murder, kidnaping, robbery, or threats
against the President. The least likely were
those charged with negligent manslaughter.

Almost 67% of those charged with violent
offenses had a pretrial detention hearing. Of
these, nearly 84% were ordered detained.
Forty-five percent of those charged with weapons
offenses had a pretrial detention hearing;
however, 81% of these defendants were ordered
detained.  Similar patterns hold for those charged 
with immigration and escape offenses. Those charged
with drug trafficking were more likely to have 
 detention hearing than those charged with other 
drug-related offenses (57% compared to 41%).
However, once the hearing was held those in 
both categories had similar chances of being 
ordered detained (table 2.5).

Violations (table 2.7)--Of defendants who
terminated pretrial services during 1994, those
charged with drug offenses, who were eventually
released prior to trial, were the most likely
(24%) to incur at least one violation during the
release period (table ). Those charged with
violent offenses were the most likely (10%)
to have their release revoked. Those charged with 
public-order offenses had the best pretrial
release record; 9% incurred at least one
violation during this release period, and 3% had
their release revoked.

Pretrial outcomes across demographic groups

Releases (table 2.2)--Females were more likely
(81%) than males(57%) to be released during 1994
(figure 2.2). Males had a greater chance of
having a financial condition imposed than
females (20% and 11%, respectively) (table 2.2).
Sixty-nine percent of all defendants identified
as non-Hispanic were released during 1994
compared to 40% of Hispanics. Non-Hispanic
releases were almost 3 times as likely to be
released on personal recognizance as Hispanics.

Education level and the likelihood of release
were positively correlated: about half the
defendants with less than a high school
education were released during 1994 while 81% of
those who had completed college were released.
Releases with a college degree were less likely
to receive financial conditions and slightly
more likely to be released on personal
recognizance than their counterparts who had
less education.

Defendants with a known history of drug abuse
were released less frequently than defendants
with no known drug history. However, among all
released defendants, drug abuse history does not
appear to have had a major effect on the form of
pretrial release.

Detentions (tables 2.4 and 2.6)--Males were
nearly twice as likely as females to be detained
(table 2.4). Of all detainees, 55% of the men
and 42% of the women were denied bail. Hispanics
were nearly twice as likely as non-Hispanics to
be detained. However, among detainees, Hispanics
had a 50% chance and non-Hispanics a 57% chance
of being denied bail.

Younger defendants were more likely to be
detained. Sixty-eight percent of defendants
between ages 16 and 18 were detained compared to
44% of those over age 40. However, of all
defendants detained, the chance of being denied
bail were similar across all age groups. The
same patterns apply to education level.

Male defendants were nearly twice as likely as
female defendants to have a detention hearing
and were more likely to be ordered detained as a
result of the hearing (table 2.6). Blacks had a
higher chance of having a detention hearing than
those of other races and were more likely to be
ordered detained as a result of the hearing.

The likelihood of having a detention hearing
increased with the number of prior convictions,
the severity of the defendant's criminal
history, and a current sentence to supervision.
Further, 48% of those with a history of drug
abuse had detention hearings compared to 37% of
those without such a past. Those with a known
history of drug abuse were also more likely to
be ordered detained.

Violations (table 2.9)--Males who were released
were more likely than females to incur a
violation during the pretrial release period and
were more likely to have their release revoked.
Defendants with no prior criminal history were
less likely to have a pretrial release violation
than those with a prior conviction. Among
defendants having prior convictions, those
previously convicted for violent crimes were the
most likely to incur a violation. Released
defendants with a known drug history were almost
3 times more likely to incur a violation than
those with no known drug history. Violators with
a history of drug use were more likely to have
their release revoked.

Chapter 2 notes

1) All tables in chapter 2 were created from
data in the Pretrial Services Information Act
System database, which is maintained by the
Pretrial Services Administration(PSA) within the
AOUSC. The data describe 45,584 defendants who
terminated pretrial services during October 1,
1993, through September 30, 1994, and whose
cases were filed by complaint, indictment, or
information. In these tables, the totals (e.g.,
"all offenses") included records whose offense
or other attributes were missing or in
determinable. The percentage distributions were
based on non-missing values, and missing values
were reported in a separate row or in a
footnote.

Offenses in the PSA are based on the most
serious charged offense, as determined by the
probation officer responsible for the interview
with the defendant. The probation officer
classifies the major offense charged into AOUSC
four-digit offense codes. For defendants charged
with more than one offense on an indictment, the
probation officer chooses as the most major
charged offense the one carrying the most severe
penalty or, in the case of two or more charges
carrying the same penalty, the one with the
highest offense severity. The offense severity
level is determined by the AOUSC, which ranks
offenses according to the maximum sentence, type
of crime, and maximum fine amount. These
four-digit codes are then aggregated into the
same offense categories as those used in chapter 1.

For drug offenses, the type of drug activity--
trafficking or possession--is obtained
by the probation officers from their reading of 
the indictment or other charging documents. The
AOUSC citation manual provides probation
officers with detailed instructions on how to
code drug crimes.

2) In tables 2.1 2.4, the percentages showing
the methods of release or methods of detention
were based on the number of defendants released
or the number of defendants detained. In tables
2.5 and 2.6, the percentages were based on the
number of defendants who had hearings and were
ordered detained. This method departs from the
1993 and prior compendia, in which the
percentages were based on the number of
defendants terminating pretrial services.


Chapter 3: Adjudication

Federal criminal cases may result in conviction
of the defendant following plea or trial,
acquittal of the defendant after trial, or
dismissal of the case.***Unless otherwise noted,
data describe felony and misdemeanor cases in
U.S. district courts and include Class A
misdemeanors handled by U.S. magistrates. The
data also include Class B misdemeanors that are
handled by U.S. district court judges. These
types of cases occur infrequently.***

Defendants in cases filed (table 3.1)

During 1994, 62,327 defendants had criminal
charges filed against them in U.S. district
courts, and more than 47,341 (76%) of these
defendants were charged with felonies. The
20,052 drug trafficking defendants comprised
almost one-third of all criminal defendants and
43% of all felony defendants. Felony property
and public-order defendants comprised 21% and
17%, respectively, of all defendants in cases
filed.  Half the 14,980 misdemeanant were
charged with traffic violations.

Defendants in cases terminated (table 3.2)

Cases were terminated against 61,404 defendants
during 1994, 47,292 (77%) of whom were felony
defendants. The 20,056 drug trafficking
defendants comprised 33% of all defendants in
cases terminated and 42% of all felony
defendants.

Almost 83% of all defendants were convicted; the
conviction rate for felony defendants (86%) was
higher than for misdemeanant (70%). For major
felony offense categories, conviction rates
ranged from 85% for public-order offenses to 88%
for violent offenses. Within major offense
categories, however, the conviction rates varied
more widely. For example, within the violent
offense category, the conviction rate ranged
from 94% for robbery to 74% for assault. Within
the public-order category, conviction rates
ranged from 51% for obscene materials violations
to 92% for immigration and tax offenses to 96%
for transportation offenses.

Most defendants who were convicted pleaded
guilty. Overall, 91% of those convicted pleaded
guilty while only 9% were convicted at trial.
For the major offense categories, between 88%
and 93% of defendants pleaded guilty (for drug
offenses and property offenses, respectively).

Of the 5,689 defendants who exercised their
right to a trial, 4,352 (77%) were convicted
either by a jury or bench trial. Drug and
violent offenders were more likely to go to
trial than were property and public-order
defendants. Drug defendants, for example,
comprised 42% of all defendants adjudicated  at
trial, but they comprised 33% of all defendants
in cases terminated. By contrast, property
defendants comprised 16% of all defendants
adjudicated at trial and 22% of all defendants
in cases terminated.

Of those adjudicated at trial, the felony
conviction rate was 82% while the misdemeanor
conviction rate was 43%. Among felony offenses,
conviction rates ranged from 85% for drug
defendants to 78% for public-order defendants.
Conviction rates of violent (81%) and property
(80%) offenders fell between these extremes.

Case processing times (table 3.3)

The data in table 3.3 cover the interval from
the time a case is filed in U.S. district court
through sentencing for those convicted as well
as the interval from case filing through
disposition for those not convicted, or those
whose cases are dismissed. Title I of the Speedy
Trial Act of 1974, as amended, sets time
requirements for processing criminal cases in
Federal courts. Except for certain exclusions,
indictment must occur within 30 days of arrest;
defendants are guaranteed at least 30 days to
prepare for trial; and the Government must be
ready for trial within 70 days. The Speedy Trial
Act does not specify a time interval from trial
to sentencing, and the time limits set by the act 
exclude several enumerated periods of pretrial 
procedure such as time spent awaiting rulings 
on motions.***18 U.S.C. section 3161 et. seq.
*** Additionally, defendants may waive their 
rights within the Speedy Trial Act.  As a 
result, the actual processing time for most 
defendants can be longer than these limits 
without violating the provisions of the Act.

Overall, the average time for processing
defendants was 8.6 months. Defendants who
pleaded guilty were processed faster (7.4
months) than defendants who went to trial
(10 months).  Defendants whose cases were
ultimately dismissed took longest to process
(13.4 months).  Among major offense categories,
case processing times were similar to the
overall pattern. However, for violent offenses,
this pattern occasionally changed. For example,
cases of murder defendants disposed of by a
guilty plea took almost 1 month longer to
dispose than those whose cases were disposed of
at trial (10.7 compared to 9.8 months).
Similarly, for rape defendants, cases disposed
of by plea took 7.2 months, on  average, to
complete, while rape defendants who went to
trial had their cases disposed in 6.6 months, on
average.

Characteristics of convicted defendants (table
3.4)

Of defendants who were convicted, 85% were men,
63% were white, 34% were black, and 25% were
Hispanic. Most were U.S. citizens (78%), had
graduated high school or completed some higher
education (61%), and had some criminal history
(52%).

Among defendants convicted there were over 5
times as many men as women (85% compared to
15%), almost twice as many whites as blacks(63%
compared to 34%), and 3 times as many
non-Hispanics as Hispanics (75% compared to
25%). U.S. citizens comprised 78% of defendants 
while non-citizens comprised 22%. Persons completing
at least high school represented 61% of all
defendants while persons over age 30 represented
59% of defendants, and persons with no known
criminal history comprised just over half (52%)
of convicted defendants.

Convictions by U.S. magistrates (table 3.5)

During 1994 U.S. magistrates disposed of 12,976
misdemeanor criminal defendants, over 70% of
whom were convicted. Traffic violators comprised
54% of the defendants disposed by U.S.
magistrates, while misdemeanor property offenses
comprised another 24% of U.S. magistrates'
cases.

Chapter 3 notes

1) Tables 3.1-3.4 were derived from the
Administrative Office of U.S. Courts (AOUSC)
criminal master data files. Only records with
cases filed in U.S. district court (table 3.1)
or cases that terminated in U.S. district court
during October 1, 1993, through September
30,1994, were selected. Offenses were classified
according to the most serious offense charged.
In the case of multiple offenses, the offense
carrying the most severe potential penalty was
selected.

20 Table 3.4 was derived from the USSC monitoring 
system files, which are limited to records of 
defendants sentenced under the Federal sentencing 
guidelines.

3) Criminal record, as reported in table 3.4, is
limited to prior adult convictions. For some
defendants in this table, it is further limited
to the portion of their criminal record that is
relevant for calculating sentences under the
Federal sentencing guidelines. In general, this
is limited to sentences imposed within a 15-year
period prior to the current offense and offenses
committed within the United States.  For most
defendants, the criminal history used to
calculate sentencing guideline ranges is tant
amount to their entire adult criminal history.




Chapter 4:  Sentencing

Depending upon the type and severity of the
offense, convicted offenders may be sentenced to
incarceration, probation, a fine, or a
combination of sanctions such as a split or
mixed sentence (imprisonment as well as a period
of probation supervision)***For a definition of
mixed sentences, see Glossary, p.93.***  The
Federal sentencing guidelines require a term of
supervised release following service of any
prison sentence of more than 1 year. In
addition, courts have discretion to impose
supervised release in any other case.

Except where otherwise indicated, tables in this
chapter are based on the most serious offense of
conviction. They are not directly comparable
with tables in earlier chapters that are based
on the most serious offense investigated or most
serious offense charged (see Methodology).

Offenders convicted and sentences imposed 
(table 4.1)

Of the 50,701 offenders sentenced during 1994,
33,022 (65%) were sentenced to prison, 15,284
(30%) were sentenced to probation, and 4,043
(8%) were ordered to pay only a fine.
***Offenders given an intermediate sanction such
as intermittent confinement or community
confinement that also included probation
supervision are counted among offenders given
probation.***  The likelihood of a convicted felon
being sentenced to prison was 78%.  However the
likelihood of being sentenced to prison varied
widely by specific  offense. Violent and drug
offenders were more likely to receive prison
sentences (93% compared to 91%) than were either
property offenders or public-order offenders(58%
compared to 76%).

Among public-order offenders, persons convicted
of weapons, immigration, and escape offenses
were about as likely as violent and drug
offenders to receive prison sentences (90%, 86%,
and 92%, respectively).

Among property offenders, burglars and persons
convicted of arson and explosives offenders were
also almost as likely as violent and drug
offenders to receive prison sentences (90%
compared to 86%).

Overall, 30% of convicted offenders were
sentenced to probation. Twenty-five percent of
felons and 48% of misdemeanant were sentenced
to probation terms. Among felons, persons
convicted of postal law violations (65%), tax
violations (64%), and gambling violations (71%)
were among the most likely to be given
probation.

While less than 1% of all convicted felons were
ordered to pay only a fine, felons convicted of
antitrust (40%) and obscene material (32%)
offenses were most likely to be so ordered.
Fines generally were reserved for misdemeanor
offenders, 34% of whom were ordered to pay
fines.

Average prison sentences imposed (table 4.2)

Average lengths of sentences imposed varied
among major offense categories. For all
offenders given prison terms, the average term
of imprisonment imposed was 61 months. Persons
convicted of felonies received an average prison
term of 64 months.

Among major offense categories, property
offenders received the shortest sentences, on
average, while violent offenders' received the
longest (26 months compared to 90 months). Drug
offenders received 83 months, on average, and
public-order offenders received 51 months. The
2,901 weapons offenders comprised 41%of all
public-order offenders sent to prison, and they
received an average prison term of 81 months.

Relationship between sentence imposed and method
of case disposition (table 4.3)

Of the 50,701 offenders convicted, 46,349 ( 91%)
were convicted by guilty plea while the
remainder (9%) were convicted at trial.
Sixty-three percent of the offenders convicted
by guilty plea received some prison time as did 
87% of the offenders convicted at trial. Across 
offense categories, offenders convicted by plea 
were less likely to receive prison time than those 
convicted at trial.

The difference in the likelihood of receiving
prison by mode of conviction varied among
offense categories. For violent offenders there
was a 5 percentage point difference in the
likelihood of receiving a prison term based on
the mode of conviction. Ninety-three percent of
violent offenders convicted by plea received
prison as did 98% of those convicted at trial.
By contrast, for fraudulent property offenders
and regulatory public-order offenders, there was
a 30 percentage point difference in the
likelihood of receiving prison based on
conviction by guilty plea or by trial.

The average prison term imposed on defendants
convicted at trial was longer than the term
imposed on defendants convicted by plea.
Defendants convicted at trial received 133
months on average, while those convicted by plea
received an average 53 months. For drug
offenders, the difference in average prison
sentences between those convicted at trial
versus those convicted by plea was 100 months.
For fraudulent property offenders, the
difference was nearly 24 months.

Characteristics of offenders sentenced to prison
(tables 4.4 4.6)

The majority of persons sentenced to prison
during 1994 were male (84%), white (63%),
non-Hispanic (75%), and U.S. citizens (78%). The
percentage sentenced to prison was not uniform
across all categories of age, race, sex,
education, and ethnicity. Similarly, the average
sentences imposed were not uniform across
categories of age, race, sex, education, or
ethnicity (table 4.5). However, conclusions
about the effect that offender characteristics
may have had  on sentencing cannot be drawn from
the aggregate patterns in the data.  Such an
assessment would require detailed information
for each category showing the presence or
absence of factors that are legally intended to
affect sentencing, such as offense severity,
weapon use, role in the offense, victim injury,
dollar loss, and so forth.

One such study of the factors affecting
sentencing found that "nearly all of the
aggregate differences among sentences for
whites, blacks, and Hispanics during 1989-90 can
be attributed to characteristics of offenses and
offenders that current law and sentencing
guidelines establish as legitimate
considerations in sentencing decisions."
***Douglas C. McDonald and Kenneth E. Carlson,
Sentencing in the Federal Courts: Does Race
Matter?,  Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of
Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics, December
1993 (NCJ-145328).***

Average sentences imposed were longest for males
(64 months), blacks (84 months), non-Hispanics
(64 months), and U.S. citizens (65 months).
These longer terms are due in large part because
these categories of offenders (males, blacks,
non-Hispanics, and U.S. citizens) are more
highly concentrated in the offense types (table
4.4) that also are associated with longer
average sentences (table 4.2). For example,
incarceration rates for blacks exceed those of
whites in the violent, drug, and non regulatory
public-order offense categories. These offenses
are associated with longer average sentences
(table 4.2) than are property offenses or
regulatory  public-order offenses--the
categories in which whites' incarceration 
rates exceed those of blacks.

In general, within categories of offender
characteristics, average prison terms were
longer for violent and drug offenses than for
property and regulatory public-order offenses.
These two offense categories generally are
considered to be more serious under the Federal
sentencing guidelines than are property and
regulatory public-order offenses.  As a result,
for aggregate tables like those presented in
this chapter, persons with a certain
characteristic may appear to receive more severe
sentences on average. The primary reason for the
longer averages is the larger number of serious
offenses that made up the average sentences.

Chapter 4 notes

1) Tables 4.1 4.3 were derived from the AOUSC
criminal master data files. Only records of
defendants sentenced during October 1,
1993, through September 30, 1994, were selected.
Offenses shown in these tables--offenses of
conviction--are based on the longest actual
sentence imposed.

2) Tables 4.4 4.6 were derived from the United
States Sentencing Commission (USSC) monitoring
system files, which are limited to records of
defendants sentenced under the Federal
sentencing guidelines only. Only records of
defendants who were sentenced during fiscal year
1994 were selected. These include defendants
convicted of felonies or Class  A misdemeanors.
Excluded from the USSC data were defendants
convicted only of Class B or C misdemeanors or
infractions, defendants whose offenses were
committed before November 1, 1987, and juvenile
offenders. Juveniles are not subject to
guidelines, and they were not included in tables
4.4 4.6; however, persons under 18 years of age
who were sentenced as adults were included in
these tables. Corporate defendants were excluded
from them. Tables 4.4 4.6 indicate the number of
records for which relevant data were available.
Percentage distributions were based on records
with known values of defendant characteristics
and offenses. USSC offense codes were translated
into the corresponding AOUSC four-digit offense
codes, and these four-digit codes were then
aggregated into the offense categories shown in
the tables.

3) Criminal record, as reported in tables 4.
4  4.6, is limited to the portion of a
defendant's criminal record that is relevant for
calculating sentences under the Federal
sentencing guidelines. In general, this is
limited to sentences imposed within a 15-year
period prior to the current offense and offenses
committed within the United States.
Specifically, the  number of  prior adult
incarcerations reported in tables 4.4  4.6
included two types of prison sentences covering
different periods of time. First, it included
prior sentences of imprisonment exceeding 13
months that were imposed or served (all or in
part) during the 15 years prior to the
commencement of the instant offense. Second, it
included other prior sentences of shorter
lengths imposed within 10 years of the
defendant's commencement of the instant offense.
Prior prison sentences not falling within these
time periods or meeting these criteria were not
counted.


Chapter 5:  Appeals

Prior to implementation of the Sentencing Reform
Act of 1984, only criminal convictions could be
appealed. However, the Sentencing Reform Act
provided for the appellate review of sentences
imposed provided the sentence was (1) imposed in
violation of the law; (2) imposed as the result
of an incorrect sentencing guideline
application; (3) outside the recommended
guideline sentencing range; or (4) imposed for
an offense for which no sentencing guideline
exists and plainly unreasonable. Both the
defendant and the Government have the right to
appeal an imposed sentence (18 U.S.C. section 3742).

Appeals filed (tables 5.1 and 5.2)

During 1994 the U.S. Court of Appeals received
10,674 criminal appeals. About 21% of all
criminal cases resulted in an appeal and fewer
than 5% of appeals (522) were filed by the
Government. The appeal rate varied substantially
across offense categories.  More than 75% of
murder convictions were appealed. Other offenses
with high rates of appeal included kidnaping,
threats against the President, civil rights
offenses, perjury, contempt and intimidation
charges, and weapons charges. Offenses with
lower rates of appeal included immigration
offenses, counterfeiting,  larceny, embezzlement,
postal law violations and gambling offenses.

Forty-five percent of these appeals challenged
both the conviction and the sentence imposed.
About 1 in 4 challenged only the sentence
imposed, and about 14% were appeals of
convictions for crimes committed before the
sentencing guidelines took effect in 1987.

The type of appeal filed (sentence, conviction,
or both) was relatively constant across the
offense categories underlying the appeal.
However, for immigration offenders, almost 40%
of those convicted appealed only their
sentences, compared to 24% for public-order
offenses and 25% for all criminal categories.

Appeals from drug convictions comprised almost
half (48%) of all appeals filed. Public-order
offenses were about 23% of all appeals, and
property offenses made up another 18% of
appeals. Violent offenders comprised 8% of
appeals filed.

Appeals terminated (tables 5.3-5.5)

Of the 11,708 appeals terminated during 1994,
9,265 (79% of all appeals) were terminated on
the merits.  In 86% of cases terminated on the
merits,  at least part of the district court
ruling was affirmed. District court decisions
were remanded or reversed in approximately 10%
of these cases. Cases were dismissed or remanded
to criminal court relatively infrequently. In
addition, 2,443 appeals were terminated on
procedural grounds.

Chapter 5 notes

Tables in chapter 5 were created from the AOUSC
appeals database. Records of appellants in
appeals filed or terminated during October 1,
1993, through September 30, 1994, were selected.
Data include records of 10,162 appellants in
criminal appeals filed during fiscal year 1994
and 10,852 appellants in appeals terminated
during the same period. Appeals were classified
into the offense categories that represent the
underlying offense of conviction. Offenses
represent the statutory offense charged against
a defendant in a criminal appeal. Offenses were
classified by the AOUSC into their four-digit
offense codes. These were then aggregated into
the offense categories shown in the tables.


Chapter 6:  Corrections

Supervision

During 1994, 39,372 offenders terminated an
active supervision of  probation, parole or
mandatory  release, or a term of supervised
release.

Active supervision can terminate upon one of two
events: (1) a temporary removal or (2) a
permanent closure. A temporary removal to
inactive status can occur because of a violation
(usually absconding, a warrant for arrest, or
failure to appear for a hearing) or for some
other reason, such as long-term hospitalization.
A permanent closure of supervision occurs in one
of three ways: (1) the offender successfully
completes the supervision term without violating
conditions; (2) the offender is returned to
prison following a violation of conditions or
conviction for a new crime; or (3) the
offender's supervision is closed for
administrative reasons. The tables in this
chapter classify termination of active
supervision as "no violation" (a successful
completion or a removal without violations), as
technical violations or new crimes (removals
with violations or returns to prison), or as
administrative case closures.

Violation of the conditions of supervision or
arrest for a new offense can result in
imposition of additional restrictions or in
removal from active supervision. Removal from
active supervision may entail incarceration of a
probationer or reincarceration of an offender
who was under parole or supervised release.
Offenders who are removed from active
supervision with violations, but who are not
incarcerated, may have some other action taken
against them, such as deportation, issuance of
an arrest warrant, assignment to community
corrections, or supervision by some other State
or local authority.

Probation outcomes (table 6.1)

During 1994, 20,185 offenders complete done or
more terms of active probation. Overall, 80% of
these offenders successfully completed their
term of probation, another 17% violated their
conditions of probation, and the remaining 3%
were administrative closures. Of those who
violated their conditions of probation, 5%
committed a new crime.  Most committed technical 
violations, such as drug use  (3%) and absconding 
(2%) (figure 6.1).

Offenders convicted of violent offenses were the
least likely to successfully complete a term of
probation without a violation. Thirty-three
percent of probationers convicted of violent
offenses violated the conditions of their
probation. By contrast, 16% of property, 16% of
drug,  and 12% of public-order offenders violated
their conditions of probation  (figure 6.2).
Violent offenders were also more likely to
commit new crimes  (12%) than were probationers
convicted of property  (5%), drug (5%), and
public-order  (4%) offenses.

Parole and supervised release outcomes (table
6.3)

During 1994, 19,187 offenders completed terms of
either parole or supervised release. Overall,
56% of these offenders successfully completed
their term of parole or supervised release; 14%
violated by committing a new crime; 26%
committed technical violations, such as drug use
(9%)  and absconding (4%);and 4% completed their
parole term through an administrative case
closure  (table 6.3, figure 6.1).

Offenders convicted of violent offenses were the
least likely to complete a term of parole or
supervised release without a violation.
Sixty-one percent of violent offenders violated
conditions of parole or supervised release,
while 40% of property, 35% of drug, and 38% of
public-order offenders violated parole or
supervised release (figure 6.2). Violent
offenders were also more likely to commit new
crimes (23%) than offenders convicted of
property (14%), drug (12%), and public-order
(14%) offenses.

Entrants into supervision (table 6.5)

Figure 6.3 displays the percentages of offenders
entering supervision (with sentences of at least
 months) during 1994 who violated conditions of
supervision over a 12-month period, by type of
supervision. The rate of violating conditions of
supervision was highest for parolees and lowest
for probationers. After 12 months of
supervision, 21% of parolees had violated
conditions of release, compared to 9% of
probationers. Overall, about 12% of offenders
entering supervision during 1994 had violated
conditions of  release within 12 months of their
entry into supervision.

Characteristics of offenders completing
supervision (tables 6.2 and 6.4) 

Probation (table 6.2)--Among offenders who completed
a term of probation, 75% were male; 70% were white
and 92% were of non-Hispanic origin; 30% were
under age 31 (compared to 39% over age 40); 27%
had less than a high school diploma (compared to
34% who had a high school diploma and 39% who
had at least some college education);  and 81%
had no known drug history.

Offender characteristics--such as age, history
of drug abuse, and education--were associated
with the probability of violating terms of
supervision. Offenders ages 16 to 20 were more
likely  (38%) to violate conditions of
supervision than probationers in other age
groups--19% of those ages 21 to 30 and 12%
of those over age 30 (figure 6.4).

Probationers with a history of drug abuse were
almost  7 times more likely to violate probation
for drug use than offenders who were not drug
abusers. Probationers with known histories of
drug abuse were also more likely to violate
supervision for other reasons (technical
violations and new crimes) than were other
probationers.

Probationers with lower levels of education were
more likely to violate the conditions of
probation than those with higher levels of
education. Those who did not graduate high
school had a 24% violation rate, those who were
high school graduates had a 17% violation rate,
those with some college had a 13% violation
rate, and those with a college degree had only a
7% violation rate (figure 6.5).

Parole and supervised release (table 6.4)--Among
those who completed a term of parole or
supervised release, 89% were male, 67% were
white, 85% were of non-Hispanic origin, 22% were
less than age 31 (41% were over age 40), 42% had
only some high school (34% had a high school
diploma and 24% had at least some college), and
54% had no known drug history. 

Offender characteristics--such as age, history 
of drug abuse, and education--were associated
with the probability of violating terms of 
supervised release and parole. Offenders ages 
16 to 20 were more likely (60%) to violate  
conditions of supervision than offenders in 
other age groups--51% of those ages 21 to 30 
and 37% of those over age 30. 

Releasees with a history  of drug abuse 
were about 5 times more  likely to terminate 
their supervision for technical violations  
of drug use as were releasees who were not 
drug abusers. Releasees with known histories 
of drug abuse were also more likely to violate 
supervision with technical violations or new crimes. 

Similarly, releasees with lower levels of education 
were more likely to violate conditions of parole 
or supervised release than those with higher 
levels of education. Those who did not graduate 
high school had a 47% violation rate, those who 
were high school graduates had a 40% violation rate, 
those with some college had a 32% violation rate, 
and those with a college degree had a 14% violation 
rate (figure 6.5).

Federal prisoners:  First releases and time
served (tables 6.6 and 6.7)

During 1994, 28,409 prisoners were released from
Federal prison for the first time after serving a
sentence imposed by a U.S. district court.
***Tables 6.6 and 6.7 include only prisoners
committed by U.S. district courts and released
by the Bureau of Prisons during 1994.*** These 
releasees served an average of 25 months
in prison (88% of the sentence imposed, on
average)(table 6.8). ***Average time to first
release is the number of months in Bureau of
Prisons facilities minus credits for time spent
in jail prior to final disposition or
sentencing. Percent of sentence served is the
average percentage of each individual 
prisoner's percent of total sentence obligation
served until first release.*** About two-thirds
of the first releases had been sentenced to a
term of imprisonment exceeding one year. 

Time served until first release varied by offense:
Violent offenders served an average of 53
months; drug offenders served an average of 34
months; and public-order offenders served an
average of 13 months, while property offenders
served an average of just over 15 months.
However, the average time to first release for
public-order offenders was influenced heavily by
the relatively short time served by immigration
offenders. On average, immigration offenders
served about 6 months until first release. This
was less than half of the average time served
for all public-order offenders. Exclusive of
immigration offenders, public-order offenders
served an average of 22 months until first
release.

Admissions, releases, and standing population of
Federal prisoners (table 6.9)

The Federal prison population grew by more than
6,000 persons during fiscal year 1994,
increasing from 78,265 to 84,362. The greatest
growth was for drug and public-order offenses,
particularly weapons offenders. The number of
drug offenders in prison grew by 3,728, and the
number of weapon offenders grew by 1,066. The
number of property offenders, however, decreased
by 143.

Characteristics of Federal prisoners (tables
6.10 and 6.11) 

Prisoners released (table 6.10)--Of prisoners 
released during 1994, 88% were male, 76% were white, 
22% were black, 39% were Hispanic, and 62% were 
U.S. citizens. Fifty-five percent were 31 years 
of age or older. These patterns held across 
offenses and between old and new law offenders.

Time served to first release (table 6.11)--Of
persons released, males served more time than
females, blacks served more time than whites,
non-Hispanics served more time than Hispanics,
older persons served more time than younger, and
U.S. citizens served more time than non
citizens. However, among the offenses, the
overall pattern does not always hold, except for
males and females. For example, blacks served
more time on average than whites, but among
property offenders released from prison, whites
served more time than blacks.

Sentences imposed and time served until 
first release 

Prison terms imposed on offenders
sentenced since the Federal sentencing
guidelines were implemented have increased.
During 1989 the average term of imprisonment was
about 55 months; during 1994 it was 61 months
(table 1.5). Prisoners sentenced pursuant to the
Federal sentencing guidelines (new law) released
during 1994 served an average of 20 months in
prison, or 91% of the sentence imposed (tables
6.7 and 6.8). Prisoners sentenced pursuant to
old law sentencing policy and released during
1994 served an average of 60 months (table 6.7),
or 60% of the sentence imposed (table 6.8).

For new law prisoners, the difference between
the average sentence imposed (61 months) and the
average time to first release (20 months) stems
primarily from the fact that the prisoners
released from new law sentences are primarily
those released from shorter terms. For example,
during 1994, 83% of the new law prisoners
released for the  first time were released from
sentences of 4 or fewer years (not shown in a
table). Most new law prisoners sentenced to
longer sentences--terms exceeding 8 years--are
still in prison. As more offenders serving
longer prison terms are released from prison,
the average time served to first release should
increase.

Chapter 6 notes

1) Tables 6.1-6.4 were created from the
probation, parole, and supervision data files of
the Federal Probation Supervision Information
System (FPSIS), which is maintained by the
AOUSC. Only records with one or more
terminations of active supervision during
October 1, 1993, through September 30, 1994,
were selected.  Each termination was counted
separately. Technical violations and
terminations for new crimes are shown only if
supervision terminated with incarceration or
removal from active supervision for reasons of a
violation. 

Corporate defendants were excluded from
tables 6.1-6.4.

2) Offenders were classified according to their
most serious offense at conviction. In cases
involving multiple offenses, the AOUSC offense
severity hierarchy was applied. The most serious
offense was the one with the most severe penalty
imposed. If equal prison terms were imposed, or
there was no imprisonment, the offense with the
highest severity code, as determined by the U.S.
Title and Code Criminal Offense Citations
Manual, was selected.

3) Table 6.5 was also created from the FPSIS
data files. Records with supervision opened or
reinstated during fiscal year 1994 were selected
and tracked for a period of 12 months, or, if the
offender violated their supervision before
the 12-month period concluded, until the time of
the violation. This represents a departure from
the 1993 and prior compendia, which only
considered time that fell within the calendar
year in which an offender began supervision.
Therefore, direct comparisons between this
Compendium and the 1993 and prior compendia are
not valid. 

Corporate defendants were also excluded from 
table 6.5.

4) Tables 6.6-6.11 were created from the Federal
Bureau of Prisons (BOP) data files.

Tables 6.6-6.8 and 6.10-6.11 include only prisoners
committed by U.S. district courts or released by
standard methods by the BOP during fiscal year
1994. Standard methods of release include
full-term sentence expirations, expirations with
good time, mandatory releases, and releases to
parole. Table 6.9 also shows sentenced prisoners
in the custody of the BOP at the end of fiscal
year 1995.

In these tables, a single person may be counted
more than once if that person was committed
into, or released from, the BOP more than one
time during fiscal year 1994, or if that person
appears in more than one column in a table,
e.g., commitment and population.

5) Offense categories in these tables were based
on combinations of offense designations used by
the BOP. They are similar, but may not be
directly comparable, to the categories used in
other tables of this Compendium. Offenses for
some prisoners admitted or released were not
able to be classified; these offenders were
included in the totals and are shown as "other
prisoners" on the last line of tables.

In these tables, offenses were classified
according to the offense associated with the
longest single sentence actually imposed.
Classifications in other tables may have been
based on the longest potential sentence allowed
by law.

6) Tables 6.6-6.11 distinguish between prisoners
committed by U.S. district courts for violations
of the U.S. Code and other prisoners. Prisoners
released after commitment from U.S. district
court are called "first releases." Only first
releases that have standard methods of release
are included in these tables. The other
admissions and releases include offenders who
returned to prison after their first release
(such as probation, parole, or supervised
release violators), offenders convicted in other
courts (such as military or District of Columbia
courts), and persons admitted to prison as
material witnesses or for purposes of treatment,
examination, or transfer to another authority.
Offenders who entered or left a prison
temporarily--such as for transit to another
location, for health care, or to serve a weekend
sentence--were not counted as admitted or
released. Persons who were detained for
deportation by the Immigration and
Naturalization Service and who were not criminal
offenders were also not included in the tables.

7) Tables 6.6, 6.7, 6.8, 6.10, and 6.11 include
only prisoners committed by U.S. district courts
and released by standard means by the BOP during
fiscal year 1994. Standard methods of release
include full-term expiration of sentence,
expiration with good time, mandatory releases,
and releases on to parole. Prisoners committed
by U.S. district court--but not for a violation
of the U.S. Code, or whose offense could not be
classified--were included in the total but are
not shown separately. Table 6.9, however, shows
these prisoners separately. Other prisoners--such 
as probation and parole violators and prisoners 
committed by other courts, such as courts martial 
or District of Columbia Superior Court--were excluded
from tables 6.6, 6.7, 6.8, 6.10, and 6.11, as were 
other persons admitted to Federal prison but not 
committed from a U.S. district court.

8) In tables 6.6, 6.7, 6.8, 6.10, and 6.11, time
served was calculated for prisoners committed
from U.S. district courts only. Time served
in prison is the number of months from the
prisoner's arrival into jurisdiction of the BOP
until first release from prison, plus any jail
time served and credited. The calculation is the
same as that currently used by the BOP.
Prisoners serving consecutive sentences may have
total imposed sentences exceeding the longest
single sentence length. Accordingly, time
actually served may exceed the longest single
imposed sentence. The percent of sentence
served(in tables 6.6, 6.7, and 6.8) is the
average of each individual prisoner's percent of
sentence served. Because other publications may
include different groups of prisoners, calculate
time served differently, or use a different
offense classification, data in tables in this
Compendium may differ from estimates of time
served in previous publications by the BOP or in
publications based on other data sources.

Time served, as reported in tables 6.6, 6.7,
6.8, 6.10, and 6.11 in this Compendium, may not
be directly comparable to the calculation of
time served in the 1993 and prior compendia.

9) Table 6.9 shows all persons admitted to, or
released from, the jurisdiction of the BOP
during fiscal year 1994 and those persons in
Federal prisons at the start and end of the
fiscal year. A single person may be counted in
one or more columns of this table. The column
heading "first release" refers to those
prisoners whose commitment to the BOP was by a
U.S. district court during any year, but who
were first released during fiscal year 1994.
Prisoners counted in this column are the same as
prisoners included in tables 6.6, 6.7, and 6.8.
The release column labeled "All other" includes
prisoners released by extraordinary means, which
include death, commutation, and release by
transfer. Table 6.9 shows in separate columns,
as well as in the total, prisoners committed by
a U.S. district court--but not for a violation
of the U.S. code, or whose offense could not be
classified. Other columns in table 6.9 include
prisoners who were committed by other courts,
returned to prison for violation of the
conditions of supervision, or were received for
examination, treatment, or transfer to another
jurisdiction. Offenders who returned to prison
for a violation of the conditions of
supervision, without a new court commitment,
were classified according to the offense with
the longest single sentence originally imposed
at conviction.


Methodology

The Federal justice database

Source of data

The source of data for all tables in this
Compendium is the Bureau of Justice Statistics
(BJS) Federal justice database. The database is
presently constructed from source files provided
by the Executive Office for U.S. Attorneys, the
Administrative Office of the U.S. Courts, the
United States Sentencing Commission, and the
U.S. Bureau of Prisons. The Administrative
Office of the U.S. Courts also maintains the
data collected by the Pretrial Services
Administration, the U.S. Court of Appeals, and
the U.S. Probation officer. Federal law
prohibits the use of these files for any
purposes other than research or statistics. A
description of the source agency data files is
provided in the table at the end of this
section.

Some records in the Federal justice database are
matched according to a statistically weighted
combination of names, other personal
identifiers, dates of court appearances, types
of offenses, and other relevant information
contained in the files. Using the matched data
files, it is possible to combine information
about two or more stages of the processing of a
criminal matter or case, for example from
adjudication to probation or parole supervision.

Reporting period

Wherever possible, matters or cases have been
selected according to some event which occurred
during fiscal year 1994 (October 1, 1993,
through September 30, 1994). Some data files
provided by source agencies are organized
according to a calendar year time frame; these
have been combined and divided into fiscal years
for purposes of the Compendium. Files which are
organized by their source agencies according to
fiscal year nonetheless include some pertinent
records in later years' files.  For example,
tabulations of suspects in matters concluded
during fiscal year 1994 in this Compendium have
been assembled from source files containing
records of 1994 matters concluded which were
entered into the data system during fiscal years
1994 or 1995.

Availability of data items

The availability of particular items of
information is affected by the data source. For
example, data on prosecutors' decisions prior to
court filing are provided for cases investigated
by U.S. attorneys, but not for those handled by 
other litigating divisions of the U.S. Department 
of Justice. Criminal Division cases enter the data 
base once they are filed in U.S. district court, 
however.

Many items of social and demographic information
come from presentence investigation records,
supervision records, or sentencing records, and
are available only for arrested defendants who
were convicted and/or began serving a sentence
involving supervised release. This particularly
affects sex, race, ethnicity, and prior record
information.

Data on offender characteristics in chapters 3
and 4 are limited to offenders convicted and
sentenced pursuant to the Federal sentencing
guidelines whose records have been reported to
the U.S. Sentencing Commission. Currently, it is
estimated that more than 90% of the felony
defendants convicted in U.S. district courts are
sentenced pursuant to the Federal sentencing
guidelines. The Federal sentencing guidelines do
not cover class Band C misdemeanors or in
fractions or traffic offenses occurring on
Federal land.

Table construction and interpretation

Unit of analysis

The unit of analysis in chapters 1 through 5 is
a combination of a person (or corporation) and a
matter or case. For example, if a single
person is involved in three different criminal
cases during the time period specified in the
table, he or she is counted three times in the
tabulation. Similarly, if a single criminal case
involves a corporate defendant and four
individual defendants, it counts five times in
the tabulation. In chapter 6, the unit of
analysis for incarceration, probation, parole,
or other supervised release is a person entering
custody or supervision, or a person leaving
custody or supervision. For example, a person
convicted in two concurrent cases and committed
once to the custody of the U.S. Bureau of
Prisons in the indicated time period is counted
as one admission to a term of incarceration. A
person who terminates probation twice in the
indicated time period, such as with a violation
and again after reinstatement, is counted as two
terminations of probation.

Interpretation

The tables in the Compendium are constructed to
permit the user to make valid comparisons of
numbers within each table and to compare
percentage rates across tables. The total
numbers of subjects in Compendium tables that
are based on records linked between two files
are generally less than the total number of
records in either source file. Accordingly, 
comparisons of absolute numbers across two
or more tables in this volume and other
data sources are not necessarily valid.

Offense classifications

Procedure

The offense classification procedure
used in this Compendium is based on
the classification system followed by
the Administrative Office of the U.S.
Courts. Specific offenses in the 
Administrative Office classification are 
combined to form the BJS categories shown 
in the Compendium tables. ***These categories 
correspond to the Bureau of Justice Statistics 
crime definitions and, to the extent possible, 
are organized and presented consistent with BJS 
publications on State criminal justice systems.***

For data from the Executive Office for U.S.
Attorneys, which include United States Code
citations but do not include the Administrative
Office offense classifications, United States
Code titles and sections are translated into the
Administrative Office classification system and
then aggregated into the offense categories used
in the tables. Offense categories for prisoners
in chapter 6 are based on combinations of
offense designations used by the Bureau of
Prisons. They are similar to the categories in
other chapters and other tables in chapter 6,
but may not be directly comparable.

Felony/misdemeanor distinctions

Felony and misdemeanor distinctions are provided
where possible. Felony offenses are those with a
maximum penalty of more than 1 year in prison.
Misdemeanor offenses are those with a maximum
penalty of 1 year or less. Felonies and
misdemeanors are further classified using the
maximum term of imprisonment authorized. Section
3559, U.S. Code, Title 18 classifies offenses
according to the following schedule:

Felonies 

Class A felony --life imprisonment, or
if the maximum penalty is death.

Class B felony --25 years or more. 

Class C felony --less than 25 years but more
than 10 years.

Class D felony --less than 10 years but more
than 5 years. 

Class E felony-- less than 5 years but more than
1 year.

Misdemeanors

Class A misdemeanor--1 year or less but more
than 1 month.

Class B misdemeanor--6 months or less but more
than 30 days.

Class C misdemeanor--30 days or less but more
than 5 days.

Infraction--5 days or less, or if no imprisonment 
is authorized.

In this Compendium, felony and misdemeanor
distinctions are provided where the data permit
these distinctions. Chapter 1 does not use this
distinction because many suspects cannot be so
classified at the investigation stage in the
criminal justice process. Chapter 2 no longer
reports this distinction because the Pretrial
Services Agency no longer gathers this
information. Chapters 3 and 4 distinguish
between felony and misdemeanor offenses, as do
tables 6.1 6.6. Tables 6.7 6.10 follow the
convention of other BJS publications by
separately tabulating offenders whose actual
imposed sentences are less than or equal to 1
year and those whose actual sentences are
greater than 1 year.

Most serious offense selection

Where more than one offense is charged or
adjudicated, the most serious offense (the one
that may or did result in the most severe
sentence) is used to classify offenses. The
offense description may change as the criminal
justice process proceeds. Tables indicate
whether investigated, charged or adjudicated
offenses are used. In chapter 1, the most
serious offense is based on the criminal lead
charge as determined by the assistant U.S.
attorney responsible for the criminal
proceeding. In chapter 2, the major charged
offense is based upon the Administrative
Office's offense severity classification system,
as determined by the pretrial officer
responsible for the case. To select this
offense, the officer ranks offenses according to
severity based on maximum imprisonment, type of
crime, and maximum fines. In chapters 3 and 4,
the most serious offense charged is based on
statutory maximum penalties. In chapter 3, the
most serious offense charged is the one that has
the most severe potential sentence. For chapter
4, conviction offenses are based on statutory
maximum penalties. In chapter 5, offenses are
classified by the offense of conviction. In
tables 6.1 6.6, the most serious offense of
conviction is either the one having the longest
sentence imposed or, if equal sentences were
imposed or there was no imprisonment, it was the
offense carrying the highest severity code as
determined by the Administrative Office's
offense severity code ranking. In tables
6.7 6.12, prisoners are classified according to
the offense which bears the longest single
incarceration sentence.

Offense categories

For offense categories in all text tables, the
following conditions apply:

"Murder" includes nonnegligent manslaughter.

"Other sex offenses" may include some nonviolent
offenses.

"Fraud" excludes tax fraud.

"Larceny" excludes transportation of stolen
property.

"Other property felonies" excludes fraudulent
property offenses, and includes destruction of
property and trespass.

"Tax law violations" includes tax fraud.

"Obscene material" denotes the mail or transport
thereof.

"All other felonies" includes felonies with
unknown or unclassifiable offense type.

"Misdemeanors" includes misdemeanors, petty
offenses, and unknown offense levels.

"Drug possession" also includes other drug
misdemeanors.


Glossary

Acquittal--legal judgment that a criminal
defendant has not been proven guilty beyond a
reasonable doubt of the charges against him.

Affirmed--in the appellate courts, the decree or
order is declared valid and will stand as
rendered in the lower court.

Agriculture violations--violations of the
Federal statutes on agriculture and
conservation: for example, violations of the
Agricultural Acts, Insecticide Act, and the
Packers and Stockyards Act, 1921; also
violations of laws concerning plant quarantine
and the handling of animals pertaining to
research (7 U.S.C., except sections on food
stamps (fraud); also 16 U.S.C. sections relating
generally to violations in operating public
parks, such as trespassing for hunting,
shooting, and fishing).

Antitrust violations--offenses relating to
Federal antitrust statutes, which aim to protect
trade and commerce from unlawful restraints,
price fixing, monopolies (for example, 15 U.S.C.
.. 1, 3, 8, 20, and 70(i)), and discrimination
in pricing or in furnishing services or
facilities (15 U.S.C. ..13(c) and 13(e)).

Appeal--a review by a higher court of a judgment
or decision of a lower court.

Appeals, U.S. Court of--an intermediate Federal
court, inferior to the U.S. Supreme Court, but
higher than the U.S. district court. The
function of the U.S. court of appeals is to
review the final decisions of the district
courts, if challenged. There are 13 courts of
appeal in the Federal system representing the 12
judicial circuits and the Federal circuit
(28 U.S.C. . 41).

Appellant--the party which takes an appeal from
1 court or jurisdiction to another; opposite of
appellee.

Appellee--the party against whom the appeal is
taken; opposite of appellant.

Arson--willfully or maliciously setting, or
attempting to set, fire to any property within
the special maritime and territorial
jurisdiction of the United States as defined in
18 U.S.C.. 7 (18 U.S.C. . 81; and 49A U.S.C...
1804 and 1809). (See also, "Explosives.")

Assault--intentionally inflicting or attempting
or threatening to inflict bodily injury to
another person. Applies to anyone within the
special maritime and territorial jurisdiction of
the United States as defined in 18 U.S.C. . 7,
or to any Government official, foreign official,
official guest, internationally protected
person, or any officer or employee of the United
States designated in 18 U.S.C. .1114 (for
example, 16 U.S.C. ..1857(e) and 1859; 18 U.S.C.
..111(a), 112(b), 113(c)(e), 114,115(c),
351(d)(e), 372, 373, 1502,1751(c), 1959,
2118(c), and 2231(a);21 U.S.C. .. 461(c),
675(b), and 1041(c); 26 U.S.C. .. 7212(a)(b);
29 U.S.C. . 1141; 46 U.S.C. . 701; and 49A U.S.C.
. 1472(k)); also certain violations of the Fair
Housing Act of 1968 (42 U.S.C. .. 3610 and 3631).

Bail--the sum of money promised as a condition
of release, to be paid if a released defendant
defaults (18 U.S.C. . 3142(c)).

Bribery--offering or promising anything of value
with intent to unlawfully influence a public
official in the discharge of official duties.
Applies generally to bank employees, officers
or employees of the U.S. Government, witnesses,
or any common carrier. Includes soliciting or
receiving anything of value in consideration of
aiding a person to obtain employment in the U.S.
Government. Also, receiving or soliciting any
remuneration, directly or indirectly, in cash or
any kind in return for purchasing, ordering,
leasing, or recommending to purchase any good,
service, or facility(18 U.S.C. .. 201(a),
203(a)(b), 204,207(a)(c), 208, 210, 211, 213,
215, and 663; 21 U.S.C. . 622; 46 U.S.C..
239(i); and 49 U.S.C. .. 104,917(b), and
11904(b)).

Burglary--breaking and entering into another's
property with intent to steal within the special
maritime and territorial jurisdiction of the
United States, as defined in 18 U.S.C. 7.
Includes breaking and entering into any official
bank, credit union, saving sand loan
institution, post office, vessel or steamboat
assigned to the use of mail service, or personal
property of the United States; or breaking the
seal or lock of any carrier facility containing
interstate or foreign shipments of freight or
express (18 U.S.C. .. 2111, 2113(a), and
2115-17).

Career offender--defendants are counted as career
offenders if they are at least 18 years old at
the time of the instant offense, if the instant
offense of conviction is a felony--that is
either a crime of violence or a controlled
substance; and if they have at least two prior
felony convictions of either a crime of violence
or a controlled substance.

Case--in this Compendium, a judicial proceeding
for the determination of a controversy between
parties wherein rights are enforced or
protected, or wrongs are prevented or redressed;
any proceeding judicial in its nature.

Collateral bond--an agreement made by a
defendant as a condition of his or her pretrial
release that requires the defendant to post
property valued at the full bail amount as an
assurance of his or her intention to appear at
trial.

Community confinement--a form of commitment
either as a substitute for Federal imprisonment
or as a condition of probation in a community
treatment center, halfway house, restitution
center, mental health facility, alcohol or drug
rehabilitation center, or other community
facility; and participation in gainful
employment, employment search efforts, community
service, vocational training, treatment,
educational programs, or similar
facility--approved programs during
non-residential hours. Under the Federal sentencing 
guidelines, community confinement may be a substitute 
for imprisonment on a day-to-day basis for
defendants with a guideline maximum of less than
16 months of imprisonment (see also, U.S.S.G. .
5C1.1(e)).

Complaint--a written statement of the essential
facts constituting the offense charged, with an
offer to prove the fact, so that a prosecution
may be instituted. The complaint can be "taken
out" by the victim, the police officer, the
district attorney, or other interested party.

Concurrent sentence--a sentence imposed which is
to be served at the same time as another
sentence imposed earlier or during the same
proceeding (18 U.S.C. . 3584). (See also,
"Consecutive sentence.")

Conditional release--in this Compendium, at the
pretrial stage, a conditional release is release
from detention contingent on any combination of
restrictions that are deemed necessary to
guarantee the defendant's appearance at trial or
the safety of the community (see text in Chapter
2 of this Compendium.) Consecutive sentence--a
sentence imposed that will follow another
sentence imposed earlier or during the same
proceeding; opposite of concurrent sentence.

Conspiracy--an agreement by two or more persons
to commit or to effect the commission of an
unlawful act or to use unlawful means to
accomplish an act that is not in itself
unlawful; also any overt act in furtherance of
the agreement. A person charged with conspiracy
is classified under the substantive offense
alleged.

Continuing criminal enterprise--a felony
committed as part of a continuing series of
violations, which is under taken by a person in
concert with five or more other persons with
respect to whom such person occupies a position
of organizer, a supervisory position, or any
other position of management, and from which
such person obtains substantial income or
resources (21 U.S.C. . 848(c)).

Conviction--the result of a criminal trial which
ends in a judgment that the defendant is guilty.
The final judgment on a verdict or finding of
guilty, a plea of guilty, or a plea of nolo
contendere, but does not include a final
judgment which has been expunged by pardon,
reversed, set aside, or otherwise rendered
invalid.

Corporate surety--in this Compendium, a surety;
one who has entered into a bond to give surety
for another; for example, bail bondsman. As a
condition of his or her release, the defendant
enters into an agreement that requires a third
party such as a bail bondsman to promise to pay
the full bail amount in the event that the
defendant fails to appear. (See also,"Surety
bond.")

Counterfeiting--falsely making, forging, or
altering obligations with a view to deceive or
defraud, by passing the copy or thing forged for
that which is original or genuine. Applies to
obligation or security of the United States,
foreign obligation or security, coin or bar
stamped at any mint in the United States, money
order issued by the Postal Service, domestic or
foreign stamp, or seal of any department or
agency of the United States. Includes passing,
selling, attempting to pass or sell, or bringing
into the United States any of the above falsely
made articles. Also, making, selling, or
possessing any plates or stones (or any other
thing or instrument) used for printing
counterfeit obligations or securities of the
United States, foreign obligations or
securities, Government transportation requests,
or postal stamp; or knowingly and intentionally
trafficking in falsified labels affixed to
phonorecords, motion pictures, or audiovisual
works (for example, 18 U.S.C... 471, 473, 477,
479, 481, 485, 487,501, 507, 509, 513(b), 2318,
and 2320).

Courts--See "Appeals, U.S. Court of" and
"District court, U.S." Pursuant to Article III
of the Constitution, judicial power is vested in
the following Federal Courts: The U.S. Supreme
Court, the U.S. Court of Appeals for the
District of Columbia, and the U.S. district
court for the District of Columbia.

Criminal career--the longitudinal sequence of
crimes committed by an individual offender.

Criminal history category--under the Federal
sentencing guidelines, a quantification of the
defendant's prior criminal record and the
defendant's propensity to recidivate. Guideline
criminal history categories range from Category
I (primarily first-time offenders) to Category
VI (career criminals).

Deadly or dangerous weapon--an instrument
capable of inflicting death or serious bodily
injury.

Declination--the decision by a prosecutor not to
file a case in a matter received for
investigation. In this Compendium, immediate
declinations(i.e., where less than 1 hour of
time is spent on a case) are excluded.

Defendant--the party against whom relief or
recovery is sought in an action or suit, or the
accused in a criminal case.

Departure--under the Federal sentencing
guidelines, the term used to describe a sentence
imposed outside the applicable guideline
sentencing range. A court may depart when
it finds an aggravating or mitigating
circumstance of a kind, or to a degree, not
adequately taken into consideration by the
Sentencing Commission in formulating the
guidelines that should result in a sentence
different from that described (18 U.S.C.
.3553(b); U.S.S.G. . 5K2.0). (See also,
"Substantial assistance.")

Deposit bond--an agreement made by a defendant
as a condition of his or her release that
requires the defendant to post a fraction of the
bail before he or she is released.

Detention--the legally authorized confinement of
persons after arrest, whether before or during
prosecution. Only those persons held 2 or more
days are classified as detained in this
Compendium.

Dismissal--termination of a case before trial or
other final judgment (including nolle prosequi
and deferred prosecution).

Disposition--the decision made on a case brought
before a criminal court.

Distribution--delivery (other than by
administering or dispensing) of a controlled
substance (21 U.S.C. .802(6)). The term
"controlled substance "means any drug or other
substance, or immediate precursor, included in
schedule I, II, III, IV, or V of part B of
subchapter I of Chapter 13 (title 21). The term
does not include distilled spirits, wine, malt
beverages, or tobacco, as those terms are
defined or used in subtitle E of the Internal
Revenue Code of 1986.

District court, U.S.--trial courts with general
Federal jurisdiction over cases involving
Federal laws or offenses and actions between
citizens of different states.

District of Columbia--the jurisdiction of the
U.S. district court for the District of
Columbia. This Compendium includes Federal
offenses prosecuted in U.S. district courts, and
except for tables based on data from the Bureau
of Prisons, excludes violations of the District
of Columbia Code and cases prosecuted in the
District of Columbia Superior Court.

Drug offenses--offenses under a Federal or State
laws prohibiting the manufacture, import,
export, distribution, or dispensing of a
controlled substance (or counterfeit substance),
or the possession of a controlled substance(or a
counterfeit substance) with intent to
manufacture, import, export, distribute, or
dispense. Also using any communication
facilities which causes or facilitates a felony
under title 21, or furnishing of fraudulent or
false information concerning prescriptions as
well as any other unspecified drug-related
offense. (See also, "Distribution,"
"Possession," and "Trafficking.")

Embezzlement--the fraudulent appropriation of
property by a person to whom such property has
been lawfully entrusted. Includes offenses
committed by bank officers or employees;
officers or employees of the Postal Service;
officers of lending, credit, or insurance
institutions; any officer or employee of a
corporation or association engaged in commerce
as a common carrier; court officers of the U.S.
courts; or officers or employees of the United
States. Also, stealing from employment and
training funds, programs receiving Federal
funds, and Indian tribal organizations; or
selling, conveying, or disposing of any money,
property, records, or thing of value to the
United States or any department there of without
authority (for example, 15 U.S.C. .645(c); 18
U.S.C. .. 153, 334,642-57, 665(a)(b), 666(b),
1163,1709, 1711, 1956, and 1957; 25 U.S.C. .
450(d); 29 U.S.C. . 502(b);and 42 U.S.C. ..
1760, 2971, and 3220(b)).

Escape--departing or attempting to depart from
the custody of a correctional institution; a
judicial, correctional, or law enforcement
officer; or a hospital where one is committed
for drug abuse and drug dependency problems.
Knowingly advising, aiding, assisting, or
procuring the escape or attempted escape of
any person from a correctional facility,
an officer, or the above-mentioned hospital as
well as concealing an escapee. Providing or
attempting to provide to an inmate in prison a
prohibited object; or making, possessing,
obtaining, or attempting to make or obtain a
prohibited object (as defined in 18 U.S.C.
.1791(d)(1)(A)). Instigating, assisting,
attempting to cause, or causing any mutiny or
riot at any Federal penal, detention, or
correctional facility, or conveying into any of
these institutions any dangerous 
instrumentalities (for example, 18 U.S.C. ..
751(a)(b),752(a), 753, 755-56, 1071,
1073,1791(a)(c), (d)(1)(A), 1792,3146(a)(b)(d),
3147 and 3615; 28 U.S.C. . 1826; 42 U.S.C. .. 261
and 3425; and 50 U.S.C . 823).

Explosives--violations of Federal law involving
importation, manufacture, distribution, and
storage of explosive material. Includes unlawful
receipt, possession or transportation of
explosives without a license (18 U.S.C. .
842(a)), where prohibited by law (18 U.S.C. .
842(c), or using explosives during commission of
a felony (18 U.S.C. . 844(h)). Also includes
violations relating to dealing in stolen
explosives (18 U.S.C. .842(h)), using mail or
other form of communication to threaten an
individual with explosives (18 U.S.C. .844(e),
and possessing explosive materials at an airport
(18 U.S.C. .844(g), and 49A U.S.C. .. 1804 and
1809). (See also, "Arson" and 18 U.S.C. ..
842(e)(g)(i)(k); and . 844(b).)

Failure to appear--willful absence from any
court appointment.

Felony--a criminal offense punishable by death
or imprisonment for a term exceeding 1 year.
According to 18 U.S.C. . 3559, felonies are
classified into 5 grades based on maximum terms
of imprisonment: Class A felony, if the maximum
term is life imprisonment, or if the maximum
penalty is death; Class B, if 25 years or more;
Class C, if less than 25 years, but 10 years or
more; Class D, if less than 10 years, but five
or more years; and Class E, if less than 5
years, but more than 1.

Filing--the initiation of a criminal case in
U.S. district court by formal submission to the
court of a charging document alleging that one
or more named persons have committed one each
defendant in a or more specified offenses. In
this Compendium, case is counted separately, and
only the most serious alleged offense is
considered.

Financial conditions--monetary conditions upon
which release of a defendant before trial is
contingent. Includes deposit bond, surety bond,
and collateral bond. (See also, "Specific 
definitions.")

First release--in this Compendium, prisoners who
are released from the Bureau of Prisons for the
first time after their commitment by a U.S.
district court (i.e., excludes offenders who are
returning to prison after their first release,
such as probation, parole, etc.).

Food and drug violations--violations of the
Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act such as
regulations for clean and sanitary movement of
animals(21 U.S.C. . 134(b)), adulteration or
misbranding of any food or drug (21 U.S.C. .
331(a)), failure to transmit information about
prescription drugs (21 U.S.C. . 331(o)), and
intent to defraud and distribute adulterated
material (21 U.S.C. . 676).(See also, 18 U.S.C.
. 1365(b); 21 U.S.C. .. 17, 22, 63, 115, 122,
126,134(d), 142, 144, 151, 153, 155, 158,201,
205, 209, 210, 212, 331(b)-(g),331(i)-(n)(p)(t),
333(a), 458(a), 459,460(a)-(d), 461(a), 463,
466,610(a)(c), 611(a), 620, 642, 1037,1041(a),
and 1175.)

Forgery--falsely making or materially altering a
document with the intent to defraud. Includes
such falsification with intent to pass off as
genuine any of the following: U.S. Postal
Service money order; post-marking stamp or
impression; obligation or security of the United
States; foreign obligation, security, or bank
note; contractors' bond,  bid, or public record;
deed; power of attorney; letters patent; seal of
a court or any department or agency of the U.S.
Government; the signature of a judge or court
officer; ships' papers; documents on entry of
vessels; customs matters; coin or bar; and so
forth. Also includes making, possessing, selling,
or printing plates or stones for counterfeiting
obligations or securities, and detaching,
altering, or defacing any official, device, mark
or certificate (for example, 18 U.S.C. ..483,
493, 495, 497, 503, 505,510(a)(b), and 511; 19
U.S.C. .1436; and 21 U.S.C. .. 458(b)(c)).

Fraud--unlawfully depriving a person of his or
her property or legal rights through intentional
misrepresentation of fact or deceit other than
forgery or counterfeiting. Includes violations
of statutes pertaining to lending and credit
institutions, the Postal Service, interstate
wire, radio, television, computer, credit card,
veterans benefits, allotments, bankruptcy,
marketing agreements, commodity credit, the
Securities and Exchange Commission, railroad
retirement, unemployment, Social Security, food
stamp, false personation, citizenship,
passports, conspiracy, and claims and
statements, excluding tax fraud. The category
excludes fraud involving tax violations that are
shown in a separate category under "Public-order, 
other offenses." (See also, specific offenses in 
this glossary for citations.)

Fraudulent property offenses--see "Property
offenses, fraudulent."

Gambling--the Federal offense of transporting,
manufacturing, selling, possessing, or using any
gambling device in the District of Columbia or
any possession of the United States or within
Indian country or the special maritime and
territorial jurisdiction of the United States as
defined in 18 U.S.C. . 7. Includes transporting
gambling devices in the jurisdiction of the
United States (except under authority of the
Federal Trade Commission or any State that has a
law providing for their exemption from these
provisions), transmitting wagering information
in interstate or foreign commerce, interstate
transporting of wagering  paraphernalia,
importing or transporting lottery tickets, or
mailing lottery tickets or related matter (for
example, 15 U.S.C. .. 1173 and 1175; and 18
U.S.C. .. 1082(a), 1084, 1302, 1956, and 1962).

Good-time--time credited toward early release to
an offender for good behavior in imprisonment.
Under the 1984 Sentencing Reform Act, two
classes of prisoners are ineligible to receive
good-time credits: (1) misdemeanants serving a
term of imprisonment of 1 year or less; and (2)
felons serving life sentences. All other Federal
prisoners receive a flat allocation of 54 days
per year of sentence served; credit for a
partial year remaining at the end of the
sentence is prorated. The annual allotment does
not change according to the length of time a
Federal inmate already has spent in prison (18
U.S.C. . 3624(b)).

Guideline sentencing range--under the Federal
sentencing guidelines, the range of imprisonment
corresponding to the applicable guideline
offense level and criminal history category. The
guideline offense level incorporates any minimum
terms of imprisonment required by statute as
well as the statutory maximum term of
imprisonment, where applicable.

Guilty plea--a plea in response to formal
charges admitting that the defendant committed
offenses as charged. In this Compendium, this
category also includes pleas of nolo contendere.

Hispanic--ethnic category based on
classification by reporting agency. Hispanic
persons may be of any race.

Home detention--a form of confinement and
supervision either as a substitute for
imprisonment or as a condition of probation that
restricts the defendant to his place of
residence continuously (except for authorized
absences) and enforced by appropriate means of
surveillance by the probation office. Under the
Federal sentencing guidelines, home detention
may be a substitute for imprisonment on a day to
day basis for defendants with a guideline
maximum sentence of less than 16 months
imprisonment. (See also, U.S.S.G. . 5C1.1.)

Homicide--see "Murder."

Immigration offenses--offenses involving illegal
entrance into the United States, illegally
reentering after being deported, willfully
failing to deport when so ordered, willfully
remaining beyond days allowed on conditional
permit, or falsely representing oneself to be a
citizen of the United States. Includes
violations relating to provisions for special
agricultural workers and to those relating to
limitations on immigrant status (such as
employment). Also includes bringing in or
harboring any aliens not duly admitted by an
immigration officer (for example, 8 U.S.C. ..
1160, 1252(d),1255, 1282(a), 1286, 1324-25, and
1326(a)).

Incarceration--any sentence of confinement,
including prison, jail, and other residential
placements.

Indeterminate sentence--a prison sentence whose
maximum or minimum term is not specifically
established at the time of sentencing (18 U.S.C.
.. 4205(b)(1)(2)).

Indictment--the formal charging of the defendant
with a particular crime by a grand jury. In the
Federal system, a defendant may waive indictment
and be proceeded against through an information.
(See also, Fed. R. Crim. P. 7(b).)

Information--the formal accusation charging the
defendant with a particular crime but brought by
the U.S. Attorney rather than by the grand jury.

Infraction--an offense for which the maximum
term of imprisonment is 5 days or less, or where
no imprisonment is authorized, according
to 18 U.S.C. . 3559.

Instant offense--the offense of conviction, and
all relevant conduct under U.S.S.G . 1B1.3.

Intermittent confinement--a form of commitment,
in a prison or jail, either as a substitute for
imprisonment or as a condition of probation.
Under the Federal sentencing guidelines,
intermittent confinement may be a substitute for
imprisonment (each 24 hours of intermittent
confinement is credited as 1 day of
incarceration) for defendants with a guideline
maximum of less than 16 months imprisonment.
(See also, U.S.S.G. .5C1.1.)

Jurisdictional offenses--acts that are Federal
crimes because of the place in which they occur
(such as on an aircraft, on Federal land or
property) and for certain crimes on Indian
reservations or at sea, but which cannot be
classified in a more specific substantive
category.

Juvenile--a person who has not attained the age
of 18 years; or for the purposes of a juvenile
delinquency hearing, a person who has not
attained the age of 21 years (18 U.S.C.. 5031).

Juvenile delinquency--a violation of Federal law
committed by a person prior to the age of 18
years which would have been a crime if committed
by an adult (18 U.S.C. . 5031).

Kidnaping--unlawfully seizing any person as
defined in 18 U.S.C. .1201 for ransom or reward,
except in the case of a minor by a parent.
Includes receiving, possessing, or disposing of
any money or other property that has been
delivered as ransom or reward in connection with
a kidnaping as well as conspiring to kidnap.
Also, includes kidnaping or attempting to kidnap
any Government official, the President of the
United States, the President-elect, the Vice
President, any foreign official, any official
guest, or any internationally protected person.
(See also, 18 U.S.C. . 351(b); and hostage taking
as defined in 18 U.S.C. . 1203.)

Labor law violations--violations of, for
example, the Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938
and the Taft-Hartley Act, which govern a broad
spectrum of activities relating to
labor-management relations (for example, 29
U.S.C. .. 186(a), 461(a), 463, 1021(b), 1022,
1023(b)(d),1024(a)(c), 1027, 1111(a)(b),
1112(c), 1811, 1816, 1821 and 1851).

Larceny--the act of taking and carrying away any
personal property of another with intent to
steal or convert it to one's own use or gain.
Includes stealing, possessing or illegally
selling or disposing of anything of value to the
United States or any of its departments or
agencies; or stealing from a bank, the Postal
Service, or any interstate or foreign shipments
by carrier. Also encompasses receiving or
possessing stolen property or pirate property;
and stealing or obtaining by fraud any funds,
assets, or that belong to, or are entrusted to,
the custody of an Indian tribal organization
(for example, 18 U.S.C. .. 641,659, 661-62, 667,
1168(a), 1704,1707, and 2113(b)). (This offense
category excludes the transportation of stolen
property.)

Liquor violations--violations of Internal
Revenue Service laws on liquor, as well as
violations of liquor laws not cited under these
laws, such as dispensing or unlawfully
possessing intoxicants in Indian country;
transporting intoxicating liquors into any
State, territory, district, or possession where
sale is prohibited; shipping packages containing
unmarked and unlabeled intoxicants; shipping
liquor by C.O.D.; knowingly delivering a liquor
shipment to someone other than to whom it has
been consigned; and violating in any way the
Federal Alcohol Administration Act (for example,
18 U.S.C. .. 1154,1156, 1263 and 1265; 26 U.S.C.
..5113, 5171(c), 5179, 5214, 5222,5291, 5301(b),
5601, 5603(a), 5604,5606, 5608(a), 5661(a),
5662, 5672,5681(a)(c), 5683, 5685(b) and
5687; and 27 U.S.C. .. 203, 205(f), 206(b) and
208(a)).

Magistrates (U.S.) (Federal)--judicial officers
appointed by judges of Federal district courts
having many but not all of the powers of a
judge. Magistrates are designated to hear a wide
variety of motions and other pretrial matters in
both criminal and civil cases. With consent of
the parties, they may conduct civil or
misdemeanor criminal trials. Magistrates,
however, may not preside over felony trials or
over jury selection in felony cases.

Mailing or transportation of obscene
materials--a violation of Federal law relating
to knowingly using the mail for mailing obscene 
or crime-inciting matter, as defined in 18 U.S.C. 
.1461 and 39 U.S.C. .3001(e). Also includes
transporting for sale or distribution, importing, 
or transporting any obscene matter in interstate 
or foreign commerce. (See also, 18 U.S.C. 
.. 1462-63.)

Major offense (while on conditional release)--
allegation, arrest, or conviction of a crime for which 
the minimum sentence is incarceration for over 
90 days or greater than 1 year on probation. (See 
also, PACTS Statistical Reporting Guide, Version 
1.0, Administrative Office of the U.S.Courts.)

Mandatory sentences--a sentence that includes a
minimum term of imprisonment that the sentencing
court is statutorily required to impose barring
the government's motion of substantial
assistance. See, for example, 18 U.S.C. .. 841
and 960, which provide for mandatory sentences
ranging from 5 years imprisonment to life
imprisonment depending on the quantity of drugs
involved.

Mandatory sentencing enhancement--a form of
mandatory sentence in which the minimum term of
imprisonment is to be imposed consecutive to any
other term of imprisonment imposed. See, for
example, 18 U.S.C. . 924(c), which provides for
a 5-year to lifetime enhancement for the use of
a firearm during the commission of a crime;
18 U.S.C. . 844(h), which provides for a 5-year
enhancement for use of firearms or explosives
during the commission of a crime; and 18 U.S.C.
.929 which provides for a 5-year enhancement for
the use of armor-piercing ammunition during the
commission of a crime.

Mandatory release--the release of an inmate from
prison after confinement for a time period equal
to his or her full sentence minus statutory
good-time, if any. Federal prisoners released on
mandatory release may still be subject to a
period of post-release community supervision.

Matter--in this Compendium, a potential case
under review by a U.S. attorney on which more
than 1 hour is expended.

Matters concluded--in this Compendium, matters
about which a final decision has been reached by
a U.S. attorney. Specifically includes matters
filed as cases, matters declined after
investigation, matters referred for disposition
by U.S. magistrates, and matters otherwise
terminated without reaching court.

Migratory birds offenses--violations of acts
relating to birds which move from one place to
another in season. Includes taking, killing, or
possessing migratory birds, or any part, nest,
or egg thereof, in violation of Federal
regulations or the transportation laws of the
State, territory, or district from which the
bird was taken. Also, misuse or non-use of
a migratory-bird hunting and conservation stamp
(for example, 16 U.S.C... 690(g), 701, 703,
704-6, 707(b),708, 711, and 718(a)(e)(g)).

Minor offense (while on conditional
release)--conviction of a crime for which the
maximum sentence is incarceration for 90 days 
or less, probation of 1 year or less, or a fine 
of $500 or less. (See also, PACTS Statistical 
Reporting Guide, Version 1.0, Administrative 
Office of the U.S. Courts.)

Misdemeanor--a criminal offense punishable by a
jail term not exceeding 1 year and any offense
specifically defined as a misdemeanor by the
Administrative Office of the U.S. Courts for the
purposes of data collection.  According to 18
U.S.C. .3559, misdemeanors are classified in 3
letter grades, based on the maximum terms of
imprisonment: Class A, if 1 year or less, but
more than  6 months; Class B, if 6 months or
less, but more than 30 days; and Class C, 30
days or less, but more than 5 days. (This
category includes offenses previously called
minor offenses that were reclassified under the
Federal Magistrate Act of 1979.)

Mixed sentence--a sentence requiring the
convicted offender to serve a term of
imprisonment, followed by a term of probation.
Unless otherwise noted, offenders receiving
mixed sentences are included in both
incarceration and probation categories. (See
also, "Split sentence.")

Most serious offense--in this Compendium, the
offense with the greatest potential sentence; or
with respect to tables describing Federal
prisoners, the offense with the greatest imposed
sentence (for example, prison data in Chapter
6).

Motor carrier violations--violations of the
Federal statutes relating to the Motor Carrier
Act, which regulates (routes, rates) of motor
carriers of freight and passengers in interstate
commerce. The Act is administered by the
Interstate Commerce Commission (for example, 15
U.S.C... 1984, 1986, 1988 and 1990; 49 U.S.C. ..
117(a), 301(f), 303(f),322(a)(d), 411, 526,
917(f),1021(b)(f), 11703, 11903(a), 11904,11907,
11909(a), 11909(c), 11910,11913, and 11914; and
49A U.S.C. .120).

Motor vehicle theft--interstate or foreign
transporting, receiving, concealing, storing,
bartering, selling, or disposing of any stolen
motor vehicle or aircraft (for example, 18
U.S.C. ..2119, 2313, and 2322; and 49A U.S.C. 
. 1472(i)).

Murder--the unlawful killing of a human being
with malice a fore-thought, either express or
implied. Nonnegligent manslaughter is the
unlawful killing of a human being without
malice. This offense covers committing or
attempting to commit murder (first or second
degree) or voluntary manslaughter within the
special maritime and territorial jurisdiction of
the United States (18 U.S.C. . 7). Includes
killing or attempting to kill any Government
official, the President of the United States,
the President-elect, the Vice President, any
officers and employees of the United States, any
foreign officials, any official guests, or any
internationally protected persons. As applied to
the owner or charterer of any steamboat or
vessel, knowingly and willfully causing or
allowing fraud, neglect, misconduct, or
violation of any law resulting in loss of
life(18 U.S.C. .. 113(a), 115(a),1111-13, 1115,
1117, 1512(a)(1),1751(a), and 2332(b)).

National defense violations--violations of the
national defense laws or the Military Selective
Service Act, the Defense Production Act of 1950,
the Economic Stabilization Act of 1970 (which
includes prices, rents, and wages), the
Subversive Activities Control Act, alien
registration, treason (including espionage,
sabotage, sedition, and the Smith Act of 1940);
also violations relating to energy facilities,
curfew and restricted areas, exportation of war
materials, trading with an enemy, illegal use of
uniform and any other violations of the Federal
statutes concerning national defense(for
example, 8 U.S.C. ..1304(e) and 1306(b)(d); 10
U.S.C. ..976 and 2408; 18 U.S.C. .. 703,705,
711, 713, 792, 794, 797, 799,953, 961, 965, 967,
970, 1366(a),1382, 2152, 2153(b),
2154(b),2155(b), 2156(b), 2382, 2384,
2386,2388(a)(c), and 2390; 22 U.S.C. ..253, 286,
447, 447(c), 450, 455, 612,614(b)(f), 617,
1178(c), 1182, 1199,1978(c), 2778(b), 4198, 4202
and 5113(c); 42 U.S.C. .. 2274(b), 2276,2278(b)
and 2384(b); and 50A U.S.C... 2, 3(a)(c), 16,
167, 210, 322, 324,326, 328, 421(a)(c), 462,
468(b),643(a), 781, 783(b)(d), 789, 794,797,
851, 1152, 1705, 1436(e),1809(c), 2062, 2071(b),
2073,2405(a)(b), and 2410(b)).

Negligent manslaughter--causing the death of
another, within the special maritime and
territorial jurisdiction of the United States as
defined in 18 U.S.C. . 7, by want on or reckless
disregard for human life. Also negligent
manslaughter of any Government official, the
President of the United States, the
President-elect, the Vice President, any
officers and employees of the United States, 
any foreign officials, any official guests, or any
internationally protected persons. This offense
category also includes misconduct, negligence,
or in attention to duties by ship officers on a
steamboat or vessel resulting in death to any
person (18 U.S.C. .1112).

New law--In this Compendium defendants convicted
and sentenced pursuant to the Sentencing Reform
Act of 1984. (See also "Old law.")

Nolo contendere--defendant's plea in a criminal
case indicating that he or she will not contest
charges, but not admitting or denying guilt.

Non-citizen--a person who is without U.S.
citizenship, including legal aliens (for
example, resident aliens, tourists, and
refugees/asylees) and illegal aliens.

Not convicted--acquittal by bench or jury trial,
mistrial, and dismissal (including nolle
prosequi and deferred prosecution).

Not guilty--plea entered by the accused to a
criminal charge. If the defendant refuses to
plead, the court will enter a plea of not
guilty. Also the form of a verdict in a criminal
trial where the jury acquits the defendant.

Offense--violation of U.S. criminal law. In this
Compendium, where more than 1 offense is
charged, the offense with the greatest potential
penalty is reported.

Offense level--under the Federal sentencing
guidelines, a quantification of the relative
seriousness of the offense of conviction and any
offense-specific aggravating or mitigating
factors. Guideline offense levels range from
level 1 (the least serious offense) to level 43
(the most serious offense).

Old law--in this Compendium, defendants
convicted and sentenced pursuant to laws
applicable before the Sentencing Reform Act of
1984. (See also, "New law.")

Parole--period of supervision after release from
custody before the expiration of sentence. The
U.S. Parole Commission is empowered to grant,
modify or revoke the parole of all Federal
offenders. Pursuant to the Sentencing Reform Act
of 1984, parole was abolished and defendants are
required to serve the imposed sentence (less 54
days per year good-time for sentences greater
than 1 year, but not life imprisonment),
followed by a term of supervised release.
Because of the number of Federal inmates
sentenced under pre-Sentencing Reform
provisions, parole is being phased out.
Approximately 2, 500 Federal inmates were
paroled by the U.S. Parole Commission during
1995.

Perjury--a false material declaration under oath
in any proceeding before or ancillary to any
court or grand jury of the United States.
Includes knowingly or willfully giving false
evidence or swearing to false statements under
oath or by any means procuring or instigating
any person to commit perjury. This offense also
includes any officers and employees of the
Government listed under 13 U.S.C. .. 21-25 who
willfully or knowingly furnish, or cause to be
furnished, any false information or statement
(for example, 2 U.S.C. . 192;13 U.S.C. . 213; 15
U.S.C. . 2614;18 U.S.C. .. 401, 402, 1504,
1506,1508, 1510, 1512(b), 1513, and 1622; 28
U.S.C. . 1866(g); 42 U.S.C.. 5411; 43 U.S.C. .
104; and 49A U.S.C. .. 1472 (m)(o)).

Personal recognizance--pretrial release
condition in which the defendant promises to
appear at trial and no financial conditions are
required to be met.

Petty offense--a Class B misdemeanor, a Class C
misdemeanor, or an infraction with fines as
specified in 18 U.S.C. .. 3571. (See also,
"Misdemeanor"and "Infraction.")

Plea bargaining--practice where by a defendant
in a criminal proceeding agrees to plead guilty
to a charge in exchange for the prosecution's
cooperation in securing a more lenient sentence
or some other mitigation.

Pornographic--that which is of or pertaining to
obscene literature; obscene, licentious.
Material is pornographic or obscene if the
average person, applying contemporary community
standards, would find that the work taken as a
whole appeals to the prurient interest; and if
it depicts in a patently offensive way sexual
conduct; and if the work taken as a whole lacks
serious literary, artistic, political, or
scientific value. (See Milla v. California, 113
U.S. 15(1973).)

Possession--offense involving the possession of
a controlled substance, acquiring a controlled
substance by misrepresentation or fraud,
attempting or conspiring to possess, or simple
possession of a controlled substance in
schedules I-V (as defined by 21 U.S.C. .. 812).
Includes possession of a controlled substance in
schedule I or II, or a narcotic drug in schedule
III or IV on board a vessel of the United States
or vessels within custom waters of the United
States, or by any citizen of the United States
on board a vessel. Also, possessing any punch,
die, plate, stone, or any other thing designed
to reproduce the label upon any drug or
container is an offense under this category.
Distributing a small amount of marijuana for no
remuneration is treated as simple possession
and, therefore, is included in this offense
category (for example, 21 U.S.C. .. 829
(a)(b)(c),841(a)(b)(d)(g), 842(a)(c),
843(a),844(a), 846, 955, and 962).

Presentence Investigation Report(PSR)--following
a presentence investigation, a report to the
court prepared by the probation officer before
the imposition of sentence, as required by law;
unless the court finds that there is information
in the record sufficient to enable the
meaningful exercise of sentencing authority
pursuant to 18 U.S.C. . 3553, and the court
explains this finding on there cord.

Presentment--an accusation initiated by the
grand jury itself, and in effect, an instruction
that an indictment be drawn.

Pretrial diversion--an agreement to defer (and
possibly drop) prosecution conditioned on the
defendant's good behavior and/or participation
in programs (such as job training, counseling,
education) during a stated period.

Pretrial release--the release of a defendant from custody, 
for all or part of the time, before or during prosecution. 
The defendant may be released either on personal 
recognizance or unsecured bond or on financial 
conditions. The category includes defendants released 
within 2 days after arrest and defendants who were
initially detained but subsequently released
after raising bail or having release conditions
changed at a subsequent hearing.

Probation--sentence imposed for commission of a
crime where by the convicted criminal offender is 
released into the community under the
supervision of a probation officer in lieu of
incarceration. An act of clemency available only
to those found eligible by the court, probation
offers a chance for reform and rehabilitation for 
the defendant. For this purpose, the defendant must 
agree to specified standards of conduct; violation 
of such standards subjects his liberty to revocation.

Property offenses, fraudulent--property offenses
involving the elements of deceit or intentional
misrepresentation. Specifically includes
embezzlement, fraud (excluding tax fraud),
forgery, and counterfeiting.

Property offenses, non-fraudulent--violent
offenses against property: burglary, larceny,
motor vehicle theft, arson, transportation of
stolen property, and other property offenses
(destruction of property and trespassing). These
offenses are termed "non-fraudulent" only for the
purpose of distinguishing them from the category
"Property offenses, fraudulent," above.

Property offenses, other--offenses that involve
the destruction of property moving in interstate
or foreign commerce in the possession of a
common or contract carrier. Includes the
malicious destruction of Government property, or
injury to U.S. postal property such as
mail-boxes or mailbags. Trespassing on timber and
Government lands is also included in this
category of offenses(for example, 2 U.S.C. .
167(c)(g);15 U.S.C. . 1281; 16 U.S.C. ..
3,45(d), 114, 121, 123, 152, 430(q),433, 470,
478, 481, 551, and 605; 18 U.S.C. .. 1164,
1361-62, 1364,1852, 1854, 1856, 1858, 1860,
1863,1864(c), and 2071(b); 40 U.S.C. ..193
(h)(q)(r)(s); 43 U.S.C. . 316; and 47 U.S.C. ..
13 and 22).

Public-order offenses, non-regulatory--offenses 
concerning weapons; immigration; tax law
violations (tax fraud); bribery; perjury;
national defense; escape; racketeering and
extortion; gambling; liquor; mailing or
transporting of obscene materials; traffic;
migratory birds; conspiracy, aiding and
abetting, and jurisdictional offenses; and
"other public-order offenses."  These offenses
are termed "non-regulatory" only for the purpose
of distinguishing them from the category
"Public-order offenses, regulatory" below.

Public-order offenses, other--violations of laws
pertaining to bigamy, disorderly conduct on the
U.S. Capitol grounds, civil disorder, and travel
to incite to riot (for example, 18 U.S.C. .. 228,
231, 1367, and 1385;40 U.S.C. .
193(b)(d)(g)(o)(p); and 47 U.S.C. .. 223(a)(b)).
Included in"Public-order offenses,
non-regulatory."

Public-order offenses, regulatory--violations of
regulatory laws and regulations in agriculture,
antitrust, labor law, food and drug, motor
carrier, and other regulatory offenses that are
not specifically listed in the category
"Public-order offenses, non-regulatory."

Racketeering and extortion--racketeering is
demanding, soliciting, or receiving anything of
value from the owner, proprietor or other
person having a financial interest in a
business, by means of a threat or promise,
either express or implied. Extortion is the
obtaining of money or property from another,
without his consent, induced by the wrongful use
of force or fear. This offense code covers using
interstate or foreign commerce or any facility
in interstate or foreign commerce to aid
racketeering enterprises such as arson, bribery,
gambling, liquor, narcotics, prostitution, and
extortionate credit transactions; obtaining
property or money from another, with his or her
consent induced by actual or threatened force;
violence, blackmail, or committing unlawful
interference with employment or business;
transmitting by interstate commerce or through
the mail any threat to injure the property, the
person, or the reputation of the addressee or of
another; or kidnaping any person with intent to
extort. Applies to officers or employees of the
United States, or anyone representing himself or
herself as such (for example, 18 U.S.C. .. 831,
872,874, 875(b)(d), 877, 878(b), 892,894,
1365(d), 1952-53, 1955-60,1962-63).

Rape--rape, assault with intent to commit rape,
and carnal knowledge of a female under 16 who is
not one's wife, within the territorial and
special maritime jurisdictions of the United
States as defined in 18 U.S.C. . 7(for example,
22D U.S.C. . 2801). Also includes cases of
sexual abuse, including of a minor (18 U.S.C.
..2241(a) (c), 2242(2)(B), and 2243)and in
Federal prisons (18 U.S.C.. 2244(a)).

Regulatory offenses, other--violations covering
areas such as civil rights, election laws, the
Communication Act of 1934 (including wire
tapping and wire interception), custom laws
(except narcotics and liquor), interstate commerce 
(the Hot Oil Act, transportation or importation of 
prison-made goods, and the railroad and 
transportation acts), maritime and shipping laws, 
laws regarding stowaways, the Federal Boat 
Safety Act of 1971, U.S. postal laws (excluding 
injury to postal property), intimidation of witness 
laws, aircraft regulations, and any other regulatory 
offenses not listed above. (For citations refer to the 
United States Title and Code Criminal Offense 
Citations, Administrative Office of the U.S.Courts, 
June, 1995.)

Release 

   Extraordinary release--unusual methods
   of prisoners exiting prison, such as death,
   commutation, and transfer to another facility.

   Standard release--the usual way prisoners exit
   prison, including full-term sentence
   expirations, expirations with good time,
   mandatory releases, and releases to parole.

Remand--to send back. The act of an appellate
court in sending a case back to the lower court
for further action.

Remove--transfer from Federal court (usually to
a State court).

Restitution--the action of restoring or giving
back something to its proper owner, or making
reparations to one for loss or injury previously
inflicted.

Reversal--the act of an appellate court
annulling a judgment of a lower court because of
an error.

Revocation--termination of a probation, parole,
or mandatory release order because of either a
rule violation or a new offense, and forcing the
offender to begin or continue serving his or her
sentence.

Robbery--taking anything of value from the
person or presence of another by force or by
intimidation, within the special maritime and
territorial jurisdiction of the United States
(18 U.S.C. .. 7). Includes robbery of bank
property, U.S. postal property, or personal
property of the United States. Also, assaulting
or putting the life of any person in jeopardy by
the use of a dangerous weapon while committing
or attempting to commit such robbery (for
example, 18 U.S.C... 1661, 1991, 2112, 2113(c)
(d),2114, 2116, and 2118(a)).

Rule 20 transfer--upon petition by a defendant,
a transfer of proceedings to the district in
which the defendant is arrested, when the
defendant is arrested, held, or present in a
district other than that in which an
indictment or information is pending against him.
In this case, the defendant may state in writing
a wish top lead guilty or nolo contendere, to
waive trial in the district in which the
indictment or information is pending, and to
consent to the disposition of the case in the
district in which the defendant was arrested
(Fed. R.Crim. P. 20).

Rule 40 transfer--upon petition by the U.S.
attorney, commitment to another district;
transfer proceedings of a defendant arrested in a
district for an alleged offense committed in the
another district (Fed. R. Crim. P. 40).

Sentence--sanction imposed on a convicted
offender. For sentences to incarceration, the
maximum time the offender may be held in custody
is reported. (See also, "Split sentence,""Mixed
sentence," "Indeterminate sentence," and
"Mandatory sentence.")

Sentencing Guidelines (Federal) --
guidelines established by the United States
Sentencing Commission to be followed by the
Federal courts in the sentencing of those
convicted of Federal offenses. Established
pursuant to the Sentencing Reform Act of 1984,
the sentencing guidelines prescribe a range of
sentences for each class of convicted persons as
determined by categories of offense behavior and
offender characteristics.

Sex offenses, other--transporting, coercing, or
enticing any individual(including minors) to go
from one place to another in interstate or
foreign commerce, in the District of Columbia,
or in any territory or possession of the United
States with the intent and purpose to engage in
prostitution, or any sexual activity for which
any person can be charged with a criminal
offense (8 U.S.C. .1328 and 18 U.S.C. .. 1460,
1466,2251-52, 2257, 2421 and 2423).

Shock incarceration--an intense confinement
program, consisting of a highly regimented
schedule that provides the strict discipline,
physical training, hard labor, drill, and
ceremony characteristic of military basic
training.

Special maritime and territorial jurisdiction --
areas of Federal jurisdiction outside the jurisdiction 
of any State, including (1) the high seas, Great Lakes, 
and connecting water-ways;(2) Federal lands; and 
(3) U.S.-owned aircraft in flight over the high seas 
(18 U.S.C.. 7).

Split sentence-- See, "Mixed sentence."

Stale--the case/matter is too old to support
successful prosecution.

Substantial assistance--a form of cooperation
with the government in which the defendant
provides the government with information,
testimony, or other assistance relating to the
criminal activities of other persons in exchange
for a sentence reduction. Substantial assistance
provides the only mechanism for judges to impose
a sentence below an applicable mandatory
sentence (U.S.S.G. 5K1.1 as codified at 18 U.S.C.
. 3553(e)).

Supervised release--under the Sentencing Reform
Act of 1984, a form of post-imprisonment
supervision to be imposed by the court as a part
of the sentence of imprisonment at the time of
initial sentencing. Unlike parole, a term of
supervised release does not replace a portion
of the sentence of imprisonment, but rather is an
order of supervision in addition to any term of
imprisonment imposed by the court (compare also
with probation).

Surety bond--an agreement by the defendant as a
condition of his or her release that requires a
third party (usually a bail bondsman) to promise
to pay the full bail amount in the event that
the defendant fails to appear.

Suspect--a person who is under investigation or
interrogation as a likely perpetrator of a
specific criminal offense.

Tax law violations--tax fraud offenses such as
income tax evasion and fraud; counterfeiting any
stamps with intent to defraud the collection or
payment of tax; willfully failing to collect or
pay tax; failure to obey summons to produce any
papers concerning taxes; failing to furnish
receipts for employees of tax withheld; failing
to furnish information relating to certain
trusts, annuity, and bond purchase plans;
putting fraudulent or false statements on tax
returns; and not obtaining a license for a
business that makes a profit from foreign items.
Also included in this offense category are
violations of excise and wagering tax laws and
any other laws listed below from the Internal
Revenue Service Code (for example, 26 U.S.C. ..
3402, 4412, 5751,5762(a), 6047(a)(c),
6331,6420(ea.), 6674, 7121, 7201, 7203(c),7204,
7206(a)(c), 7208(a)(c), 7210,7213(b), (d),
7214(b), 7216, 7232,7513, 7602, and 7604(b)).

Technical violation--failure to comply with any
of the conditions of pretrial release,
probation, or parole, excluding alleged new
criminal activity. May result in revocation of
release status. Examples of conditions that may
be imposed and then violated include remaining
within a specified jurisdiction, or appearing at
specified intervals for drug tests.

Termination--at the pretrial services stage:
execution of sentence, acquittal, dismissal,
diversion, or fugitive status; in the U.S.
district court: conviction, acquittal, or
dismissal; and at probation or supervised
release: the removal of a person from
supervision either for successful completion of
the term of supervision or as the result of a
revocation.

Threats against the President--knowingly and
willfully depositing in the mail, at any post
office, or by any letter carrier a letter,
paper, writing, print, missive, or document
containing any threat to take the life of or
to inflict bodily harm upon the President, Vice
President, or any other officer in order of
succession to the Presidency. Knowingly and
willfully making such threats in any way to the
above-named people (18 U.S.C. .871).

Traffic offenses--driving while intoxicated, or
any moving or parking violations on Federal
lands (for example, 40 U.S.C. . 212(b)).

Trafficking -- knowingly and intentionally
importing or exporting any controlled substance
in schedule I, II, III, IV, or V (as defined by
21 U.S.C. .. 812). Includes manufacturing,
distributing, dispensing, selling, or possessing
with intent to manufacture, distribute, or sell
a controlled substance or a counterfeit
substance; exporting any controlled substance
in schedules I-V; manufacturing or distributing a 
controlled substance in schedule I or II for
purposes of unlawful importation; or making or
distributing any punch, die, plate, stone, or
any other thing designed to reproduce the label
upon any drug or container, or removing or
obliterating the label or symbol of any drug or
container. Also includes knowingly opening,
maintaining or managing any place for the
purpose of manufacturing, distributing, or using
any controlled substance (for example, 19 U.S.C.
. 1590; 21 U.S.C. .. 333(e),825(a)-(d), 830(a),
841(a)-(b)(d)(e)(g), 842(a), 843(a)(b), 845,
846,848, 854, 856, 858, 859(a)(b),860(a),
861(c)(f), 952(a)(b),953(a)(e), 957, 959,
960(a)(b)(d),961, 962, and 963; and 46A U.S.C...
1903(g) and (j)).

Transportation of stolen property--transporting,
selling, or receiving stolen goods, stolen
securities, stolen moneys, stolen cattle,
fraudulent State tax stamps, or articles used in
counterfeiting, if the above articles or goods
involve or constitute interstate or foreign
commerce (18 U.S.C. ..2315, 2317).

Trial conviction--conviction by judge or jury
after trial.

True bill--an indictment.

United States--includes the out lying
territories (Guam, Puerto Rico, Northern
Marianna Islands, and The U.S.  Virgin Islands)
and the territory occupied by the 50 states and
the District of Columbia.

U.S. attorneys--all United States attorneys.
Prosecutorial data in this Compendium come from
the Central System and Central Charge Files of
the Executive Office for U.S. Attorneys.

Unsecured bond--an agreement by the defendant as
a condition of his or her release in which the
defendant agrees to pay full bond amount in the
event of nonappearance at trial, but is not
required to post security as a condition to
release.

Violation (of pretrial release, probation, or
parole)--allegation of a new crime or a
technical violation while on pretrial release,
probation, or parole.

Violent offenses--threatening, attempting, or
actually using physical force against a person.
Includes murder, negligent manslaughter,
assault, robbery, rape, other sex offenses (some
of which may be nonviolent), kidnaping, and
threats against the President. (See also,
specific offenses for citations.)

Weapons violations-- violations of any of the
provisions of 18 U.S.C. ..922 and 923 concerning
the manufacturing, importing, possessing,
receiving, and licensing of firearms and
ammunition. Includes manufacturing, selling,
possessing, or transporting (within any
territory or possession of the United States,
within Indian country, or within the special
maritime and territorial jurisdiction of the
United States) (18 U.S.C. .. 7) any switchblade
knife; or making, receiving, possessing, or
transporting a firearm not registered in the
National Firearms Registration Transfer Record. 
Also, engaging in importing, manufacturing, or
dealing in firearms if not registered with the
secretary in the Internal Revenue Service
District in which the business is conducted or
not having paid a special occupational tax. In
addition, this code covers cases where in a
crime of violence or drug trafficking enhanced
punishment is handed down when committed with a
deadly weapon (for example, 15 U.S.C. . 1242;
18 U.S.C. .. 922(a)(c)(e)(g)(i)(k)(m)(n)(q), 923,
924(a)(c)(f)(h) and 930; 26 U.S.C. .. 5801,
5811,5821, 5841, 5843, 5851, and 5861(b)(d)(h)
(j)(l); 40 U.S.C. .193f(a); and 49A
U.S.C. . 1472(q)).


(End of file)














