U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Programs
Bureau of Justice Statistics

Statistical Table

Capital Punishment 2009 -- Statistical Tables

November 2010   NCJ 231676

Tracy L. Snell
BJS Statistician
----------------------------------------------------------
This file is text only without graphics and many of the
tables. A Zip archive of the tables in this report in
spreadsheet format (.csv) and the full report including
tables and graphics in .pdf format are available from:
http://bjs.ojp.usdoj.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbdetail&iid=2172

This report is one in a series. More recent editions may be
available. To view a list of all in the series go to
http://bjs.ojp.usdoj.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbse&sid=1
-----------------------------------------------------------   
 
At yearend 2009, 36 states and the Federal Bureau of Prisons
held 3,173 inmates under sentence of death, which was 37
fewer inmates than at yearend 2008. This represents the ninth
consecutive year that the population has decreased.

California, Florida, Texas, and Pennsylvania held half of all
inmates on death row as of December 31, 2009. The Federal
Bureau of Prisons held 55 inmates.

Of those under sentence of death at yearend, 56% were
white, and 42% were black. The 376 Hispanic inmates under
sentence of death accounted for nearly 14% of inmates with
a known ethnicity. Ninety-eight percent of all inmates were
male, and 2% were female. The race and gender of those
under sentence of death has remained relatively unchanged
since 2000.

During 2009, 149 inmates were removed from under sentence: 52
were executed***Footnote( For 2010 data on executions, see
table 21, page 22).*** 27 died by means other than execution,
and 70 were removed as a result of sentences and/or
convictions overturned or commutations of sentences. A total
of 112 inmates were received under sentence of death during
2009, representing the smallest number of admissions since
1973 when 44 persons were admitted.

During 2009, 21 states and the Federal Bureau of Prisons
received 112 prisoners under sentence of death. Admissions
in California (29), Florida (15), Arizona (14), and Alabama
(9) accounted for 60% of those sentenced to death in 2009.

Eleven states executed 52 inmates during 2009. The inmates
executed in 2009 had been under sentence of death an
average of 14 years and 1 month, which was about 30 months
longer than for those executed in 2008.

Of the 7,773 people under sentence of death between 1977
and 2009, 15% had been executed, 5% died by causes other
than execution, and 39% received other dispositions.

One state repealed its death penalty statute in 2009; 6
states revised statutes in 2009

At yearend 2009, the death penalty was authorized by 36
states and the federal government (see table 1). The New
Mexico legislature repealed the death penalty in 2009 (Laws
2009, ch. 11 - 5). The repeal of the death penalty was
effective for offenses committed after July 1, 2009. The
repeal was not retroactive. As of December 31, 2009, New
Mexico held two men under previously imposed death sentences,
and one person was on trial with the state seeking the death
penalty.

During 2009, 6 states revised statutory provisions relating
to the death penalty. By state, the changes were as follows:

Idaho--Repealed the use of a firing squad as a method of
execution (I.C.  19-2716), effective July 1, 2009.

Maryland--Revised its criminal code to require DNA or other
biological evidence, a video-taped confession, or a video
recording that conclusively links the defendant to the murder
in order to impose a death sentence (MD Code Ann., Crim.
Law Art,  2-202 (2009 Supp.)), effective October 1, 2009.

Nebraska--Authorized lethal injection as a method of
execution (Neb. Rev. Stat. 83-964, (2009 Supp.)), effective
August 30, 2009.

North Carolina--Amended the capital statute to prohibit
imposition of a death sentence on the basis of race and
establishing evidentiary standards and procedures to be used
in the review of death sentences (NCGS  15A-2010,  15A-
2011, and  15A-2012), effective August 11, 2009.

Tennessee--Added to its list of aggravating circumstances
murder committed in the course of aggravated child abuse,
aggravated child neglect, and rape of a child (Tenn. Code
Ann.  39-13- 204(i)(7)), effective August 15, 2009.

Utah--Revised its definition of aggravated murder to include
murder committed by an offender previously convicted of
felony discharge of a firearm (Utah Code Ann.  76-5-202(j)),
effective May 12, 2009.

Lethal injection was authorized by all states with capital
statutes

As of December 31, 2009, all 36 states with death penalty
statutes authorized lethal injection as a method of execution
(table 2).

In addition to lethal injection, 17 states authorized  an
alternative method of execution. Nine states authorized
electrocution, 4 states authorized lethal gas, 3 states
authorized hanging, and 2 states authorized firing squad.

For states that authorize multiple methods of execution, the
method is generally selected by the condemned prisoner. Six
of the 17 states stipulated which method must be used
depending on either the date of the offense or sentencing.
One state authorized hanging only if lethal injection could
not be given. Four states authorized alternative methods if
lethal injection is ruled to be unconstitutional: 1
authorized electrocution, 1 authorized electrocution or
firing squad, 1 authorized firing squad, and 1 authorized
lethal gas.

The method of execution of federal prisoners is lethal
injection, pursuant to 28 CFR, Part 26. For offenses under
the Violent Crime Control and Law Enforcement Act of 1994,
the method is that of the state in which the conviction took
place (18 U.S.C. 3596).

2009 Statistical Tables

Table 1. Capital offenses, by state, 2009

Table 2. Method of execution, by state, 2009

Table 3. Federal capital offenses, by statute, 2009

Table 4. Prisoners under sentence of death, by region,
jurisdiction, and race, 2008 and 2009

Table 5. Demographic characteristics of prisoners under
sentence of death, 2009

Table 6. Women under sentence of death, by region,
jurisdiction, and race, 2008 and 2009

Table 7. Hispanics under sentence of death, by region and
jurisdiction, 2008 and 2009

Table 8. Persons under sentence of death by sex, race, and
Hispanic origin, December 31, 2009

Table 9. Elapsed time since sentencing for inmates under
sentence of death, by sex, race, and Hispanic origin,
December 31, 2009

Table 10. Criminal history profile of prisoners under
sentence of death, by race and Hispanic origin, 2009

Table 11. Inmates removed from under sentence of death, by
jurisdiction and method of removal, 2009

Table 12. Average time between sentencing and execution, by
year, 1977-2009

Table 13. Number of inmates executed, by race and Hispanic
origin, 1977-2009

Table 14. Executions and other dispositions of inmates
sentenced to death, by race and Hispanic origin, 1977-2009

Table 15. Number of persons executed by race, Hispanic
origin, and method, 1977-2009

Table 16. Number of executions, by jurisdiction and method,
1977-2009

Table 17. Number of persons executed, by jurisdiction,
1930-2009

Table 18. Prisoners under sentence of death, by jurisdiction
and year of sentencing, December 31, 2009

Table 19. Prisoners sentenced to death and outcome of the
sentence, by year of sentencing, 1973-2009

Table 20. Number sentenced to death and number of removals,
by jurisdiction and reason for removal, 1973-2009

Table 21. Advance count of executions: January 1,
2010-November 6, 2010

Methodology

Capital punishment information is collected annually as part
of the National Prisoner Statistics program (NPS-8). This
data series is collected in two parts: data on persons under
sentence of death are obtained from the department of
corrections in each jurisdiction currently authorizing
capital punishment; and information on the status of death
penalty statutes is obtained from the Office of the Attorney
General in each of the 50 States, the District of Columbia,
and the Federal Government. Data collection forms are
available on the BJS website.

NPS-8 covers all persons under sentence of death at any time
during the year who were held in a state or federal
nonmilitary correctional facility. Included are capital
offenders transferred from prison to mental hospitals and
those who may have escaped from custody. Excluded are persons
whose death sentences have been overturned by the court,
regardless of their current incarceration status.

The statistics reported in this bulletin may differ from data
collected by other organizations for a variety of reasons:
(1) NPS-8 adds inmates to the population under sentence of
death not at sentencing but at the time they are admitted to
a state or federal correctional facility; (2) if inmates
entered prison under a death sentence or were reported as
being relieved of a death sentence in one year but the court
had acted in the previous year, the counts are adjusted to
reflect the dates of court decisions (see the note on table 4
for the affected jurisdictions); and (3) NPS counts are
always for the last day of the calendar year and will differ
from counts for more recent periods.

All data in this report have been reviewed for accuracy by
the data providers in each jurisdiction prior to publication.

-------------------------------------------------------------
Office of Justice Programs * Innovation* Partnership * Safer
Neighborhoods * http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov
-------------------------------------------------------------
The Bureau of Justice Statistics is the statistical agency of
the U.S. Department of Justice. James P. Lynch is Director.

This Special Report was written by Tracy L. Snell. James J.
Stephan verified the report.

Colette R. Heiston carried out the data collection and
processing under the supervision of Steve Bittner and Jeremy
Shimer, Demographic Surveys Division, Census Bureau, U.S.
Department of Commerce.

Georgette Walsh and Jill Duncan edited the report, Barbara
Quinn produced the report, and Jayne E. Robinson prepared the
report for final printing under the supervision of Doris J.
James.

December 2010, NCJ 231676

This report in portable document format and in ASCII and its
related statistical data and tables are available at the BJS
World Wide Wed Internet site:
<http://bjs.ojp.usdoj.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbdetail&iid=2172>.Off
ice of o Innovation o Partnerships o Safer Neighborhoods o
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov

--------------------------------------------------------


11/29/2010/ JER 4:15