U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Programs
Bureau of Justice Statistics

-------------------------------------------------------
This report is one in a series. More recent editions 
may be available. To view a list of all reports in the 
series go to http://www.bjs.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbse&sid=1

This file is text only without graphics and many of the
tables. A Zip archive of the tables in this report in
spreadsheet format (.csv) and the full report including
tables and graphics in .pdf format are available on BJS
website at:http://www.bjs.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbdetail&iid=4697
--------------------------------------------------------

*******************
Statistical Tables
*******************

Capital Punishment, 2011--Statistical Tables

Tracy L. Snell, BJS Statistician


At yearend 2011, 35 states and the Federal Bureau of Prisons 
held 3,082 inmates under sentence of death, which was 57 
fewer than at yearend 2010 (figure 1). This represents the 
eleventh consecutive year in which the number of inmates 
under sentence of death decreased.

Four states (California, Florida, Texas, and Pennsylvania) 
held more than half of all inmates on death row on December 
31, 2011. The Federal Bureau of Prisons held 56 inmates 
under sentence of death at yearend.

Of prisoners under sentence of death at yearend, 55% were 
white and 42% were black. The 387 Hispanic inmates under 
sentence of death accounted for 14% of inmates with a known 
ethnicity. Ninety-eight percent of inmates under sentence of 
death were male, and 2% were female. The race and sex of 
inmates under sentence of death has remained relatively 
unchanged since 2000.

Among inmates for whom legal status at the time of the 
capital offense was available, 40% had an active criminal 
justice status. Less than half of these inmates were on 
parole, about a quarter were on probation, and the remaining 
inmates had charges pending, were incarcerated, had escaped 
from incarceration, or had some other criminal justice 
status.

Criminal history patterns of death row inmates differed by 
race and Hispanic origin. More black inmates had a prior 
felony conviction (72%), compared to Hispanic (64%) or white 
(62%) inmates. Similar percentages of white (9%), black 
(8%), and Hispanic (6%) inmates had a prior homicide 
conviction. A slightly higher percentage of Hispanic (31%) 
and black (30%) inmates were on probation or parole at the 
time of their capital offense, compared to 23% of white 
inmates.

In 2011, 18 states reported that 80 inmates were received 
under sentence of death. Admissions in Florida (14), 
California (10), Texas (8), and Arizona (8) accounted for 
half of those sentenced to death in 2011.

Twenty-four states and the Federal Bureau of Prisons removed 
137 inmates from under sentence of death: 43 were executed, 
24 died by means other than execution, and 70 were removed 
as a result of commutations or courts overturning sentences 
or convictions. Removals in Texas (16), Illinois (15), and 
Alabama (14), accounted for nearly a third of all inmates 
removed from under sentence of death in 2011. Illinois 
removed all 15 inmates under sentence of death when the 
governor granted commutations upon signing a law to repeal 
the death penalty in that state.

Thirteen states executed 43 inmates in 2011, compared to 46 
inmates in 2010. The inmates executed in 2011 had been under 
sentence of death an average of 16.5 years, which was 20 
months longer than those executed in 2010.

Among the 36 jurisdictions with prisoners under sentence of 
death on December 31, 2011, 7 jurisdictions had more inmates 
than a year earlier, 15 had fewer inmates, and 15 had the 
same number. California showed the largest increase (up 5 
inmates). The largest decreases in the population of inmates 
under sentence of death were in Ohio and Texas (down 8 
each), followed by Pennsylvania and Oklahoma (down 7 each), 
and Alabama (down 5).

The U.S. Supreme Court reinstated the death penalty in 1976 
(see Gregg v. Georgia, 427 U.S. 153 (1976) and its companion 
cases). From 1976 to 2000, the number of inmates under 
sentence of death in the U.S. steadily increased until it 
peaked at 3,601 inmates on December 31, 2000 (figure 2). In 
2001, the number of inmates removed from under sentence of 
death was higher than the number admitted for the first time 
since 1976 (figure 3). The number of annual removals of 
those under sentence of death has continued to outpace 
admissions since 2001. The 80 inmates received under 
sentence of death in 2011 was a 27% decrease from the number 
received in 2010 (109). The number of inmates received in 
2011 represented the smallest number of admissions to death 
row since 1973 when 44 persons were admitted.

Of the 7,958 people under sentence of death between 1977 and 
2011, 16% had been executed, 6% died by causes other than 
execution, and 40% received other dispositions.***Footnote 1 
Following the U.S. Supreme Court’s 1976 approval of revised 
statutes in some states (Gregg v. Georgia), executions of 
inmates resumed in 1977.*** The federal government began 
collecting annual execution statistics in 1930. Between 1930 
and 2011, a total of 5,136 inmates were executed under civil 
authority (figure 4). ***Footnote 2 Military authorities 
carried out an additional 160 executions between 1930 and 
1961 which are not included in this report. After the 
Supreme Court reinstated death penalty statutes in 1976, 35 
states and the federal government executed 1,277 inmates.

*************************************************
One state repealed its death penalty statue 
in 2011, and two states revised capital statutes
*************************************************

As of December 31, 2011, 36 states and the federal 
government authorized the death penalty (table 1). While New 
Mexico repealed the death penalty in 2009 (Laws 2009, ch. 11 
§ 5), the repeal was not retroactive, and offenders charged 
with a capital offense committed prior to the repeal may be 
eligible for a death sentence. As of December 31, 2011, New 
Mexico held two men under previously imposed death 
sentences, and one person was awaiting sentencing with the 
state seeking the death penalty.

The Illinois legislature repealed the death penalty (725 
ILCS 5/119-1), effective July 1, 2011. During 2011, two 
states revised statutory provisions relating to the death 
penalty. By state, the changes were--

New Hampshire--Added murder during the commission of a 
burglary of any person authorized to occupy the building 
(RSA 630:1(g)), to the list of offenses eligible for a death 
penalty, effective July 1, 2011.

Texas--Revised an element of capital murder, murder of a 
child under age 6, to include any child under age 10 (Tex. 
Penal Code 19.03(a)(8)), effective September 1, 2011.

*************************************************
Lethal injection was authorized by all states 
with capital statutes
*************************************************

As of December 31, 2011, all 36 states with death penalty 
statutes authorized lethal injection as a method of 
execution (table 2).

In addition to lethal injection, 15 states authorized an 
alternative method of execution: 8 states, electrocution; 
3 states, lethal gas; 3 states, hanging; and 2 states, 
firing squad.

For states that authorize multiple methods of execution, the 
method is generally selected by the condemned prisoner. Five 
of the 15 states (Arizona, Arkansas, Kentucky, Tennessee, 
and Utah) stipulated which method must be used depending on 
either the date of the offense or sentencing. One state (New 
Hampshire) authorized hanging only if lethal injection could 
not be given. Four states authorized alternative methods if 
lethal injection is ruled to be unconstitutional: Delaware 
authorized hanging, Oklahoma authorized electrocution or 
firing squad, Utah authorized firing squad, and Wyoming 
authorized lethal gas.

The method of execution of federal prisoners is lethal 
injection, pursuant to 28 CFR, Part 26. For offenses 
prosecuted under the federal Violent Crime Control and Law 
Enforcement Act of 1994, the method is that of the state in 
which the conviction took place (18 U.S.C. 3596).

************************************************************
--------------------
Executions in 2012
--------------------

In 2012, 9 states executed 43 inmates, which was the same 
number executed in 2011.

Four states accounted for three-quarters of the executions 
carried out during this period: Texas executed 15 inmates; 
and Mississippi, Oklahoma, and Arizona each executed 6 
inmates.

Of the 43 executions carried out in 2012, all were by lethal 
injection.

No women were executed in 2012.
************************************************************

************
Methodology
************

Capital punishment information is collected annually as part 
of the National Prisoner Statistics program (NPS-8). This 
data series is collected in two parts: data on persons under 
sentence of death are obtained from the department of 
corrections in each jurisdiction currently authorizing 
capital punishment, and information on the status of death 
penalty statutes is obtained from the Office of the Attorney 
General in each of the 50 States, the District of Columbia, 
and the federal government. Data collection forms are 
available on the BJS website at www.bjs.gov.

NPS-8 covers all persons under sentence of death at any time 
during the year who were held in a state or federal 
nonmilitary correctional facility. This includes capital 
offenders transferred from prison to mental hospitals and 
those who may have escaped from custody. It excludes persons 
whose death sentences have been overturned by the court, 
regardless of their current incarceration status.

The statistics included in this report may differ from data 
collected by other organizations for a variety of reasons: 
(1) NPS-8 adds inmates to the population under sentence of 
death not at sentencing, but at the time they are admitted 
to a state or federal correctional facility; (2) if inmates 
entered prison under a death sentence or were reported as 
being relieved of a death sentence in one year but the court 
had acted in the previous year, the counts are adjusted to 
reflect the dates of court decisions (See note on table 4 
for the affected jurisdictions); and (3) NPS counts are 
always for the last day of the calendar year and will differ 
from counts for more recent periods.

All data in this report have been reviewed for accuracy by 
the data providers in each jurisdiction prior to 
publication.

***********************************************************
Table 1. Capital offenses, by state, 2011

Table 2. Method of execution, by state, 2011

Table 3. Federal capital offenses, 2011

Table 4. Prisoners under sentence of death, by region, 
jurisdiction, and race, 2010 and 2011

Table 5. Demographic characteristics of prisoners under 
sentence of death, 2011

Table 6. Women under sentence of death, by region, 
jurisdiction, and race, 2010 and 2011

Table 7. Hispanics under sentence of death, by region 
and jurisdiction, 2010 and 2011

Table 8. Criminal history profile of prisoners under 
sentence of death, by race and Hispanic origin, 2011

Table 9. Inmates removed from under sentence of death, 
by method of removal, 2011

Table 10. Average time between sentencing and execution, 
1977–2011

Table 11. Number of inmates executed, by race, 1977–2011

Table 12. Executions and other dispositions of inmates 
sentenced to death, by race and Hispanic origin, 
1977–2011

Table 13. Executions, by jurisdiction and method, 
1977–2011

Table 14. Number of persons executed, by jurisdiction, 
1930–2011

Table 15. Prisoners under sentence of death on December 
31, 2011, by jurisdiction and year of sentencing

Table 16. Prisoners sentenced to death and the outcome of 
sentence, by year of sentencing, 1973-2011

Table 17. Number sentenced to death and number of removals, 
by jurisdiction and reason for removal, 
1973–2011

Appendix Table 1. Number of inmates under sentence of 
death, by demographic characteristics, 2011
************************************************************

************************************************************
The Bureau of Justice Statistics is the statistical agency 
of the U.S. Department of Justice. William J. Sabol is the 
acting director.

This report was written by Tracy L. Snell. Todd D. Minton 
verified the report.

Lorelle Dennis and Beth Davis carried out the data 
collection and processing under the supervision of 
Heather C. West, Ph.D., and Nicole Adolph, Criminal 
Justice Statistics Branch, Governments Division, Census 
Bureau, U.S. Department of Commerce. Rekha Kudlur provided 
statistical and technical assistance.

Jill Thomas edited the report, and Barbara Quinn and Morgan 
Young produced the report under the supervision of Doris J. 
James.

July 2013, NCJ 242185
************************************************************

****************************************************
Office of Justice Programs
Innovation * Partnerships * Safer Neighborhoods
www.ojp.usdoj.gov
****************************************************

6/27/13/JER/10:10am

