U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Programs
Bureau of Justice Statistics

Census of Publicly Funded Forensic
Crime Laboratories, 2009

Matthew R. Durose, BJS Statistician
Kelly A. Walsh, Research Associate, Urban 
Institute Andrea M. Burch, BJS 
Statistician

August 2012, NCJ 238252
----------------------------------------
This file is text without graphics and 
many of the tables. A Zip archive of the 
tables in this report in Spreadsheet 
format (.cvs) and the full report 
including tables and graphs in .pdf 
format are available at:
http://www.bjs.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbdetail&iid=4412
----------------------------------------

In 2009, the nation’s 411 publicly funded 
crime laboratories received an estimated 
4.1 million requests for forensic 
services. Of these, 8 out of 10 were for 
the screening or DNA analysis of 
biological evidence (i.e., forensic biology) 
(34%), controlled substance analysis (33%), 
or toxicology (15%). During the same year, 
83% of publicly funded crime labs were 
accredited by a professional forensic 
science organization compared to 71% in 
2002 (figure 1). Between 2002 and 2009, 
the overall accreditation rate increased 
across state (80% to 92%), county (66% to 
75%), municipal (45% to 62%), and federal 
(67% to 79%) labs.

This report summarizes data from the 
Bureau of Justice Statistics’ (BJS) 2009 
Census of Publicly Funded Forensic Crime 
Laboratories (CPFFCL) and provides a 
comparative  analysis with findings from 
the censuses conducted in 2002 and 2005. 
The CPFFCL offers a comprehensive look at 
crime lab personnel, budgets, and other 
administrative information (including 
backlogs in requests for forensic 
services) across the nation. The census 
also provides information on accreditations, 
proficiency tests, and other quality 
assurances within publicly operated labs.

*************************************
*************
HIGHLIGHTS
*************

* During 2009, publicly funded crime labs 
began and ended the year with a total 
backlog of more than one million requests 
for forensic services. 

* While forensic biology accounted for 
about a third of all requests received 
during 2009, about three-quarters of the 
total backlog that year was for these 
types of requests.

* DNA samples collected from convicted 
offenders and arrestees for a database of 
DNA profiles accounted for the majority 
of all forensic biology requests received 
in 2009.

* About 3 out of 10 publicly funded crime 
labs outsourced some forensic work to 
private labs or other public facilities 
in 2009.

* Publicly funded crime labs employed an 
estimated 13,100 full-time personnel in 
2009--an increase from about 11,000 in 
2002.

* The estimated budget for all publicly 
funded crime labs in 2009 was about $1.6 
billion compared to the $1.0 billion 
budget for labs in 2002.
**********************************

**********************************
Most crime labs provided evidentiary 
analysis in multiple forensic disciplines
**********************************
Publicly funded crime labs provided an 
average of five different functions in 
2009 (not in table). Agencies that had a 
larger number of full-time employees 
generally provided a wider range of 
forensic functions. On average, labs with 
100 or more employees performed seven 
different functions, while smaller labs 
having fewer than 10 employees were more 
specialized and performed three 
functions. In 2009, the most common 
service (82%) performed by crime labs was 
the analysis of drugs or other illegal 
substances (table 1). 

The majority (60%) of crime labs reported 
analyzing latent (or hidden) fingerprints 
recovered from crime scenes.  The CPFFCL 
asked respondents to report on their use 
of the FBI’s Integrated Automated 
Fingerprint Identification System 
(IAFIS), a national database that 
provides automated fingerprint search 
capabilities. In 2009, IAFIS was used by 
78% of labs that performed latent 
fingerprint comparisons (not in table).

Fifty-five percent of crime labs examined 
pattern evidence resulting from the use 
of firearms or tools in 2009. Among labs 
that performed this function, 78% 
reported using the Bureau of Alcohol, 
Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives’ 
National Integrated Ballistic Information 
Network (NIBIN). This database allows 
examiners to upload images from casings 
and bullets recovered during an 
investigation and compare them to 
evidence from other crimes.

**************************************
The Census of Publicly Funded Crime 
Laboratories examines services and 
resources devoted to forensic 
investigations in the U.S.
*************************************

Forensic crime labs are a critical 
component of criminal investigations and 
the administration of justice. Publicly 
funded forensic crime labs examine and 
report on physical evidence in criminal 
matters for state, county, municipal, and 
federal jurisdictions, and also provide 
court testimony regarding that evidence. 
They receive requests for forensic 
services from a variety of agencies, 
including the police, medical examiners, 
prosecutors, and correctional facilities. 
 
In 1998, the Bureau of Justice Statistics 
(BJS) conducted its first national survey 
of crime labs, focusing solely on 
agencies that performed DNA testing. The 
National Study of DNA Laboratories was 
repeated in 2001 and surveyed 
approximately 120 public DNA labs. As the 
need for statistics on other forensic 
services grew, BJS expanded the data 
collection to include all areas of 
forensic analysis being performed at 
publicly operated crime labs. 

The first Census of Publicly Funded 
Forensic Crime Laboratories (CPFFCL) was 
conducted in 2003 to capture data on the 
2002 workload and operations of the 351 
publicly funded crime labs operating that 
year. A follow-up census was fielded 
three years later to address additional 
forensic science issues and examine 
changes since 2002. In 2010, BJS 
conducted a third census on the workload 
and operations of publicly funded crime 
labs in 2009. A total of 397 (or 97%) of 
all labs responded to the 2009 census, 
including at least one from every state 
(table 2).
 
About half (51%) of labs in 2009 were 
units within a multiple laboratory system 
(not in table). State labs, which can 
serve an entire state or regional area, 
accounted for 89% of all publicly funded 
crime labs that operated within a 
multiple lab system. The 2009 CPFFCL was 
administered to each lab within a 
multiple lab system.
*************************************

About half (52%) of the nation’s crime 
labs engaged in crime scene response 
activities, including the documentation 
and collection of physical evidence. 
County (62%) and municipal (71%) labs 
were more likely than state (44%) and 
federal (44%) labs to be directly 
involved in crime scene investigations in 
2009. Among labs involved in crime scene 
investigations, 96% performed evidence 
collection and 56% conducted crime scene 
reconstruction (table 3).

Examinations of printed or written 
documents (16%) and digital evidence 
(19%) were performed by the smallest 
percentage of publicly funded crime labs 
in 2009. Federal labs (44%) were more 
likely than state (10%), county (21%), or 
municipal (32%) labs to report analyzing 
digital evidence.

Forensic biology services, including 
biology screening and DNA analysis, were 
provided by about 6 out of 10 (59%) 
publicly funded crime labs in 2009. This 
includes samples that were collected 
during a criminal investigation, either 
at the crime scene or from a person of 
interest, and samples that were collected 
for inclusion in a local, state, or 
national DNA database. All 50 states, the 
District of Columbia, and the federal 
government require convicted offenders, 
and in some jurisdictions those arrested 
for certain crimes, to provide DNA 
samples to be processed for a database. 
Among the labs that handled forensic 
biology requests in 2009, 61% used 
robotic instruments and 17% used expert 
system software.  These advanced 
technologies reduced the time to process 
samples by minimizing human intervention.

State, county, municipal, and federal 
labs enter DNA profiles from offenders, 
arrestees, and casework into the FBI’s 
Combined DNA Index System (CODIS). CODIS 
software allows crime labs to 
electronically compare biological 
evidence collected from criminal 
investigations to DNA profiles stored in 
a database for the purpose of linking 
serial crimes together and identifying 
suspects.  Eighty-one percent of crime 
labs that performed forensic biology 
services in 2009 reported using CODIS.

***************************************** 
Crime labs received an estimated 4 
million requests for forensic services in 
2009
*****************************************
*

Crime laboratories receive millions of 
pieces of evidence from criminal 
investigations each year. A criminal case 
may generate more than one type of 
request to process or analyze evidence.  
For example, a laboratory may receive 
fiber evidence and biological evidence 
from the same case, which require 
analysis by different sections of the 
lab. The ability of a lab to handle its 
forensic workload depends on numerous 
factors, including the complexity of the 
procedures and the availability of 
analysts and other resources.  

BJS asked labs to provide the total 
number of requests received and completed 
within their facility for each forensic 
service they performed during 2009. To 
examine the capacity of labs to turn 
around all requests within a 30-day 
period, BJS also asked respondents to 
supply information on the number of 
requests that had been submitted to the 
lab but had not yet been examined and 
reported to the submitting agency. The 
CPFFCL defined a pending request as 
backlogged if it was in the lab and 
remained unreported for 30 days or 
longer. The 2009 census asked labs to 
report both the overall number of pending 
requests and the number of backlogged 
requests at yearend 2008 and 2009.  
Nearly 9 out of 10 forensic requests that 
were pending at the end of 2008 had been 
in the lab for 30 days or more and were 
classified as backlogged (not in table).   

The nation’s 411 publicly funded crime 
labs began 2009 with an estimated backlog 
of 1.2 million requests for forensic 
services (table 4). These labs received 
an estimated 4.1 million new requests for 
forensic services during 2009 (table 5). 
The screening or DNA analysis of 
biological evidence (i.e., forensic 
biology) (34%), analysis of controlled 
substance (33%), and toxicology (15%) 
accounted for about 8 in 10 of all 
requests received that year. For various 
reasons (e.g., the case being solved or 
closed), some requests were ultimately 
canceled by the submitting agency before 
being completed by the lab because the 
services were no longer needed. The 411 
publicly funded crime labs completed 
about 3.9 million requests during 2009 
and had a backlog of about 1.2 million 
requests at yearend.

While forensic biology accounted for 
about a third of the 4.1 million requests 
received during 2009, about three-
quarters of the total backlog that year 
was for these types of requests. Due to 
an increase in the collection of DNA 
samples as mandated by federal 
legislation, about 60% of the estimated 
887,000 requests for forensic biology 
services that were backlogged at the 
beginning of 2009 were reported by the 
FBI Laboratory Division. 
 
With more than 500 employees, the FBI Lab 
was the largest publicly funded crime 
laboratory in the United States. This 
laboratory provided a full range of 
forensic services, including the analysis 
of samples received from federal, state, 
county, and municipal casework and 
persons convicted of a federal crime, 
arrested under federal authority, or 
detained and who are not United States 
citizens. 

Among the nation’s publicly funded crime 
labs, DNA samples from convicted 
offenders and arrestees accounted for the 
majority (75%) of all forensic biology 
requests in 2009. In fact, these samples 
were about a quarter of all requests for 
service in 2009. Publicly funded crime 
labs received and completed an estimated 
1.0 million samples taken from convicted 
offenders and arrestees during 2009. 
These labs had about 522,000 convicted 
offender and arrestee samples backlogged 
at the start of 2009 and 498,000 
backlogged at yearend.

As a part of the 2009 CPFFCL, labs were 
asked about forensic biology evidence 
submitted from sexual assaults. However, 
not all labs that handled these types of 
requests were able to report how many 
were received, completed, or backlogged. 
In this census, 122 labs reported 
receiving an estimated 55,000 new 
requests to process sexual assault 
evidence during 2009 and completed about 
57,000 of these types of requests that 
year (not in table).  The number of 
completed requests in 2009 exceeded the 
number received because some of the 
completed requests were for evidence 
collected before 2009.  

Among the 123 labs that provided the 
number of pending requests to process 
sexual assault evidence at yearend 2008 
and 2009, an estimated 28,000 requests 
were pending at the end of 2009--a 
decrease from the approximately 34,000 
pending requests in these labs at yearend 
2008.  Of these labs, 116 reported that 
19,000 requests to process sexual assault 
evidence were backlogged (i.e., pending 
requests not completed for 30 days or 
longer) at yearend 2009, compared to 
about 21,000 at the end of 2008.

To study changes in the backlog for 
individual forensic services during a 
given year, comparisons were made among 
the 363 labs that provided this 
information for both yearend 2008 and 
2009 (table 6). While the overall number 
of backlogged requests remained 
relatively unchanged during this 1-year 
period, changes in the backlog for 
individual types of requests varied 
depending on the service. During 2009, 
the backlog of requests for forensic 
services declined for latent prints, 
toxicology, and trace evidence. Among the 
217 labs that reported backlog data for 
forensic biology requests, the total 
backlog between yearend 2008 and 2009 
decreased for offender and arrestee 
samples and increased for casework. 
The overall backlog also increased 
for firearm or toolmark examinations.

**********************************
More than half of all requests for 
forensic services were sent to state 
labs
**********************************

In 2009, more than half (2.4 million) of 
the estimated 4.1 million requests for 
forensic services received by publicly 
funded crime labs nationwide were 
submitted to state laboratories (table 
7). Labs serving county and municipal 
jurisdictions received an estimated 1.5 
million forensic requests in 2009. 
Federal labs received the fewest requests 
that year (284,000).

The composition of the forensic work 
handled by the nation’s crime labs during 
2009 varied among those serving federal, 
state, county, and municipal 
jurisdictions. For instance, toxicology 
requests accounted for about 5% of the 
workload for municipal and federal labs, 
while toxicology made up about 26% of the 
requests received by county labs and 15% 
of requests to state labs. Forensic 
biology comprised 61% of requests made to 
federal labs and 46% of requests to state 
labs, compared to less than 10% of 
requests to county and municipal labs. 
Crime scene investigations accounted for 
16% of requests made to municipal labs, 
compared to 10% of requests to county 
labs and less than 1% of requests to 
state and federal labs.

**********************************
About 3 out of 10 labs outsourced some 
forensic work in 2009
**********************************

To address the demands for forensic 
services, some publicly funded crime labs 
outsourced work to private labs or other 
public facilities (e.g., evidence 
originally sent to a state lab outsourced 
to a federal lab for analysis). Twenty-
eight percent of publicly funded crime 
labs reported outsourcing one or more 
types of forensic services in 2009 
(figure 2). This was a decline from the 
percentage of labs that outsourced 
forensic work in 2002 (41%) and 2005 
(51%). 

Forensic biology accounted for about 8 in 
10 (83%) of the more than 187,000 
requests that publicly funded crime labs 
reported outsourcing during 2009 (not in 
table). Toxicology requests accounted for 
an additional 11% of requests outsourced 
in 2009.

Larger publicly funded crime labs were 
more likely to outsource requests for 
forensic services in 2009. Sixty-two 
percent of labs having 100 or more 
employees reported some type of 
outsourcing, compared to 12% of labs 
employing 10 or fewer people (table 8). A 
larger percentage of labs serving county 
(40%) and municipal (31%) jurisdictions 
compared to those serving state (23%) and 
federal (21%) jurisdictions reported 
outsourcing requests for forensic 
services in 2009. 

Fifteen percent of publicly funded crime 
labs reported receiving some requests for 
forensic services from other labs rather 
than directly from law enforcement or 
other criminal justice agencies during 
2009. Federal labs (35%) were more likely 
than state (12%), county (17%), and 
municipal (14%) labs to received requests 
that were sent out for analysis by 
another laboratory that year.
 
**********************************
8 in 10 crime labs had a laboratory 
information management system (LIMS)
**********************************

A laboratory information management 
system (LIMS) is used to manage tasks and 
pieces of evidence received from criminal 
investigations. Overall, the percentage 
of publicly funded crime labs that had 
these electronic systems or software 
programs increased from 75% in 2002 to 
84% in 2009 (figure 3). In 2009, labs 
serving state jurisdictions (97%) were 
more likely than those serving federal 
(77%), county (76%), or municipal (56%) 
jurisdictions to have a LIMS. 

Labs used LIMS for a variety of 
functions.  The vast majority (89%) of 
publicly funded crime labs with a LIMS 
used it to track individual items of 
forensic evidence being processed, while 
31% reported their LIMS tracked the 
progress of criminal cases through the 
justice system so they could prioritize 
their workload based on the needs of 
their customers (table 9).  Eighty-four 
percent of labs with a LIMS reported that 
the system was used to calculate the 
turnaround time it took to analyze the 
evidence.
 
**********************************
Most publicly funded crime labs were 
accredited in 2009
**********************************

In 2009, about 8 in 10 publicly funded 
crime labs (83%) were professionally 
accredited (table 10). Most of these labs 
received accreditation through the 
American Society of Crime Laboratory 
Directors/Laboratory Accreditation Board 
(ASCLD/LAB). State labs (92%) were the 
most likely to be accredited, while 
municipal labs (62%) were the least 
likely. 

In 2009, 60% of publicly funded crime 
labs employed at least one forensic 
examiner who was externally certified by 
a certification body, such as the 
American Board of Criminalistics, 
International Association for 
Identification, or Forensic Toxicologist 
Certification Board (not in table). 
Seventy-two percent of labs had written 
standards for the performance 
expectations for their examiners in 2009.
In 2002 and 2009, the vast majority (97%) 
of publicly funded crime labs performed 
proficiency testing, which ensures the 
accuracy and reliability of forensic 
examinations (figure 4). Of labs that 
performed proficiency testing in 2009, 
97% used declared tests (i.e., an 
examiner knew the sample he or she was 
analyzing was a test sample), and 36% 
used random case reanalysis (i.e., an 
examiner’s work was randomly selected for 
reanalysis by another examiner). Ten 
percent performed blind tests (i.e., the 
examiner was not aware of being tested). 

Seven percent of publicly funded crime 
labs devoted staff time, supplies, or 
other resources to forensic science 
research in 2009, including 
experimentation aimed at the discovery 
and interpretation of facts, the revision 
of accepted theories, and practical 
application of such new or revised 
theories or technologies (table 11). A 
larger percentage of federal labs than 
state, county, and municipal labs had 
resources devoted to research. Labs with 
50 or more employees were more likely 
than smaller labs to have dedicated 
resources to research. 
 
**********************************
The nation’s crime labs had about 
13,100 full-time employees in 2009
**********************************

Publicly funded crime labs in the United 
States ranged in staff size from one 
employee to more than 500 in 2009. The 
mean number of full-time lab employees 
was 32, and the median was 17 staff per 
lab (table 12).  

Federal labs accounted for less than 10% 
of all crime labs operating during 2009. 
On average, federal labs had larger staff 
sizes compared to those serving state, 
county, or municipal jurisdictions.  In 
2009, the mean staff size was 60 for 
federal labs, 28 for both state and 
county labs, and 34 for municipal labs. 
Overall, 32% of federal labs had 50 or 
more employees in 2009, compared to 15% 
of state labs, 18% of county labs, and 
19% of municipal labs.

The nation’s publicly funded crime labs 
employed an estimated 13,100 full-time 
personnel in 2009, compared to 11,900 in 
2005 and 11,000 in 2002 (figure 5).  
During each of these three years, about 
half of crime lab employees worked in 
state-operated facilities.
  
In 2009, more than half (60%) of crime 
lab employees were analysts or examiners 
who prepared and analyzed evidence and 
reported on their conclusions (table 13). 
The majority of analysts were 
intermediate or senior level employees.  
Managers (directors and supervisors) 
accounted for 14% of all crime lab 
employees in the United States.  Nine 
percent of all crime lab employees were 
clerical or administrative staff who 
performed functions related to the 
operation of the laboratory, such as 
quality assurance or information 
technology, but did not analyze forensic 
evidence. An additional 9% of personnel 
were lab technicians or technical support 
staff who assisted in evidence 
examination. While crime scene 
investigations were often handled by 
agencies outside of the crime lab (such 
as specialized police units), 6% of the 
nation’s crime lab employees worked as 
crime scene technicians who were 
responsible for collecting evidence in 
the field and documenting the crime 
scene.

**********************************
Annual budget for publicly funded crime 
labs increased between 2002 and 2009
**********************************

The estimated budget for all 411 crime 
labs in 2009 was about $1.6 billion--an 
increase from the $1.0 billion for the 
351 labs operating in 2002 (table 14). 
Labs serving state jurisdictions 
accounted for nearly half ($680 million) 
of the overall budget in 2009. The budget 
for all federal labs in 2009 was about 
$348 million, more than half of which was 
reported by the FBI aboratory. Overall, 
the mean annual budget was $3.9 million 
(not in table). Federal labs had the 
highest mean budget at about $9.4 
million, while the mean budgets was  
$3.7 million for county jurisdictions and 
$3.6 million for municipal jurisdictions. 
State labs had a mean budget of about 
$3.2 million. The overall median budget 
for state ($1.6 million), county ($1.9 
million), municipal ($1.4 million), and 
federal labs ($1.1 million) was about 
$1.6 million.

Personnel costs, including salaries and 
fringe benefits, accounted for 73% of the 
$1.4 billion expenditures reported by 
publicly funded crime labs in 2009 (not 
in table). Costs for supplies (13%) and 
equipment (9%) accounted for more than 
20% of expenditures. Thirty-one percent 
of publicly funded crime labs charged 
fees for forensic services in 2009. Labs 
serving state (41%) and county (35%) 
jurisdictions were more likely than those 
serving municipal (16%) and federal (3%) 
jurisdictions to receive fees for 
services. About 7 in 10 (69%) publicly 
funded crime labs received funding from 
grants in 2009. 

**************
Methodology
**************

The Census of Publicly Funded Forensic 
Crime Laboratories (CPFFCL) included all 
state, county, municipal, and federal 
crime labs that met the project 
definition of a crime laboratory (See 
Definitions). Some of these laboratories 
were part of a multi-lab system. The 
census attempted to collect information 
from each lab in the system. Police 
identification units, although sometimes 
responsible for fingerprint analysis, and 
privately operated facilities were not 
included in the census.
 
*******************
Data collection
*******************

In November 2010, Bureau of Justice 
Statistics (BJS) fielded a third CPFFCL 
to collect detailed information on the 
workload and operations of the nation’s 
crime labs during 2009 and to examine 
changes since the previous censuses. The 
Urban Institute administered the data 
collection on behalf of BJS. The census 
population frame and questionnaire were 
developed by BJS and the Urban Institute 
with input from the American Society of 
Crime Laboratory Directors (ASCLD), as 
well as researchers and practitioners in 
the forensic science field. The data 
collection instrument was pretested on a 
small sample of labs representing 
facilities of different sizes and 
governmental affiliations.

The Urban Institute conducted the census 
through a mailed questionnaire and a web-
based data collection interface. Follow-
up phone calls and emails were made to 
nonrespondents and labs that submitted 
incomplete questionnaires. In addition, 
ASCLD encouraged labs to participate 
through announcements in its newsletter. 
In May 2011, a shorter form with basic 
census items was sent to 12 nonresponding 
labs in a final effort to improve 
response rates. Overall, 97% (or 397) of 
the 411 eligible labs submitted responses 
to the 2009 census, including 375 through 
the automated web system and 22 by mail, 
fax, or email (table 15).

This report summarizes findings from the 
2009 census and provides comparative 
analysis with data collected in the 2002 
and 2005 censuses. Because of the low 
response rate in 2005 among federal 
laboratories, 2005 summary statistics are 
not presented in many tables for those 
labs.

**********************************
Imputation procedures for national 
estimates
***********************************

To generate national estimates for staff, 
budgets, and workload totals in 2009, 
several imputation methods were used to 
account for missing data. For the 2009 
census, 392 laboratories reported a 
combined staff of about 12,500 full-time 
employees in 2009 (appendix table 3). For 
the other 19 labs, imputations were made 
using employee data reported in the 
previous censuses or the median staff 
size in 2009 among labs of similar type, 
depending on the availability of data. 

Budget data were provided by 383 of the 
411 laboratories in the 2009 census, 96 
of which provided combined budget data 
for the entire multi-lab system. Those 
totals were distributed proportionately 
across each laboratory in the system 
based on the staff size. For the 28 labs 
that were missing 2009 budget 
information, imputations were based on 
either 1) budget data from the previous 
censuses or, if that information was 
unavailable, 2) their staff size in 2009 
was multiplied by the median ratio of 
budgets per employee for labs of similar 
type and size.

National estimates for 2002 and 2005 
budget and staff totals were generated 
using similar imputation methods. See 
Census of Publicly Funded Forensic Crime 
Laboratories, 2005, BJS website, NCJ 
222181, June 2008, for more information. 

Labs that did not provide workload data 
received imputed values within each 
category of forensic service they perform 
in 2009. Imputations for requests 
received and completed were based on 
either information provided in the 
previous censuses or on the median 
requests among labs of similar size and 
jurisdiction.  Imputations for backlogs 
were made using either the number of 
pending requests in 2009, the number of 
backlogged requests from the previous 
censuses, or the median backlog among 
labs of similar size and jurisdiction.

National estimates could not be generated 
for the number of requests received, 
completed, and backlogged in 2002 and 
2005. Among the 351 publicly funded crime 
labs operating in 2002, 45 did not 
respond to the census that year. Of the 
389 labs operating in 2005, 38 labs did 
not respond to the 2005 census. Without 
knowing the type of work performed by 
these labs, national-level totals could 
not be reliably estimated for all labs 
performing a specific forensic service 
during those years.

**************
Definitions
**************

Analyst--an investigator who inspects, 
analyzes, and interprets physical 
evidence, writes reports, and delivers 
testimony in court about the evidence.

Backlogged request--a request that has 
been submitted to a specialized area of 
the crime laboratory and is not completed 
within 30 days.

Controlled substance analysis--the 
identification of drugs and other 
substances whose possession or use, in 
either legal or illicit dosages, is 
restricted by the government.

Crime scene analysis--the identification, 
documentation, collection, and 
interpretation of physical evidence at a 
location external to a laboratory 
facility and where a suspected crime has 
occurred.

Digital evidence--the investigation of 
various types of analog or multi-media 
evidence, such as the recovery, 
extraction, and analysis of computer 
files, film, tape, and magnetic and 
optical media.

Examiner--See analyst.

Firearms analysis--the examination and 
comparison of evidence resulting from the 
discharge or use of firearms.

Forensic biology--includes the discipline 
areas of biology screening and DNA 
analysis. Biology screening is the 
examination of evidence for the presence 
of stains from blood, saliva and other 
physiological fluids. DNA analysis is the 
process used to develop a DNA profile 
from (1) arrestees or convicted offenders 
as required by federal and state laws or 
(2) casework samples collected from crime 
scenes, victims, or suspects.

Impressions analysis--the identification, 
documentation, collection, and 
interpretation of two- and three-
dimensional impressions and imprints 
found at crime scenes (including footwear 
and tire tread).

Latent prints analysis--the development 
or comparison of finger or palm print 
impressions.

Municipal--cities, towns, villages, and 
boroughs.

Publicly funded forensic crime 
laboratory--a scientific laboratory that 
(1) is solely funded by government or 
whose parent organization is a government 
agency and (2) employs at least one full-
time natural scientist who examines 
physical evidence in criminal matters and 
provides reports and opinion testimony 
with respect to such physical evidence in 
courts of law. This definition does not 
include operations that engage 
exclusively in fingerprint recovery, 
development, and examination; crime scene 
investigation; computer crime inquiries; 
and photography.

Questioned documents analysis--the 
examination of printed, typed, or written 
material for the purpose of identifying 
the source or determining alterations, or 
other means of gaining information about 
the item or the circumstances surrounding 
its production.

Request--the submission of physical 
evidence from a case to a single 
specialized area of a crime laboratory. 
Multiple submissions of new evidence from 
the same case to one or more sections of 
the laboratory would count as separate 
requests.

Toolmark analysis--the comparison of 
marks made by various tools.

Toxicology--the analysis of biological 
samples for the presence of drugs and 
other potentially toxic materials. 
Includes antemortem, postmortem, and 
blood alcohol content (BAC).

Trace evidence--any analytical procedure 
using microscopy or chemical and 
instrumental techniques. Includes the 
examination of gunshot residue, 
explosives, hair, fibers, and fire 
debris.

**********************************
Other BJS reports related to forensics 
available on the BJS website at 
http://www.bjs.gov
**********************************

Survey of DNA Crime Laboratories, 1998, 
NCJ 179104, February 2000

Survey of DNA Crime Laboratories, 2001, 
NCJ 191191, January 2002

50 Largest Crime Labs, 2002, NCJ 205988, 
September 2004 

Census of Publicly Funded Forensic Crime 
Laboratories, 2002, NCJ 207205, February 
2005

Medical Examiners and Coroners’ Offices, 
2004, NCJ 216756, June 2007 

Unidentified Human Remains in the United 
States, 1980-2004, NCJ 219533, November 
2007

Census of Publicly Funded Forensic Crime 
Laboratories, 2005, NCJ 222181, July 2008

**************************************
The Bureau of Justice Statistics is the 
statistical agency of the U.S. Department 
of Justice. James P. Lynch is the 
director.

This report was written by Matthew R. 
Durose, Kelly A. Walsh, and Andrea M. 
Burch. Andrea M. Burch and Alexia Cooper 
verified the report. Matthew Durose and 
Christine Eith were the BJS project 
managers for the 2009 census. The Urban 
Institute, under grant number 2009-BJ-CX-
K039 and in collaboration with BJS, 
developed the questionnaire, and 
collected and processed the data: David 
Hayeslip, Principal Investigator; Kelly 
A. Walsh, Project Director; Sara Debus-
Sherrill, Data Collection Manager; 
Samantha Lowry, Data Compilation Manager; 
and Michael Lai, Research Assistant. 
Susan Johns and Susan Narveson served as 
subject matter experts and consultants to 
this project, providing assistance with 
the development of the census instrument 
and non-response follow-up.

Jill Thomas edited the report, and Tina 
Dorsey and Morgan Young produced the 
report under the supervision of Doris J. 
James.

August 2012, NCJ 238252
***********************************

***********************************
Office of Justice Programs
Innovation * Partnerships 
* Safer Neighborhoods
www.ojp.usdoj.gov
**********************************

*********************
7/23/12/JER/4:35pm
*********************

