


U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Programs
Bureau of Justice Statistics

-----------------------------------------------------
This report is one in series. More recent 
editions may be available. To view a list 
of all reports in the series go to 
http://www.bjs.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbse&sid=5

This file is text only without graphics and many of the
tables. A Zip archive of the tables in this report in
spreadsheet format (.csv) and the full report including
tables and graphics in .pdf format are available on BJS
website at:http://bjs.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbdetail&iid=4537
--------------------------------------------------------

Correctional Population in the United States, 2011

Lauren E. Glaze, BJS Statistician
and Erika Parks, BJS Intern

November 2012, NCJ 239972

There were 6.98 million offenders under the supervision of 
the adult correctional systems at yearend 2011, a decrease of 
more than 98,900 offenders during the year (figure 1). The 
adult correctional systems supervise offenders in the 
community under the authority of probation or parole agencies 
and those held in the custody of state and federal prisons or 
local jails. The 1.4% decline in the correctional population 
during 2011 was the third consecutive year of decline and by 
yearend, the population dropped below the level observed in 
2004 (6,995,900). At yearend 2011, about 1 in every 34 adult 
residents in the U.S. was under some form of correctional 
supervision, down from 1 in 31 in 2007. 
 
This report provides summary data on offenders supervised by 
the adult correctional systems. (See Methodology for more 
information.) It also highlights significant changes in the 
components of the correctional population—probationers, 
parolees, state and federal prisoners, and local jail 
inmates.

About 2.9% of adults in the U.S. (or 1 in every 34 adults) 
were under some form of correctional supervision at yearend 
2011 (table 1). The correctional supervision rate observed in 
2011 marked the lowest rate of adults in the U.S. under 
correctional supervision since 2000. The 2011 rate was 
comparable to the correctional supervision rate observed in 
1998 (1 in every 34 adults) when about one million fewer 
offenders were under correctional supervision (5.9 million in 
1998). *** Footnote 1 See Probation and Parole in the United 
States, 1998, BJS website, NCJ 178234, August 1999.***
 
At yearend 2011, the rate of adults in the U.S. who were 
under supervision in the community on probation or parole 
(2,015 per 100,000 adults) was more than twice as high as the 
rate of adults incarcerated in state and federal prisons or 
local jails (937 per 100,000 adults). (See appendix table 1 
for the incarceration rate, which is different from the 
imprisonment rate published in Prisoners in 2011, BJS 
website, NCJ 239808, December 2012. See Probation and Parole 
in the United States, 2011, BJS website, NCJ 239686, November 
2012, for the community supervision rate.) About 1 in every 
50 adults in the U.S. was under community supervision and 1 
in every 107 adults was incarcerated in 2011. 

At yearend 2011, about 7 in 10 offenders supervised by the 
adult correctional systems were on probation or parole, while 
about 3 in 10 were held in the custody of state and federal 
prisons or local jails. These findings have remained 
relatively constant since 2000. 
 
**************************************************
********************
HIGHLIGHTS
********************

* Adult correctional authorities supervised about 6,977,700 
offenders at yearend 2011, a decrease of 1.4% during the 
year.

* The decline of 98,900 offenders during 2011 marked the 
third consecutive year of decrease in the correctional 
population, which includes probationers, parolees, local jail 
inmates, and prisoners in the custody of state and federal 
facilities.

* About 2.9% of adults in the U.S. (or 1 in every 34 adults) 
were under some form of correctional supervision at yearend 
2011, a rate comparable to 1998 (1 in every 34). 

* At yearend 2011, about 1 in every 50 adults in the U.S. was 
supervised in the community on probation or parole while 
about 1 in every 107 adults was incarcerated in prison or 
jail.

* The community supervision population (including 
probationers and parolees, down 1.5%) and the incarcerated 
population (including local jail inmates and federal and 
state prisoners, down 1.3%) decreased at about the same rate 
in 2011.

* The majority (83%) of the decline in the correctional 
population during the year was attributed to the decrease in 
the probation population (down 81,800 offenders).
*************************************************

*************************************************
Prison populations: A comparison between the 
jurisdiction and custody populations
*************************************************

BJS’s official measure of the prison population is the count 
of prisoners under the jurisdiction or legal authority of 
state and federal adult correctional officials (1,598,780 in 
2011). The jurisdiction population count is reported in 
Prisoners in 2011, BJS website, NCJ 239808, December 2012. 
These prisoners may be held in prison or jail facilities 
located outside of the state or federal prison systems. The 
prison population reported in table 2 in this report is the 
number held in custody or physically housed in state 
(1,289,376 in 2011) and federal (214,774 in 2011) adult 
correctional facilities, regardless of which entity has legal 
authority over the prisoners (appendix table 1). This 
includes state and federal prisoners held in privately 
operated facilities. The difference between the number of 
prisoners in custody and the number under jurisdiction is the 
number of state and federal prisoners held in the custody of 
local jails, inmates out to court, and those in transit from 
the jurisdiction of legal authority to the custody of a 
confinement facility outside that jurisdiction. Because table 
2 presents data on the number of individuals under the 
supervision of the adult correctional systems by correctional 
status, BJS uses the count of the number of prisoners held in 
custody to avoid double counting prisoners held in local 
jails.
***********************************************************

***************************************************
Community supervision and incarcerated populations 
decreased at about the same rate during 2011 
***************************************************

At yearend 2011 about 4,814,200 offenders were supervised in 
the community either on probation or parole, while about 
2,239,800 offenders were incarcerated in state and federal 
prisons or local jails (table 2). During 2011, the population 
supervised in the community (down 1.5%) and the incarcerated 
(down 1.3%) population declined at about the same rate. This 
was the third consecutive year of decline in both 
correctional populations. 

All of the decrease in the number of offenders supervised in 
the community (down 71,300) on probation or parole was 
attributed to the decline in the probation population (down 
81,800).  An increase of 1.6% (13,300 parolees) in the parole 
population slightly offset the decline observed in the 
community supervision population during the year. *** 
Footnote 2 A small number of parolees were also on probation 
during 2011. The total community supervision population and 
change in the population during the year was adjusted to 
account for these offenders to avoid double counting. For 
this reason, the sum of the changes in the probation and 
parole populations during 2011 does not equal the total 
change in the community supervision population during the 
year. See Methodology for more details.***

During 2011, less than half (43%) of the decrease in the 
incarcerated population (down 30,400 inmates) was attributed 
to the decline in the local jail population (down 13,100). In 
comparison, more than half (57%) of the decrease in the 
incarcerated population was due to the decline in the number 
of persons in the custody of state and federal prisons (down 
17,300).*** Footnote 3 Changes in the prison population in 
this report are not comparable to changes in the prison 
population reported in Prisoners in 2011, BJS website, NCJ 
239808, December 2012. This is due to the difference in the 
custody prison population and the jurisdiction prison 
population, which is BJS’s official measure of the prison 
population. See the text box at the bottom of page 2 for more 
information.*** All of the decrease in the total prison 
population was due to the decline in the number of prisoners 
held in the custody of state facilities (down 25,100 
prisoners or 1.9%), including privately operated facilities 
under state authority (appendix table 1). The increase in the 
number of prisoners held in the custody of federal facilities 
(up 7,800 or 3.8%) partially offset the decline in the total 
prison population during the year. The growth in the federal 
prison population during 2011 was lead by an increase in the 
number of federal prisoners held in privately operated 
facilities under federal authority (up 4,600 or 18.2%).

***************************************************
Fewer probationers during 2011 accounted for 
most of the decline in the correctional population 
***************************************************

The probation population (57%) represented the largest 
component of the correctional population at yearend 2011, 
relatively consistent since 1980 (61%) (table 3). About 
81,800 fewer offenders were on probation at the end of 2011, 
accounting for most (83%) of the decline in the correctional 
population during the year. 

The drop in the number of prisoners held in the custody of 
state and federal prisons (down 17,300) during 2011 
represented about 18% of the decline in the correctional 
population, while the decrease in the number of local jail 
inmates (down 13,100) accounted for about 13%. The parole 
population (up 13,300) was the only correctional population 
to increase during 2011, partially offsetting the decline in 
the total correctional population during the year.

*******************
Methodology 
*******************
-------------------
Sources of data
--------------------

The data were collected through five separate Bureau of 
Justice Statistics (BJS) data collections:
 
Annual Probation Survey; Annual Parole Survey. BJS’s Annual 
Probation Survey and Annual Parole Survey began in 1980 and 
collect data from probation and parole agencies in the U.S. 
that supervise adults. In these data, adults are persons 
subject to the jurisdiction of an adult court or correctional 
agency. Persons under age 18 who were prosecuted as adults in 
a criminal court are considered adults, but persons under age 
18 who were under the jurisdiction of a juvenile court or 
agency are excluded. The National Criminal Justice 
Information and Statistics Service of the Law Enforcement 
Assistance Administration (LEAA), BJS’s predecessor agency, 
began a statistical series on parole in 1976 and probation in 
1979. 

The Annual Probation Survey and the Annual Parole Survey 
collect data on (1) the total number of adults supervised in 
the community on January 1 and December 31 each year, (2) the 
number of adults who enter and exit supervision during the 
reporting year, (3) characteristics of the populations at 
yearend, and (4) other information. Both surveys cover the 50 
states, the District of Columbia, and the federal system. BJS 
relies on the voluntary participation of state central 
reporters and separate state, county, and court agencies for 
its annual data on probation and parole. For more 
information, go to the Probation and Parole Population series 
page on the BJS website at www.bjs.gov. 

Annual Survey of Jails. BJS’s Annual Survey of Jails (ASJ) 
began in 1982. Jails are confinement facilities, usually 
administered by a local law enforcement agency, that are 
intended to hold adults. Local jails may also hold inmates 
under age 18 before or after adjudication (about 5,900 in 
2011; See Jail Inmates at Midyear 2011 – Statistical Tables, 
BJS website, NCJ 237961, April 2012). These inmates are 
included in the jail population count.

The ASJ collects data from a nationally representative sample 
of local jails and has been conducted annually except for 
1983, 1988, 1993, 1999, and 2005 in which a complete census 
of U.S. local jails was conducted. It collects data on (1) 
the size of the jail inmate population at midyear, (2) the 
characteristics of the population, (3) information about jail 
capacity, and (4) in recent years, data on weekly admissions 
and releases. BJS relies on the voluntary participation of 
local jail administrators for the ASJ data. For more 
information, go to the Prison and Jail Inmates at Midyear 
series page on the BJS website at www.bjs.gov for the Jail 
Inmates at Midyear statistical products. Prior to 2007, the 
Jail Inmates at Midyear statistical products were titled 
Prison and Jail Inmates at Midyear. 

Census of Jails. BJS’s Census of Jails (CJS) is part of a 
series of data collection efforts aimed at studying the 
nation’s locally administered jails. To reduce respondent 
burden and improve data quality and timeliness, the census 
was split into two data collections in 2005 and 2006: the 
2005 Census of Jail Inmates (CJI) and the 2006 Census of Jail 
Facilities (CJF). The census collects data on (1) jail 
jurisdictions’ supervised populations, which may include 
inmates under age 18 who were held before or after 
adjudication, (2) inmate counts and movements, and (3) 
persons under jail supervision who were supervised outside a 
jail facility. The Census of Jails began in 1970 and was 
conducted in 1972, 1978, 1983, 1988, 1993, 1999, 2002, 2005, 
and 2006. For more information on the 2005 CJI, 2006 CJF, and 
the original Census of Jails, go to www.bjs.gov.

National Prisoner Statistics Program. Begun in 1926 under a 
mandate from Congress, the National Prisoner Statistics (NPS) 
program collects data on the number of state and federal 
prisoners at midyear and yearend. BJS relies on the voluntary 
participation by state departments of corrections and the 
Federal Bureau of Prisons for NPS data. 

The NPS distinguishes between prisoners in custody and 
prisoners under jurisdiction. To have custody of a prisoner, 
a state or federal correctional authority must physically 
house a prisoner in one of its facilities or in a private 
facility under its authority. To have jurisdiction over a 
prisoner, a state or federal prison must have legal authority 
over the prisoner, regardless of where the prisoner is held. 
These prisoners may be held in prison or jail facilities 
located outside of the state or in the federal prison system.
 
The prison data in this report reflect the NPS custody counts 
and they include all inmates held within a respondent’s 
facilities, including inmates housed for other correctional 
facilities,  prisoners held in privately operated facilities, 
prisoners under age 18 who were serving time in a state or 
federal correctional facility after being sentenced as an 
adult in a criminal court (1,790 in 2011), and inmates in the 
six states in which prisons and jails form one integrated 
system, including inmates under age 18 who may have been held 
before or after adjudication.*** Footnote 4 See Prisoners in 
2011, BJS website, NCJ 239808, December 2012, for more 
information about the six states with combined prison and 
jail systems.***

----------------------------------
Probation and parole populations 
----------------------------------

Total correctional population counts reflect data reported by 
probation and parole agencies within the specific reporting 
year. While some agencies update their probation and parole 
data for different reasons after submitting their data, BJS 
does not obtain updated data for prior years. 

Updated data usually include data that were not entered into 
the information system before the survey was submitted or 
data that were not fully processed by yearend. Probation and 
parole agencies also experience changes in reporting methods 
over time. (See Probation and Parole in the United States, 
2011, BJS website, NCJ 239686, December 2012.) Therefore, 
probation and parole population counts on January 1 of the 
current year may differ from population counts on December 31 
of the prior reporting year.

The number of offenders supervised by the adult correctional 
systems in each year reflect the population counts reported 
by probation and parole agencies within the reporting year. 
For example, the 2010 probation and parole totals are the 
December 31, 2010, population counts reported by the agencies 
for the 2010 reporting year. This method was first adopted 
with Correctional Populations in the United States, 2010, BJS 
website, NCJ 236319, December 2011. 

In previously published BJS reports, the December 31 
probation and parole population counts within a reporting 
year were updated with the January 1 probation and parole 
population counts from the next reporting year. The total 
correctional population counts within a year in previously 
published BJS reports included the January 1 probation and 
parole population counts from the next reporting year. This 
former method was previously used to facilitate the 
estimation of annual change in the total correctional 
population, as well as the probation and parole populations, 
by attempting to account for annual reporting changes or 
updated data. However, for this report, BJS used the newer 
method to estimate annual change in the total correctional 
population, and the probation and parole populations. This 
method is comparable to the method used for the 2010 report. 
(See Estimating annual change in the total correctional 
populations, page 7.)

*****************************************
Local jail and custody prison population 
*****************************************

Respondents to the ASJ are asked to report the number of jail 
inmates confined as of the last weekday in June of each year. 
The total correctional population counts in each year include 
jail population counts as of the last weekday in June for all 
inmates confined in local jails. This is used as an estimate 
of the number in local jails at yearend.

Respondents to the NPS are asked to report separate 
population counts of the number of prisoners in the custody 
of and under the jurisdiction of state or federal 
correctional facilities on December 31 of each year. The 
total correctional population count in each year reflects the 
custody prison populations as of December 31, and differs 
from the jurisdiction population counts reported in Prisoners 
in 2011, BJS website, NCJ 239808, December 2012.

*******************************************
Counts adjusted for offenders with multiple 
correctional statuses 
*******************************************

Offenders under correctional supervision may have multiple 
correctional statuses for several reasons. For example, 
probation and parole agencies may not always be notified 
immediately of new arrests, jail admissions, or prison 
admissions; absconders included in a probation or parole 
agency’s population in one jurisdiction may actually be 
incarcerated in another jurisdiction; individuals may be 
admitted to jail or prison before formal revocation hearings 
and potential discharge by a probation or parole agency; and 
individuals may be serving separate probation and parole 
sentences concurrently.

In 1998, BJS began collecting data on the number of offenders 
with multiple correctional statuses and has expanded on the 
information collected since then. Table 4 includes the 
adjustments that were made to the total correctional 
population to exclude offenders with multiple correctional 
statuses.

These estimates are based on reported data provided by the 
probation and parole agencies that were capable of providing 
the information within the specific reporting year. Because 
some probation and parole agencies did not provide these data 
each year, the numbers may underestimate the total number of 
offenders with multiple correctional statuses between 1998 
and 2011. Due to these adjustments, the sum of the four 
correctional populations in tables 2 and 3 will not equal the 
total correctional population. In addition, the sum of the 
probation and parole populations for 2008 through 2011 will 
not equal the total community supervision population because 
the total was adjusted for parolees who were also on 
probation. 

*****************************************
Estimating annual change in the 
correctional populations 
*****************************************

The probation and parole population counts on January 1 of 
the current year may differ from population counts on 
December 31 of the prior reporting year, because probation 
and parole agencies may update their data (See Probation and 
parole populations on page 5), change their reporting methods 
from one year to the next, or discharge offenders on January 
1 of each year. For these reasons, annual change in the 
probation and parole populations was calculated within the 
reporting year. (See Methodology in Probation and Parole in 
the United States, 2011, BJS website, NCJ 239686, December 
2012 for more information.) 

The annual change in the community supervision population was 
also calculated within the reporting year. For years 2008 
through 2011, change in the community supervision population 
was calculated after accounting for offenders with multiple 
community supervision statuses. (See Counts adjusted for 
offenders with multiple correctional status on page 6.) For 
these reasons, in years 2008 through 2011, the sum of the 
changes in the probation and parole populations does not 
equal the total change in the community supervision 
population. For example, the change in the probation 
population (down 81,800) during 2011 plus the change in the 
parole population (up 13,300) during the year does not equal 
the total change in the community supervision population 
(down 71,300). The difference (up 2,800) is the change in the 
number of parolees who were also on probation during 2011. 

The annual change in the jail and custody prison populations 
was based on the change from the prior year to the current 
year because respondents are only asked to report a 
population count for one reference date. For example, the 
annual change in the jail population for 2011 is the 
difference (down 13,100) between the populations on the last 
weekday in June 2010 and June 2011. The annual change in the 
custody prison population for 2011 is the difference (down 
17,300) between the December 31, 2010, and December 31, 2011, 
custody prison populations. The change in the total 
incarcerated population was calculated as the sum of the 
change in the jail and custody prison populations from the 
prior year to the current year. 

The annual change in the total correctional population for 
each year was not calculated as the difference in the total 
correctional population from the prior year and the current 
year but rather the sum of the annual changes for each 
correctional population. For example, the annual change in 
the total correctional population (down 98,900) during 2011 
was calculated as the sum of four components: (1) the change 
in the probation population (down 81,800) in 2011; (2) the 
change in the parole population (up 13,300) in 2011; (3) the 
change in the jail population (down 13,100), or the 
difference between the populations on the last weekday in 
June 2010 and June 2011; and (4) the change in the custody 
prison population (down 17,300), or the difference between 
the December 31 populations in 2010 and 2011.

*****************************************
Probation coverage expanded beginning in 
1998 through 1999
*****************************************
 
To address survey undercoverage, the number of probation 
agencies was expanded beginning in 1998 and continued through 
1999 to include misdemeanor probation agencies in a few 
states that fell within the scope of this survey. In 1998, 
survey coverage was expanded to include 35 additional 
probation agencies, which accounted for 27,644 additional 
probationers. Expansion of probation coverage continued 
through 1999, and in that year an additional 178 probation 
agencies were added to the collection, which accounted for 
259,744 additional probationers. Therefore, the 1998 total 
correctional population reported in figure 1 includes 27,644 
probationers added through the expansion of coverage in 1998. 
The 1999 correctional population reported in figure 1 
includes 259,744 probationers added through the expansion of 
coverage in 1999.

To calculate the annual change in the total correctional 
population between 1997 and 1998, the 27,644 probationers 
added through the expansion of coverage in 1998 were 
subtracted from the 1998 total correctional population 
reported in figure 1. The 259,744 probationers added through 
the expansion of coverage in 1999 were subtracted from the 
1999 correctional population total in order to calculate the 
annual change between 1998 and 1999.

******************************************************
The Bureau of Justice Statistics is the statistics agency of 
the U.S. Department of Justice. James P. Lynch is director.

Lauren E. Glaze and Erika Parks wrote this report. Lauren E. 
Glaze and Erika Parks analyzed the data and prepared the 
tables and graphs with assistance from E. Ann Carson. Todd 
Minton and E. Ann Carson provided statistical verification. 
Sheri Simmons provided statistical review.

Doris J. James edited the report, and Barbara Quinn and Tina 
Dorsey produced the report under the supervision of Doris J. 
James.

November 2012, NCJ 239972
******************************************************

******************************************************
Office of Justice Programs * Innovation * Partnerships 
* Safer Neighborhoods * http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov
******************************************************
______________________
11/26/12/JER/12:35pm
______________________
******************************************************


