U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Programs
Bureau of Justice Statistics

-------------------------------------------------

This file is text only without graphics and many 
of the tables. A Zip archive of the tables in this 
report in spreadsheet format (.csv) and the full 
report including tables and graphics in .pdf 
format are available on BJS website at 
http://www.bjs.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbdetail&iid=5870

This reports is one in series. More recent 
editions may be available. To view a list of all 
reports in the series go to 
http://www.bjs.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbse&sid=5
------------------------------------------------- 

Bulletin

Correctional Populations in the United States, 2015 


Danielle Kaeble and Lauren Glaze, BJS Statisticians

At yearend 2015, an estimated 6,741,400 persons were under the 
supervision of U.S. adult correctional systems, about 115,600 
fewer persons than yearend 2014 (figure 1). This was the first 
time since 2002 (6,730,900) that the correctional population fell 
below 6.8 million. The population declined by 1.7% during 2015, 
which was the largest decline since 2010 (down 2.1%). 
Additionally, the decrease was a change from a 3-year trend of 
stable annual rate declines of about 0.6% between 2012 and 2014. 
About 1 in 37 adults in the United States was under some form of 
correctional supervision at the end of 2015. This was the lowest 
rate observed since 1994, when about 1 in 38 adults (1.6 million 
fewer persons) were under correctional supervision in the nation 
(not shown).***Footnote 1 See the Key Statistics page on the BJS 
website for correctional population statistics prior to 2000 or 
other years not included in the tables and figures of this 
report.***

This report summarizes data from several Bureau of Justice 
Statistics’ (BJS) correctional data collections to provide 
statistics on the total population supervised by adult 
correctional systems in the United States. (See Methodology.) 
These systems include persons living in the community while 
supervised by probation or parole agencies and those under the 
jurisdiction of state or federal prisons or in the custody of 
local jails. (See Terms and definitions.)

******************************************************
************
HIGHLIGHTS
************
* At yearend 2015, an estimated 6,741,400 persons were supervised 
by U.S. adult correctional systems, a decrease of about 115,600 
persons from yearend 2014.

* About 1 in 37 adults (or 2.7% of adults in the United States) 
was under some form of correctional supervision at yearend 2015, 
the lowest rate since 1994. 

* The U.S. correctional population declined 1.7% during 2015 due 
to decreases in both the community supervision (down 1.3%) and 
incarcerated (down 2.3%) populations. 

* By yearend 2015, the community supervision population 
(4,650,900) fell to the lowest level since 2000 (4,564,900).

* The incarcerated population in 2015 (2,173,800) fell to the 
lowest levels since 2004 (2,136,600).

* All of the decrease in the community supervision population 
during 2015 was due to a drop in the probation population (down 
2.0%).

* The decline in the incarcerated population in 2015 (down 
51,300) represented the largest annual decrease since 2009. 

* In 2015, the majority (69%) of the decline in the incarcerated 
population resulted from the drop in the prison population (down 
35,500).
******************************************************

******************************************
Community supervision and incarcerated 
populations declined to lowest levels 
in more than a decade 
*******************************************

From 2014 (6,856,900) to 2015 (6,741,400), the U.S. correctional 
population declined by 1.7%, continuing a downward trend that 
began in 2008 (table 1). Persons supervised in the community on 
either probation (3,789,800) or parole (870,500) continued to 
account for most of the U.S. correctional population in 
2015.***Footnote 2 The total correctional, community supervision, 
and incarcerated populations exclude offenders with multiple 
correctional statuses to avoid double counting. See table 5 and 
Methodology.*** About 7 in 10 persons under correctional 
supervision were supervised in the community at yearend 2015, 
compared to 3 in 10 incarcerated in state or federal prisons 
(1,526,800) or local jails (728,200).

The decrease in the number of persons under correctional 
supervision in 2015 was due to a reduction in both the community 
supervision (down 1.3%) and incarcerated (down 2.3%) populations. 
Because persons under community supervision accounted for most of 
the U.S. correctional population, the decrease in the community 
supervision population during 2015 accounted for more than half 
(54%) of the decline in the correctional population. 

The number of persons under supervision in the community fell by 
62,300 to 4,650,900 at yearend 2015. All of the decrease in the 
community supervision population resulted from a decline in the 
probation population (down 2.0%), as the parole population (up 
1.5%) increased. Since 2007, the community supervision population 
decreased by an annual average of 1.2%. By yearend 2015, the 
number of offenders under community supervision declined to the 
lowest level observed since 2000 (4,564,900). 

At yearend 2015, an estimated 2,173,800 persons were either under 
the jurisdiction of state or federal prisons or in the custody of 
local jails in the United States, down about 51,300 persons 
compared to yearend 2014. This was the largest decline in the 
incarcerated population since it first decreased in 2009. By 
yearend 2015, the number of persons incarcerated in state or 
federal prisons or local jails fell to the lowest level observed 
since 2004 (2,136,600) (not shown).

Declines in both the U.S. prison (down 2.3%) and local jail (down 
2.2%) populations contributed to the decrease in the incarcerated 
population during 2015. However, 69% of the decline in the 
incarcerated population was due to the drop in the number of 
persons incarcerated in state or federal prisons (down 35,500). 
One jurisdiction, the Federal Bureau of Prisons, accounted for 
40% of the decrease in the U.S. prison population during the 
year. By the end of 2015 (1,526,800), the U.S. prison population 
fell to a level similar to 2005 (1,525,900).

******************************************
Drop in the number of probationers 
accounted for most of the decrease in 
the correctional population during 2015
******************************************

After a peak in 2007, the U.S. correctional population declined 
annually through 2015. However, the composition of the population 
remained stable despite the decreasing size of the population 
during that time. Between 2007 (58%) and 2015 (56%), probationers 
accounted for the majority of offenders under correctional 
supervision (table 2). Prisoners represented slightly less than a 
quarter of the U.S. correctional population in 2007 (22%) and 
2015 (23%). Parolees (11% in 2007 and 13% in 2015) and jail 
inmates (11% in both 2007 and 2015) remained the smallest shares 
of the correctional population during the 8-year period. 

During 2015, decreases in the probation (down 78,700), prison 
(down 35,500), and local jail (down 16,300) populations led to 
the overall decline in the U.S. correctional population (table 
3). The decrease in the probation population accounted for 68% of 
the total decline in the correctional population, as probationers 
represented the largest share of offenders under correctional 
supervision. The parole population (up 12,800) was the only 
correctional population to increase during the year, slightly 
offsetting the overall decline in the correctional population.

Between 2007 and 2015, the U.S. correctional population declined 
by 598,300 persons. The number of persons on probation in the 
United States fell by 503,200, representing 84% of the total 
decrease in the correctional population between 2007 and 2015. 
While the prison (12%) and local jail (9%) populations also 
declined during the last 8 years, their contribution to the 
overall decrease in the correctional population was less than a 
quarter (20%) combined. In comparison, the parole population (up 
44,400) was the only correctional system to increase between 2007 
and 2015.

******************************************
By yearend 2015, the correctional 
supervision rate dropped to the lowest 
rate since 1994
******************************************

After peaking at 3,210 offenders per 100,000 U.S. adult residents 
in 2007, the correctional supervision rate trended downward, 
falling to a low of 2,710 per 100,000 by yearend 2015 (table 4). 
The drop in the correctional supervision rate was attributed 
equally to the decline in the U.S. correctional population and 
the increase in the U.S. adult resident population. By yearend 
2015, the correctional supervision rate fell to the lowest rate 
since 1994 (2,650 per 100,000), when about 1.6 million fewer 
persons were supervised by U.S. adult correctional systems (not 
shown). 

There were 1,870 offenders per 100,000 U.S. adult residents on 
either probation or parole at yearend 2015. This represented the 
lowest rate of offenders under community supervision since 1993 
(1,830 per 100,000), when the population was smaller by about 1.1 
million offenders (not shown). The community supervision rate 
reached a high in 2007 (2,240 per 100,000) before declining each 
year through 2015.

At yearend 2015, 870 persons per 100,000 U.S. adult residents 
were under the jurisdiction of state or federal prisons or in the 
custody of local jails. The incarceration rate has been declining 
since 2009 (980 per 100,000). By yearend 2015, the incarceration 
rate dropped to the same rate as 1997 (870 per 100,000) (not 
shown).

*************************
Terms and definitions
*************************

Adult--persons subject to the jurisdiction of an adult criminal 
court or correctional agency. Adults are age 18 or older in most 
jurisdictions. Persons age 17 or younger who were prosecuted in 
criminal court as if they were adults are considered adults, but 
persons age 17 or younger who were under the jurisdiction of a 
juvenile court or agency are excluded. (See Methodology for more 
information on prison and local jail inmates age 17 or younger.)

Annual change--change in a population between two consecutive 
years.

Average annual change--average (mean) annual change in a 
population across a specific period.

Community supervision population--estimated number of persons 
living in the community while supervised on probation or parole.

Community supervision rate--estimated number of persons 
supervised in the community on probation or parole per 100,000 
U.S. residents of all ages (i.e., total community supervision 
rate) or U.S. residents age 18 or older (i.e., adult community 
supervision rate).

Correctional population--estimated number of persons living in 
the community while supervised on probation or parole and persons 
under the jurisdiction of state or federal prisons or held in 
local jails.

Correctional supervision rate--estimated number of persons 
supervised in the community on probation or parole and persons 
under the jurisdiction of state or federal prisons or held in 
local jails per 100,000 U.S. residents of all ages (i.e., total 
correctional supervision rate) or U.S. residents age 18 or older 
(i.e., adult correctional supervision rate).

Imprisonment rate--estimated number of prisoners under state or 
federal jurisdiction sentenced to more than 1 year per 100,000 
U.S. residents of all ages (i.e., total imprisonment rate) or 
U.S. residents age 18 or older (i.e., adult imprisonment rate). 
This statistic does not appear in this report; see Prisoners in 
2015 (NCJ 250229, BJS web, December 2016).

Incarcerated population--estimated number of persons under the 
jurisdiction of state or federal prisons or held in local jails.

Incarceration rate--estimated number of persons under the 
jurisdiction of state or federal prisons or held in local jails 
per 100,000 U.S. residents of all ages (i.e., total incarceration 
rate) or U.S. residents age 18 or older (i.e., adult 
incarceration rate).

Indian country jail population--estimated number of inmates held 
in correctional facilities operated by tribal authorities or the 
Bureau of Indian Affairs (BIA), U.S. Department of the Interior. 
These facilities include confinement facilities, detention 
centers, jails, and other facilities operated by tribal 
authorities or the BIA. (This estimate is presented in appendix 
table 5.)

Local jail population--estimated number of inmates held in a 
confinement facility usually administered by a local law 
enforcement agency that is intended for adults, but sometimes 
holds juveniles, for confinement before and after adjudication. 
These facilities include jails and city or county correctional 
centers; special jail facilities, such as medical treatment or 
release centers; halfway houses; work farms; and temporary 
holding or lockup facilities that are part of the jail’s combined 
function. Inmates sentenced to jail facilities usually have a 
sentence of 1 year or less.

Military prison population--estimated number of service personnel 
incarcerated under the jurisdiction of U.S. military correctional 
authorities. (This estimate is presented in appendix table 5.)

Parole population--estimated number of persons who are on 
conditional release in the community following a prison term 
while under the control, supervision, or care of a correctional 
agency. Violations of the conditions of supervision during this 
period may result in a new sentence to confinement or a return to 
confinement for a technical violation. This population includes 
parolees released through discretionary (i.e., parole board 
decision) or mandatory (i.e., provisions of a statute) supervised 
release from prison, those released through other types of post-
custody conditional supervision, and those sentenced to a term of 
supervised release.

Prison population--estimated number of prisoners incarcerated in 
a long-term confinement facility, run by a state or the federal 
government, which typically holds felons and offenders with 
sentences of more than 1 year, although sentence length may vary 
by jurisdiction.

Prison jurisdiction population--estimated number of prisoners 
under the jurisdiction or legal authority of state or federal 
correctional officials, regardless of where the prisoner is 
held. This population represents BJS’s official measure of the 
prison population and includes prisoners held in prisons, 
penitentiaries, correctional facilities, halfway houses, boot 
camps, farms, training or treatment centers, and hospitals. 
Counts also include prisoners who were temporarily absent 
(fewer than 30 days), in court or on work release, housed in 
privately operated facilities, local jails, or other state or 
federal facilities, and serving concurrent sentences for more 
than one correctional authority.

Prison custody population--estimated number of prisoners held 
in the physical custody of state or federal prisons regardless 
of sentence length or the authority having jurisdiction. This 
population includes prisoners housed for other correctional 
facilities but excludes those in the custody of local jails, 
those held in other jurisdictions, those out to court, and 
those in transit from one jurisdiction of legal authority to 
the custody of a confinement facility outside that 
jurisdiction. (This estimate is presented in appendix table 6.)

Probation population--estimated number of persons who are on a 
court-ordered period of supervision in the community while under 
the control, supervision, or care of a correctional agency. The 
probation conditions form a contract with the court by which the 
person must abide in order to remain in the community, generally 
in lieu of incarceration. In some cases, probation can be a 
combined sentence of incarceration followed by a period of 
community supervision.

Often, probation entails monitoring or surveillance by a 
correctional agency. In some instances, probation may not involve 
any reporting requirements.

Territorial prison population--estimated number of prisoners in 
the custody of correctional facilities operated by departments of 
corrections in U.S. territories (American Samoa, Guam, and the 
U.S. Virgin Islands) and U.S. commonwealths (Northern Mariana 
Islands and Puerto Rico). (This estimate is presented in appendix 
table 5.)

*************
Methodology
*************

Sources of data
****************

The statistics presented in this report include data from various 
Bureau of Justice Statistics’ (BJS) data collections. Each 
collection relies on the voluntary participation of federal, 
state, and local respondents. For more information about any of 
the following data collections, go to the Data Collections page 
on the BJS website.

Annual Probation Survey and Annual Parole Survey. The Bureau of 
Justice Statistics’ (BJS) Annual Probation Survey and Annual 
Parole Survey, which began in 1980, collects data from U.S. 
probation and parole agencies that supervise adults. These data 
collections define adults as persons subject to the jurisdiction 
of an adult court or correctional agency. Juveniles sentenced as 
adults in a criminal court are considered adults. Juveniles under 
the jurisdiction of a juvenile court or correctional agency are 
excluded from these data. The National Criminal Justice 
Information and Statistics Service of the Law Enforcement 
Assistance Administration, BJS’s predecessor agency, began a 
statistical series on parole in 1976 and on probation in 1979.

The two surveys collect data on the number of adults supervised 
in the community on January 1 and December 31 each year, the 
number of entries and exits to supervision during the reporting 
year, and characteristics of the population at yearend. See 
appendix tables for detailed data. Both surveys cover all 50 
states, the District of Columbia, and the federal system. BJS 
depends on the voluntary participation of state central reporters 
and separate state, county, and court agencies for these data.

Annual Survey of Jails. The Annual Survey of Jails (ASJ) has 
collected data from a nationally representative sample of local 
jails each year since 1982, except 1983, 1988, 1993, 1999, and 
2005, when a complete census of U.S. local jails was conducted. 
Jails are confinement facilities, usually administered by a local 
law enforcement agency, that are intended to hold adults, but may 
also hold youth age 17 or younger before or after they are 
adjudicated. The ASJ data used in this report include inmates age 
17 or younger who were held either before or after they were 
adjudicated (about 3,500 persons at yearend 2015).

To maintain the jail series in this report, all tables and 
figures that include national estimates of the local jail 
population as of the last weekday in June were provided through 
the ASJ, except in 2005 when a jail census was completed (see 
Census of Jails). Because the ASJ is designed to produce only 
national estimates, tables and figures in this report that 
include jurisdiction-level counts of the incarcerated population 
and the total correctional population were based on jail data 
collected through another BJS source, specifically the Deaths in 
Custody Reporting Program. (See Deaths in Custody Reporting 
Program on the BJS website.)

Census of Jails. The Census of Jails began in 1970 and was 
conducted in 1972, 1978, 1983, 1988, 1993, 1999, 2005, and 2006. 
In 2013, BJS expanded the 2013 Deaths in Custody Reporting 
Program—Annual Summary on Inmates under Jail Jurisdiction to act 
as the 2013 Census of Jails. (See Deaths in Custody Reporting 
Program.) The census is designed to produce a complete 
enumeration of jail facilities in the United States. It is part 
of a series of data collection efforts, including the Census of 
Jail Inmates and the Census of Jail Facilities, aimed at studying 
the nation’s jails and their inmate populations. The reference 
date of the 2013 census was December 31, while the reference date 
for prior iterations was the last weekday in June within the 
reference year. 

Deaths in Custody Reporting Program. The Deaths in Custody 
Reporting Program (DCRP) is an annual collection that provides 
national, state, and incident-level data on persons who died 
while in the physical custody of the 50 state departments of 
corrections or the approximately 2,900 local adult jail 
jurisdictions nationwide. To reduce respondent burden for the 
2013 iteration, BJS combined the 2013 DCRP collection with the 
2013 Census of Jails. For more information, see Census of Jails 
and Census of Jails: Population Changes, 1999–2013 (NCJ 248627, 
BJS web, December 2015).

The DCRP began in 2000 under the Death in Custody Reporting Act 
of 2000 (P.L. 106-297), and it is the only national statistical 
collection to obtain comprehensive information about deaths in 
adult correctional facilities. In addition to the death count, 
BJS requests that jails provide summary statistics about their 
population and admissions. All jails, including those with no 
deaths to report (which includes about 80% of jails in any given 
year), are asked to complete the annual summary survey form.
BJS relied on the local jail counts provided through the DCRP in 
2014 and 2015 to generate jurisdiction-level estimates of the 
total incarcerated population and total correctional population 
that appear in appendix tables 1, 2, 3, and 4. Because they 
include the 2015 local jail estimates as of December 31, the 
national totals of the correctional and incarcerated populations 
reported in them are not consistent with the national totals of 
the populations reported in the other tables and figures of this 
report, which include BJS’s official estimates of the total 
correctional and incarcerated populations.

National Prisoner Statistics Program. The National Prisoner 
Statistics (NPS) program began in 1926 under a mandate from 
Congress and has been conducted annually. It collects data from 
the nation’s state departments of corrections and the Federal 
Bureau of Prisons (BOP).

The NPS distinguishes between prisoners in custody and prisoners 
under the jurisdiction of correctional authorities. To have 
custody of a prisoner, a state or the BOP must hold that prisoner 
in one of its facilities. To have jurisdiction over a prisoner, 
the state or BOP must have legal authority over that prisoner, 
regardless of where the prisoner is incarcerated or supervised. 
Some states were unable to provide counts that distinguish 
between custody and jurisdiction*** Footnote 3 See Jurisdiction 
notes in Prisoners in 2015 (NCJ 250229, BJS web, December 2016) 
to determine which states did not distinguish between custody and 
jurisdiction counts.***

With the exception of appendix table 6, the NPS prisoner counts 
in all tables and figures of this report are consistent with the 
jurisdiction counts and findings reported in Prisoners in 2015 
(NCJ 250229, BJS web, December 2016). The jurisdiction counts 
represent BJS’s official measure of the prison population and 
include persons held in prisons, penitentiaries, correctional 
facilities, halfway houses, boot camps, farms, training or 
treatment centers, and hospitals. They also include prisoners who 
were temporarily absent (fewer than 30 days), in court, or on 
work release; housed in privately operated facilities, local 
jails, or other state or federal facilities; and serving 
concurrent sentences for more than one correctional authority.

The NPS prisoner custody counts are only reported in appendix 
table 6 and include all prisoners held within state and federal 
facilities, including those housed for other correctional 
facilities, prisoners held in privately operated facilities, 
prisoners age 17 or younger who were serving time in a state or 
federal correctional facility after being sentenced in criminal 
court as if they were adults (about 1,000 persons in 2015), and 
those in the six states in which prisons and jails form one 
integrated system, including persons age 17 or younger who may 
have been held before or after adjudication.

Through the annual NPS collection, since 1994 BJS has obtained 
yearend counts of prisoners in the custody of U.S. military 
authorities from the Department of Defense Corrections Council. 
In 1994, the council, comprising representatives from each branch 
of military service, adopted a standardized report (DD Form 2720) 
that obtains data on prisoners held in U.S. military confinement 
facilities inside and outside of the continental United States. 
These data are only included in appendix table 5 of this report. 
See Prisoners in 2015 (NCJ 250229, BJS web, December 2016) for 
more statistics and information. 

Since 1995, through the annual NPS collection, BJS has collected 
yearend counts of prisoners from the departments of corrections 
in the U.S. territories (American Samoa, Guam, and the U.S. 
Virgin Islands) and U.S. commonwealths (Northern Mariana Islands 
and Puerto Rico). These data are only included in appendix table 
5 of this report and represent all prisoners in the custody of 
prison facilities in the U.S. territories or commonwealths. See 
Prisoners in 2015 (NCJ 250229, BJS web, December 2016) for more 
statistics and information, including nonresponse. 

Survey of Jails in Indian Country. The Annual Survey of Jails in 
Indian Country (SJIC) has been conducted annually since 1998, 
except in 2005 and 2006. The SJIC collects detailed information 
on all adult and juvenile confinement facilities, detention 
centers, jails, and other facilities operated by tribal 
authorities or the U.S. Department of the Interior’s Bureau of 
Indian Affairs. These data are only included in appendix table 5 
of this report. See Jails in Indian Country, 2015 (NCJ 250117, 
BJS web, November 2016) for more statistics and information.

*************************************
Counts adjusted for offenders with 
multiple correctional statuses
*************************************

Offenders under correctional supervision may have multiple 
correctional statuses for several reasons:

* probation and parole agencies may not always be notified 
immediately of new arrests, jail admissions, or prison admissions

* absconders included in a probation or parole agency’s 
population in one jurisdiction may actually be incarcerated in 
another jurisdiction 

* persons may be admitted to jail or prison before formal 
revocation hearings and potential discharge by a probation or 
parole agency

* persons may be serving separate probation and parole sentences 
concurrently

* state and federal prisons may hold prisoners in county 
facilities or local jails to reduce crowding in their prisons. 

In 1998, through the Annual Probation Survey and Annual Parole 
Survey, BJS began collecting data on the number of probationers 
and parolees with multiple correctional statuses and has since 
expanded on the information collected. In 1999, through the NPS, 
BJS began collecting data on the number of prisoners under the 
jurisdiction of state or federal prisons who were held in county 
facilities or local jails (table 5). This table includes 
adjustments that were made to the total correctional population, 
total community supervision population, and total incarcerated 
population estimates presented in this report to exclude 
offenders with multiple correctional statuses to avoid double 
counting offenders.

The estimates from the ASPP are based on data reported by the 
probation and parole agencies that were able to provide the 
information within the specific reporting year. Because some 
probation and parole agencies did not provide these data each 
year, the numbers may underestimate the total number of offenders 
who had multiple correctional statuses between 2005 and 2015. 

Due to these adjustments, the sum of correctional statuses in 
figure 1, tables 1 through 4, and appendix tables 1, 2, 3, and 4 
will not equal the total correctional population. In addition, 
the sum of the probation and parole populations for 2008 through 
2015 will not yield the total community supervision population 
because the total was adjusted for parolees who were also on 
probation. Also, the sum of the prison and local jail populations 
for 2005 through 2015 will not equal the total incarcerated 
population because prisoners held in local jails were excluded 
from the total.

*************************************
Decomposing the decline in the 
correctional supervision rate
*************************************

To decompose the decline in the correctional supervision rate 
discussed in this report, the following formula was used:

ΔR = [P1 * (1/GP1)] – [P0 * (1/GP0)]

= [P1 * ((1/GP1) - (1/GP0))] + [(1/GP0) * (P1 – P0)]

= [(1/GP1) * (P1 – P0)] + [P0 * ((1/GP1) – (1/GP0)]

In this formula, ΔR is the change in the correctional supervision 
rate, P1 is the total correctional population for the most recent 
year, P0 is the total correctional population for the earlier 
year, GP1 is the U.S. adult resident population for the most 
recent year, and GP0 is the U.S. adult resident population for 
the earlier year. The components [(1/GP0) * (P1 – P0)] and 
[(1/GP1) * (P1 – P0)] provide the change in the correctional 
supervision rate due to the change in the total correctional 
population. These two components were summed, and the average was 
used to estimate the amount of change in the correctional 
supervision rate attributed to the change in the total 
correctional population during that period.

The components [P1 * ((1/GP1) – (1/GP0))] and [P0 * ((1/GP1) – 
(1/GP0)] provide the change due to the U.S. adult resident 
population. These two components were summed, and the average was 
used to estimate the amount of change in the correctional 
supervision rate attributed to the change in the U.S. adult 
resident population during the period.

*************************************
Nonresponse adjustments to estimate 
population counts
*************************************

Probation, parole, jail, and prison populations
*************************************************
 
Probation, parole, jail, and prison population counts were 
adjusted to account for nonresponse across the data collections. 
The methods varied and depended on the type of collection, type 
of respondent, and availability of information. For more 
information on the nonresponse adjustments implemented to 
generate national and jurisdiction-level estimates of the 
probation, parole, and prison populations, see the following 
reports: Prisoners in 2015 (NCJ 250229, BJS web, December 2016) 
and Probation and Parole in the United States, 2015 (NCJ 250230, 
BJS web, December 2016). For more information on the nonresponse 
adjustments implemented to generate national counts of the jail 
population that are included in the tables and figures of this 
report that include only national estimates, see Jail Inmates in 
2015 (NCJ 250394, BJS web, December 2016).

Jail population--jurisdiction-level estimates
**********************************************

Nonresponse in the 2014 and 2015 DCRP was minimal. The unit 
response rate to the 2014 DCRP was 96.6% and 96.9% for the 2015 
collection at the time of this report. The item response rate for 
the December 31 confined jail population was 98.9% in the 2014 
DCRP and 99.6% in the 2015 DCRP. For jails that were unable to 
provide the 2014 and 2015 yearend count by sex, a carry-forward 
imputation procedure was used to impute values. This procedure 
used the specific nonrespondent’s data from a prior collection as 
a substitute for missing values in the 2014 or 2015 collection. 
These prior data were adjusted by the state-level rate of change 
between the year that the data were reported and the year the 
data were missing (e.g., data carried forward from 2012 were 
adjusted to account for the growth/decline in the confined 
population between 2012 and 2015 within the state where the jail 
was located). In the event that no prior years of reported data 
were available to carry forward, the imputed value from the 2013 
Census of Jails that was used for weighting was carried forward 
as a proxy, subject to the same state-level adjustment for change 
in the confined population. For more information on the 
imputation method implemented in the 2013 Census of Jails, see 
Census of Jails: Population Changes, 1999–2013 (NDJ 248627, BJS 
web, November 2015). 

Because the DCRP data collection used a census design (no 
sampling), each jail was initially self-representing and had a 
design weight of 1. To reduce nonresponse bias, responding jails 
had their weight adjusted via post-stratification to allow their 
responses to represent jails that did not respond. The 
description of the weighting used in the 2014 and 2015 DCRP is 
described using 2015 as the example. 

Control totals for the 2015 confined jail population from the 
DCRP were estimated at the state level as follows:

* The year-to-year change in confined jail population among 
respondents to both the 2014 and 2015 DCRP was computed within 
the state.

* Estimated 2015 values were calculated by multiplying the yearly 
change rate and the 2014 DCRP estimate of confined population for 
jails that did not respond to the 2015 DCRP.

* The sum of reported, item-imputed, and DCRP-estimated values 
for the 2015 confined jail population for each state served as 
the control totals for the post-stratification procedure. The 
post-stratification weight adjustment factor was identical for 
all jails within a state and was computed as the ratio of the 
control total for state i to the sum of the reported and item-
imputed 2015 DCRP confined jail population values for state i:

The final analysis weight is the product of the design weight and 
the post-stratification adjustment factor. Because the design 
weight was 1 for all jails, the analysis weight is equal to the 
adjustment factor. 

**********************************************
Nonresponse adjustments to estimate males 
and females under correctional supervision
**********************************************

The number of males and females on probation or parole in 2014 
and 2015 were adjusted to account for nonresponse using a ratio 
adjustment method. For jurisdictions that did not provide data on 
sex for a single year, the sex distribution reported the prior 
year was used. For jurisdictions that did not provide data on sex 
for a portion of their population, the sex distribution of the 
known portion of the population was used to impute for the 
unknown portion because it was assumed that the distributions 
were the same. For jurisdictions that were unable to provide any 
data on sex for more than 1 year, the state national average was 
used to impute the number of males and females supervised in 
those states. Adjusted jurisdiction totals were then aggregated 
to produce national estimates of the number of males and females 
on probation and parole. 

The counts of prisoners by sex in 2014 and 2015 were adjusted to 
account for nonresponse using either external sources or a ratio 
adjustment method. When possible, BJS used information available 
on state department of corrections’ websites to impute the number 
of males and females under the jurisdiction of that state’s 
prison system within the reference year. Otherwise, the sex 
distribution reported by the state in a recent, prior year was 
used to impute the number of males and females in the reference 
year. For more information, see Prisoners in 2015 (NCJ 250229, 
BJS web, December 2016). 

For jails that were unable to report the number of males and 
females confined at yearend 2014 or 2015, a carry-forward 
imputation procedure was used to impute values. This procedure 
used the nonrespondent’s data from a prior collection as a 
substitute for missing values in the 2014 or 2015 collection. 
These prior data were adjusted by the state-level rate of change 
between the year that the data were reported and the year that 
the data were missing. For example, data carried forward from 
2014 were adjusted to account for the growth/decline in the 
confined population from 2014 to 2015 (i.e., the year the data 
were missing) within the state where the jail was located. In the 
event that no prior years of reported data were available to 
carry forward, the imputed value from the 2013 Census of Jails 
that was used for weighting was carried forward as a proxy, 
subject to the same state-level adjustment for change in the 
confined population. For more information on the imputation 
method implemented in the 2013 Census of Jails, see Census of 
Jails: Population Changes, 1999–2013 (NCJ 248627, BJS web, 
November 2015).

To generate estimates of the total correctional population in 
2014 and 2015 by sex and jurisdiction, ratio estimation was used 
to account for male and female offenders with multiple 
correctional statuses in each jurisdiction. These adjustments 
were made by correctional status and were based on reported 
counts, by jurisdiction, of the number of offenders by sex and 
the number of offenders with multiple correctional statuses:

* To estimate the number of male and female prisoners held in 
local jails, the distribution of the prison population by sex 
within the reference year was applied to the number of prisoners 
in local jails by jurisdiction. The estimated number of female 
prisoners held in local jails was then subtracted from the total 
number of females under correctional supervision by jurisdiction. 
This same method was used to adjust the number of males under 
correctional supervision by jurisdiction. 

* The correctional population estimates in each jurisdiction were 
also adjusted to account for the number of males and females on 
probation who were held in prisons or local jails. The 
distribution of the local jail population by sex was applied to 
the number of probationers in local jails by jurisdiction within 
the reference year to estimate the number of males and females 
with both correctional statuses. In addition, the distribution of 
the prison population by sex was applied to the total number of 
probationers in prison within the reference year to estimate the 
number of males and females with both correctional statuses. The 
estimated number of male probationers in prisons and local jails 
was then subtracted from the number of males under correctional 
supervision within the reference year by jurisdiction, and this 
same method was used to adjust the number of females under 
correctional supervision by jurisdiction. This method was also 
employed to account for parolees held in prisons or local jails 
and the totals, by sex, were excluded from the number of males 
and females under correctional supervision in each jurisdiction.

* To estimate the number of males and females on parole who were 
also on probation in 2014 and 2015, the distribution of the 
parole population by sex within the reference year was applied to 
the number of parolees on probation in each jurisdiction. The 
estimated number of males and females with dual community 
supervision statuses was then subtracted from the number of males 
under correctional supervision by jurisdiction. This same method 
was used to adjust the number of females under correctional 
supervision.

**********************************************
Comparability of jurisdiction-level 
estimates over time
**********************************************

All jurisdiction-level estimates included in this report are 
based on data reported within the reference year. Some 
jurisdictions update their population counts for different 
reasons after submitting their data to BJS. Updated population 
counts usually include data that were not entered into the 
information system before the survey was submitted or data that 
were not fully processed by yearend. 

Also, some jurisdictions have experienced reporting changes for 
one or more correctional population collections over time. These 
changes may result due to administrative changes (such as 
consolidating databases or implementing new information systems 
that result in data review and cleanup), reconciling offender 
records, reclassifying offenders (including those on probation to 
parole and offenders on dual community supervision statuses), and 
including certain subpopulations that were not previously 
reported.

For these reasons, comparisons between jurisdictions and 
comparisons between years for the same jurisdiction over time may 
not be valid. More detailed information about updates and 
reporting changes that impact the ability to make jurisdiction-
level comparisons over time can be found in the source reports 
for each of the four correctional populations, such as the 
Probation and Parole in the United States series or Prisoners 
series, within the particular reference year.

*******************************************************
The Bureau of Justice Statistics of the U.S. Department of 
Justice is the principal federal agency responsible for measuring 
crime, criminal victimization, criminal offenders, victims of 
crime, correlates of crime, and the operation of criminal and 
civil justice systems at the federal, state, tribal, and local 
levels. BJS collects, analyzes, and disseminates reliable and 
valid statistics on crime and justice systems in the United 
States, supports improvements to state and local criminal justice 
information systems, and participates with national and 
international organizations to develop and recommend national 
standards for justice statistics. Jeri M. Mulrow is acting 
director.

This report was written by Danielle Kaeble and Lauren Glaze. 
Laura Maruschak and Todd Minton verified the report.

Monika Potemra and Jill Thomas edited the report. Tina Dorsey 
produced the report.

December 2016, NCJ 250374
*******************************************************

**************************************************
Office of Justice Programs
Building Solutions * Supporting Communities * 
Advancing Justice
www.ojp.usdoj.gov
**************************************************

**************************
12/14/2016 JER 10:25am
*************************








