U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Programs
Bureau of Justice Statistics

-------------------------------------------------------
This file is text only without graphics and many of the
tables. A Zip archive of the tables in this report in
spreadsheet format (.csv) and the full report including
tables and graphics in .pdf format are available on BJS
website at: 
http://www.bjs.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbdetail&iid=4843

This report is one in a series. More recent editions 
may be available. To view a list of all in the series 
go to http://bjs.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbse&sid=5
-------------------------------------------------------

*******************
Bulletin
*******************

Correctional Populations in the United States, 2012

Lauren E. Glaze and Erinn J. Herberman, Ph.D., BJS 
Statisticians

At yearend 2012, the combined U.S. adult correctional systems 
supervised about 6,937,600 offenders, down by about 51,000 
offenders during the year (figure 1). The decrease observed 
during 2012 marked the fourth consecutive year of decline in 
the correctional population. However, this was the smallest 
decrease (down 0.7%) since the correctional population first 
declined in 2009, reversing a three-year trend of increasing 
rates of decline that started in 2009 and continued through 
2011. About 1 in every 35 adult residents in the United 
States was under some form of correctional supervision at 
yearend 2012, the lowest rate observed since 1997. 

This report summarizes data from several Bureau of Justice 
Statistics (BJS) correctional data collections to provide 
statistics on the total population supervised by adult 
correctional systems in the United States. (See Methodology 
for sources.) These systems include offenders living in the 
community while supervised by probation or parole agencies 
and those held in the custody of state or federal prisons or 
local jails.

***********************************************************

***********
HIGHLIGHTS
***********

* About 6,937,600 offenders were under the supervision of 
adult correctional systems at yearend 2012, declining by 
about 51,000 offenders during the year.

* The decrease during 2012 was the fourth consecutive year 
of decline in the U.S. correctional population.

* Although the correctional population declined by 0.7% 
during 2012, this was the slowest rate of decline observed 
since 2009 when the population first decreased.

* In 2012 about 1 in every 35 adults in the United States, 
or 2.9% of adult residents, was on probation or parole or 
incarcerated in prison or jail, the same rate observed in 
1997.

* An estimated 1 in every 50 adult residents was supervised 
in the community on probation or parole at yearend 2012, 
compared to 1 in every 108 adults incarcerated in prison 
or jail. 

* The decrease in the probation (down 38,300) and prison 
(down 21,100) populations accounted for nearly all of the 
decline in the total correctional population during 2012. 

* More than half (56%) of the decrease in the U.S. 
correctional population during 2012 was attributed to a drop 
(28,700 offenders) in California’s correctional population, 
a decline driven by the state’s Public Safety Realignment Act 
of 2011.
***********************************************************

****************************************
By yearend 2012, the rate of offenders 
under correctional supervision dropped 
below the 2000 level
****************************************

About 2,870 offenders per 100,000 U.S. adult residents (or 
about 2.9% of adults) were under some form of correctional 
supervision at yearend 2012 (table 1). The correctional 
supervision rate dropped below 2,900 per 100,000 adult 
residents for the first time since 2000, which was similar to 
the rate last observed in 1997 (2,860 per 100,000) when about 
1.2 million fewer offenders were under correctional 
supervision (5.7 million).

After peaking in 2007 at 3,210 offenders per 100,000 adult 
residents, the rate of correctional supervision declined each 
year. Slightly more than half (52%) of the decrease from 2007 
to 2011 was attributed to the decrease in the number of 
offenders under correctional supervision during the period. 
Less than half (48%) of the decline was due to the increase 
in the number of adult residents in the United States (not 
shown in table).*** Footnote 1 1See Methodology for 
information about the method used to decompose the decline in 
the correctional supervision rate since 2007.*** In contrast, 
from 2011 to 2012 the increase in the adult resident 
population accounted for most (63%) of the decline in the 
correctional supervision rate, while 37% was due to the 
decline in the number of offenders under correctional 
supervision. 

About 1,980 offenders per 100,000 adult residents were 
supervised in the community on probation or parole in 2012, a 
drop from 2,010 per 100,000 in 2011. By yearend 2012, the 
community supervision rate fell below 2,000 per 100,000 adult 
residents for the first time since 2000, which was similar to 
the rate last observed in 1997 (1,990 per 100,000). The 
incarceration rate also decreased between 2011 (940 inmates 
per 100,000 adults) and 2012 (920 per 100,000). About 1 in 
every 108 adults was incarcerated in prison or jail at 
yearend 2012, compared to about 1 in every 50 under community 
supervision. 

***********************************************************
Official BJS measure of the U.S. prison population
BJS’s official measure of the prison population is the count 
of prisoners under the jurisdiction or legal authority of 
state or federal adult correctional officials (1,570,400 in 
2012), which is reported in Prisoners in the United States, 
2012: Trends in Admissions and Releases, 1991-2012, BJS web, 
NCJ 243920, December 2013. These prisoners may be held in 
public and privately operated prison or jail facilities, 
outside of the state, or in the federal prison system. The 
prison population reported in table 2 and appendix table 1 is 
the number held in custody or physically housed in state 
(1,267,000 in 2012) or federal (216,900 in 2012) adult 
correctional facilities, regardless of which entity has legal 
authority over the prisoners. The custody population includes 
state or federal prisoners held in privately operated 
facilities. The difference between the number of prisoners in 
custody and the number under jurisdiction is the number of 
state or federal prisoners held in the custody of local 
jails, inmates held in other states, inmates out to court, 
and those in transit from one jurisdiction of legal authority 
to the custody of a confinement facility outside that 
jurisdiction. BJS uses the count of the number of prisoners 
held in custody to avoid double counting prisoners held in 
local jails.
***********************************************************

****************************************
During 2012, the community supervision
and incarcerated populations had the 
smallest decreases since 2009 
****************************************

About 4,781,300 offenders were supervised in the community on 
probation (3,942,800) or parole (851,200) at yearend 2012, 
representing about 7 in 10 offenders under correctional 
supervision (table 2).***Footnote 2 The total community 
supervision population excludes parolees who were also on 
probation to avoid double counting offenders. See table 7 and 
Methodology. *** In comparison, about 3 in 10 offenders (or 
2,228,400) under correctional supervision were in the custody 
of state or federal prisons (1,483,900) or local jails 
(744,500).*** Footnote 3 See text box on Official BJS measure 
of the U.S. prison population, for the difference between the 
jurisdiction and custody prison population counts. 
Jurisdiction counts are the official BJS measure of the 
prison population as reported in Prisoners in the United 
States, 2012: Trends in Admissions and Releases, 1991-2012, 
BJS web, NCJ 243920, December 2013.***

The decline of about 40,500 offenders under community 
supervision during 2012 represented the smallest decrease in 
this population since it first decline in 2009 (down 46,300). 
From 2009 (down 0.9%) to 2011 (down 1.5%), the rate of 
decline in the community supervision population increased. 
However, during 2012, the community supervision population 
decreased by about half (down 0.8%) of the rate of decline 
compared to the previous year.  Similar changes occurred in 
the incarcerated population, as the decrease of 12,100 
inmates during 2012 was the smallest decline observed since 
2009 (down 16,400) when the population first declined.  The 
rate of decline in the incarcerated population slowed to 0.5% 
during 2012, reversing a trend of increasing rates of decline 
from 2009 (down 0.7%) to 2011 (down 1.3%). 

Most of the decrease in the community supervision population 
during 2012 was attributed to the decline in the number of 
probationers. While the probation population declined by 1.0% 
(down 38,300 probationers) during 2012, the parole population 
remained relatively stable (down 0.1% or 500 parolees). 

During 2012, the decrease in the incarcerated population 
resulted from the drop in the number of inmates held in the 
custody of state or federal prisons (down 1.4% or 21,100 
prisoners), as the number of inmates held in local jails (up 
1.2% or 8,900 inmates) increased. The state prison population 
(down 1.8% or 23,200 prisoners) decreased during 2012, 
accounting for the entire decline in the U.S. custody prison 
population (appendix table 1). The increase in the federal 
prison population (up 1.0% or 2,100) slightly offset the 
total decline in the U.S. prison population.

****************************************
Decreases in probation and prison 
populations accounted for nearly all 
of the decline in the total correctional 
population during 2012
****************************************

At yearend 2012, the probation population represented more 
than half (57%) of all offenders under the supervision of 
adult correctional systems (table 3). The number of prisoners 
held in the custody of state or federal prisons represented 
the next largest component of the correctional population 
(21%). Parolees conditionally released to supervision in the 
community (12%) and local jail inmates (11%) represented the 
smallest components of the correctional population. These 
findings remained relatively unchanged since 2011.
 
Combined, the probation, parole, and prison populations 
decreased by 59,900 offenders during 2012. About 38,300 fewer 
probationers were under supervision at yearend 2012, compared 
to the beginning of the year, accounting for 64% of the 
combined total decrease in the correctional population during 
the year (table 4). Even though the probation population was 
more than two and half times larger than the custody prison 
population at yearend 2012, the decline in the prison 
population (down 21,100) accounted for 35% of the total 
decrease.

The drop of 500 parolees (down 1.0%) between the beginning 
and end of 2012 had minimal impact on the total decline in 
the correctional population. After three consecutive years of 
decline, the jail population increased (up 8,900) during 
2012. It was the only correctional population to increase 
during the year, partially offsetting the overall decline in 
the correctional population. Most of the increase in the jail 
population during 2012 occurred in California 
jails.***Footnote 4 See California’s Public Safety 
Realignment Act of 2011 and the U.S. correctional populations 
in this report, for the size and change in the state’s 
correctional populations and its impact on the U.S. 
correctional populations.***

***********************************************************

***************************************
California’s Public Safety Realignment 
Act of 2011 and the U.S. correctional
populations
***************************************

In October 2011, the state of California and its counties 
implemented the Public Safety Realignment Act of 2011, 
redirecting nonserious, nonviolent, and nonsex offenders from 
the state prison and parole systems to sentences in local 
jails or county-directed post-release community supervision. 
The legislation was designed to reduce the number of inmates 
in California’s prison system to alleviate crowding and to 
stop low-level offenders from cycling in and out of prison. 
Although all 58 counties in California designated probation 
agencies as the correctional entities responsible for post-
release community supervision, BJS included that population 
in California’s parole population rather than the probation 
population for counting purposes. This method was used 
because the post-release community supervision population was 
conditionally released to the community after a sentence to 
incarceration, regardless of the entity that had authority 
over the population while in the community. 

About 598,600 offenders were under the supervision of 
California’s adult correctional systems at yearend 2012. 
Offenders supervised in the community on probation (297,700) 
represented the largest component of California’s 
correctional population (table 5). An additional 132,900 
offenders were held in the custody of state prisons; 89,300 
were on parole or post-release community supervision; and 
78,700 were incarcerated in local jails.

Fewer offenders (down 28,700) were under correctional 
supervision in California at yearend 2012 than in 2011. 
Although California’s correctional population represented 
about 9% of the U.S. correctional population at yearend 2012, 
more than half of the year’s decrease in the U.S. 
correctional population (down 51,000 offenders) was 
attributed to the decrease in the state’s correctional 
population. All other states, the federal system, and the 
District of Columbia accounted for 91% of all offenders under 
correctional supervision but accounted for less of the 
decline (44%) in the U.S. correctional population than did 
California.

Yearend 2012 marked the first full year of the Public Safety 
Realignment Act, and the impact was reflected in the changes 
in California’s correctional populations during the year. 
Almost all of the decrease in California’s correctional 
population during 2012 was attributed to declines in the 
parole (down 22,400 or 20%) and prison (down 14,600 or 10%) 
populations (table 6).
 
All of the decrease in California’s parole population 
resulted from the significant drop in state parole (down 
42,400), as the number of offenders under county-directed 
post-release community supervision (up 20,000) increased 
during the year (table 5). The percentage of prisoners in the 
state who were released unconditionally to the community 
reached 62% of all releases during 2012, up from 12% in 2011, 
and about 2% in 2010.*** Footnote 5 See Prisoners in the 
United States, 2012: Trends in Admissions and Releases, 1991-
2012, BJS web, NCJ 243920, December 2013, for more 
information about California’s prison population.*** The 
significant increase in the number of unconditional releases 
from prison during 2012 was consistent with the drop in 
California’s state parole population. The 65% decline in the 
number of admissions to California’s prison system during the 
year, which was driven by an 87% decline in the number of 
parole violators admitted to prison, was associated with the 
decrease observed in the state’s prison population.

Although California’s total correctional population dropped 
in 2012, the decrease was partially offset by an increase of 
about 8,500 inmates incarcerated in local jails (table 5). 
The state’s jail population dropped to a record low in 2011 
(70,200 inmates), but that population increased by 12.1% 
during 2012.*** Footnote 6 See Jail Inmates at Midyear 2012 - 
Statistical Tables, BJS web, NCJ 241264, May 2013, for more 
information about California’s jail population.***

The number of probationers supervised in California remained 
fairly stable during 2012, after decreasing an average of 
5.6% annually from 2005 to 2010 and 9.6% in 2011. The 
relative stability in this population during 2012 was 
associated with an increase in the number of offenders placed 
on probation. During 2012, the growth in entries to probation 
(up 6.7%) was about four and half times larger than in 2011 
(up 1.5%), the year in which the largest decrease in 
California’s probation population was observed since 2005.
*** Footnote 7 See Probation and Parole in the United States, 
2012, BJS web, NCJ 243826, December 2013, for more 
information on California’s probation and parole 
populations.***

***********************************************************

*************
Methodology
*************
 
Sources of data
****************

The statistics presented in this report include data from 
five separate BJS data collections, each relying on the 
voluntary participation of federal, state, and local 
respondents. For more information about any of the following 
data collections, go to the Data Collections page on the BJS 
website at www.bjs.gov. 

Annual Probation Survey; Annual Parole Survey. The Annual 
Probation Survey and Annual Parole Survey began in 1980. They 
collect data from probation and parole agencies in the United 
States that supervise adults. Both surveys cover the 50 
states, the District of Columbia, and the federal system. In 
these data, adults are persons who are subject to the 
jurisdiction of an adult court or correctional agency. 
Persons younger than age 18 who were prosecuted in criminal 
court as if they were adults are considered adults, but 
persons under age 18 who were under the jurisdiction of a 
juvenile court or agency are excluded. 

Annual Survey of Jails. The Annual Survey of Jails (ASJ) has 
collected data from a nationally representative sample of 
local jails each year since 1982, except in 1983, 1988, 1993, 
1999, and 2005, when a complete census of U.S. local jails 
was conducted. Jails are confinement facilities, usually 
administered by a local law enforcement agency, that are 
intended to hold adults, but they may also hold youth under 
age 18 before or after they are adjudicated. The data used in 
this report include inmates under age 18 who were held either 
before or after they were adjudicated (about 5,400 persons in 
2012).

Census of Jails. The Census of Jails began in 1970 and was 
conducted in 1972, 1978, 1983, 1988, 1993, 1999, 2002, 2005, 
and 2006. The census is part of a series of data collection 
efforts, including the Census of Jail Inmates and the Census 
of Jail Facilities, aimed at studying the nation’s jails and 
their inmate populations. 

Survey of Jails in Indian Country. The Annual Survey of Jails 
in Indian Country (SJIC) has been conducted annually since 
1998, except in 2005 and 2006. The SJIC collects detailed 
information on all adult and juvenile confinement facilities, 
detention centers, jails, and other facilities operated by 
tribal authorities or the U.S. Department of the Interior’s 
Bureau of Indian Affairs. The data reflected in this report 
exclude inmates under age 18 who were confined in facilities 
that held juveniles only (218 in 2012). The SJIC data are 
only included in appendix table 2 of this report. 

National Prisoner Statistics Program. The National Prisoner 
Statistics (NPS) program began in 1926 under a mandate from 
Congress and has been conducted annually since then. It 
collects data from the nation’s state departments of 
corrections and the federal Bureau of Prisons. 
NPS distinguishes between prisoners in custody and prisoners 
under jurisdiction of correctional authorities.*** Footnote 8 
See text box on page 2 that explains the difference between 
the two types of prison populations.*** The prison data in 
this report reflect the NPS custody counts and include all 
inmates held within a state’s facilities. These counts 
include inmates housed for other correctional facilities, 
prisoners held in privately operated facilities, prisoners 
under age 18 who were serving time in a state or federal 
correctional facility after being sentenced in criminal court 
as if they were adults (1,300 persons in 2012), and inmates 
in the six states in which prisons and jails form one 
integrated system, including inmates under age 18 who may 
have been held before or after adjudication.***Footnote 9 See 
Prisoners in the United States, 2012: Trends in Admissions 
and Releases, 1991-2012, BJS web, NCJ 243920, December 2013, 
for more information about the six states with combined 
prison and jail systems.***

Through the annual NPS collection, since 1994 BJS has 
obtained yearend counts of prisoners in the custody of U.S. 
military authorities from the Department of Defense 
Corrections Council. In 1994, the council, composed of 
representatives from each branch of military service, adopted 
a standardized report (DD Form 2720) that obtains data on 
persons held in U.S. military confinement facilities inside 
and outside of the continental United States. These data are 
only included in appendix tables 2 and 4 of this report. 
In 1995, BJS began collecting yearend counts of inmates from 
the departments of corrections in the U.S. Territories 
(American Samoa, Guam, and the U.S. Virgin Islands) and U.S.  
Commonwealths (Northern Mariana Islands and Puerto Rico). 
These data are only included in appendix tables 2 and 3 of 
this report and represent all inmates in the physical custody 
of prison or local jail facilities in the U.S. Territories or 
Commonwealths.

Probation and parole populations
*********************************

Total correctional population counts reflect data reported by 
probation and parole agencies within the specific reporting 
year. For example, the 2012 probation and parole totals are 
the December 31, 2012, population counts. 

Some agencies may update their probation and parole data 
after submitting them or change their reporting methods from 
one year to the next.***Footnote 10 See Probation and Parole 
in the United States, 2012, BJS web, NCJ 243826, December 
2013, for information about the reasons why agencies may 
update their data.*** BJS does not request updated data for 
prior years; as a result, probation and parole population 
counts on January 1 of the current year may differ from 
population counts on December 31 of the prior reporting year. 
For these reasons, annual change in the probation and parole 
populations was calculated within the reporting year. See 
page 9, Estimating annual change in the total correctional 
populations, for more information.

Local jail and custody prison populations 
******************************************

Respondents to the ASJ report the number of jail inmates 
confined as of the last weekday in June of each year. The 
total correctional population counts in each year include 
jail population counts as of the last weekday in June for all 
inmates confined in local jails. This is used as an estimate 
of the number of inmates in local jails at yearend.

Respondents to the NPS submit population counts of the number 
of prisoners in custody and under the jurisdiction of state 
or federal correctional facilities on December 31 of each 
year. The total correctional population count in each year 
reflects the custody prison populations as of December 31, 
and differs from the jurisdiction population counts (See 
Prisoners in the United States, 2012: Trends in Admissions 
and Releases, 1991-2012, BJS web, NCJ 243920, December 2013.)

Counts adjusted for offenders 
with multiple correctional statuses
*************************************

Offenders under correctional supervision may have multiple 
correctional statuses for several reasons. For example, 
probation or parole agencies may not always be notified 
immediately of new arrests, jail admissions, or prison 
admissions; absconders included in a probation or parole 
agency’s population in one jurisdiction may actually be 
incarcerated in another jurisdiction; persons may be admitted 
to jail or prison before formal revocation hearings and 
potential discharge by a probation or parole agency; and 
persons may be serving separate probation and parole 
sentences concurrently.

In 1998, BJS began collecting data on the number of offenders 
with multiple correctional statuses and has expanded on the 
information collected since then. Table 6 includes 
adjustments that were made to the total correctional 
population estimates presented in this report to exclude 
offenders with multiple correctional statuses (table 7).

These estimates are based on data reported by the probation 
or parole agencies that provided the information within the 
specific reporting year. Because some probation and parole 
agencies did not provide these data each year, the numbers 
may underestimate the total number of offenders who had 
multiple correctional statuses from 2000 to 2012. Due to 
these adjustments, the sum of the four correctional 
populations in tables 2, 3, and 4 will not equal the total 
correctional population. In addition, the sum of the 
probation and parole populations from 2008 to 2012 will not 
yield the total community supervision population because the 
total was adjusted for parolees who were also on probation.
 
Decomposing the decline in the 
correctional supervision rate
**********************************

The decline in the correctional supervision rate from 2007 to 
2011 was decomposed in four steps: 

(1) The change in the rate was calculated by subtracting 
the 2011 rate from the 2007 rate.

(2) An expected rate per 100,000 in 2011 was calculated by 
dividing the 2007 correctional population by the 2011 
U.S. adult resident population and then multiplying by 
100,000. This is the expected supervision rate if 
there had been no change in the correctional 
population from 2007 to 2011.

(3) The observed 2007 rate minus the expected rate (from 
step 2) divided by the total change (from step 1) 
times 100% represents the percentage of total change 
due to the growth in the U.S. adult resident 
population.

(4) The percentage of total change due to the decline in 
the correctional population is the residual difference 
(100% – percent change in step 3).

The same method was used to decompose the decline in the 
correctional supervision rate from 2011 to 2012.

Estimating annual change in 
the correctional populations
*****************************

Because probation and parole population counts on January 1 
of the current year may differ from population counts on 
December 31 of the prior reporting year, annual change in the 
probation and parole populations was calculated within the 
reporting year. (See page 7, Probation and parole 
populations, and Probation and Parole in the United States, 
2012, BJS web, NCJ 243826, December 2013, for more 
information.) For example, annual change in the probation 
population in 2012 was calculated as the difference between 
the January 1 and December 31, 2012, probation populations. 
This same method was used to calculate annual change in the 
parole population and California’s probation and parole 
populations. 

The annual change in the community supervision population was 
also calculated within the reporting year for the same 
reasons. For the years from 2008 to 2012, change in the 
community supervision population was calculated after 
accounting for offenders with multiple community supervision 
statuses. (See page 8, Counts adjusted for offenders with 
multiple correctional statuses.) For these reasons, from 2008 
to 2012, the sum of the changes in the probation and parole 
populations does not equal the total change in the community 
supervision population. For example, the change in the 
probation population (down 38,300) during 2012 plus the 
change in the parole population (down 500) during the year 
does not equal the total change in the community supervision 
population (down 40,500). The difference (1,700) is the 
change in the number of parolees who were also on probation 
during 2012.

The annual change in the jail and custody prison populations 
was based on the change from the prior year to the current 
year because respondents were asked only to report a 
population count for one reference date. For example, the 
annual change in the jail population for 2012 is the 
difference (up 8,900) between the populations on the last 
weekday in June 2011 and June 2012. The annual change in the 
custody prison population for 2012 is the difference (down 
21,100) between the December 31, 2011, and December 31, 2012, 
custody prison populations. The change in the total 
incarcerated population was calculated as the sum of the 
change in the jail and custody prison populations from the 
prior to the current year. 

The annual change in the total correctional population for 
each year was calculated as the sum of the annual changes for 
each correctional population. For example, the annual change 
in the total correctional population (down 51,000) during 
2012 was calculated as the sum of four components: (1) the 
change in the probation population (down 38,300) during 2012; 
(2) the change in the parole population (down 500) during 
2012; (3) the change in the jail population (up 8,900) 
between 2011 and 2012; and (4) the change in the custody 
prison population (down 21,100) between 2011 and 2012. This 
same method was used to calculate annual change in 
California’s total correctional population. (See table 4 for 
the change in California’s total correctional population and 
each correctional population during 2012.) 

Adjustments for nonresponse
****************************

Probation, parole, jail, and prison population counts were 
adjusted to account for nonresponse across the data 
collections. The methods varied and depended on the type of 
collection, type of respondent, and availability of 
information. For more information for 2012, see the following 
reports: Probation and Parole in the United States, 2012, BJS 
web, NCJ 243826, December 2013; Prisoners in the United 
States, 2012: Trends in Admissions and Releases, 1991-2012, 
BJS web, NCJ 243920, December 2013; and Jail Inmates at 
Midyear 2012 - Statistical Tables, BJS web, NCJ 241264, May 
2013.

The total number of prisoners in the custody of correctional 
authorities in the U.S. Territories and Commonwealths (see 
appendix tables 2 and 3) in 2011 and 2012 includes estimates 
for nonresponse. The U.S. Virgin Islands did not provide any 
data in 2011 and Guam did not provide any data in 2012. 
Because of limited information, the U.S. Virgin Islands’ 
prison population in 2012 was used to impute its 2011 
population and the estimate was included in the U.S. total 
for 2011. Guam’s prison population for 2011 was used to 
impute its population for 2012 and the estimate was included 
in the U.S. total for 2012. American Samoa was unable to 
provide the number of prisoners sentenced to more than one 
year in 2012. Ratio estimation was used to impute the data 
and the estimate was included in the U.S. total for 2012. 
Specifically, the ratio of the number of prisoners sentenced 
to more than one year in 2011 divided by American Samoa’s 
total prison population in 2011 was applied to American 
Samoa’s prison population in 2012 to generate the estimate of 
the number of prisoners sentenced to more than one year in 
2012.

***********************************************************
The Bureau of Justice Statistics, located in the Office 
of Justice Programs, U.S. Department of Justice, 
collects, analyses, and disseminates statistical 
information on crime, criminal offenders, victims of 
crime, and the operation of justice systems at all 
levels of government. William J. Sabol is acting 
director.

Lauren E. Glaze and Erinn J. Herberman, Ph.D., wrote 
this report. Lauren E. Glaze and Erinn J. Herberman 
analyzed the data and prepared the tables and graphs. 
Todd D. Minton provided statistical verification and 
review. 

Morgan Young edited the report, and Barbara Quinn 
produced the report.

December 2013, NCJ 243936
************************************************************

**************************************************
Office of Justice Programs
Innovation * Partnerships * Safer Neighborhoods
www.ojp.usdoj.gov
**************************************************

**********************
12/5/2013/JER/12:38am
**********************

