U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Programs
Bureau of Justice Statistics

December 2011, NCJ 236319

Correctional Populations in the United States, 2010 

Lauren E. Glaze, BJS Statistician

---------------------------------------------------
This file is text without graphics and many of the
tables. A Zip archive of the tables in this report in
spreadsheet format (.cvs) and the full report including
tables and graphs in .pdf format are available at:
http://www.bjs.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbdetail&iid=2237

This reports is one in series. More recent editions 
may be available. To view a list of all reports in the series 
go to http://www.bjs.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbse&sid=5
---------------------------------------------------

During 2010, the number of persons under supervision of adult
correctional authorities declined by 1.3% (91,700
offenders), reaching 7.1 million at yearend (figure 1). This
was the second consecutive year of decline in the
correctional population. The population at yearend 2010
dropped below the 2006 level (7.2 million). The adult
correctional systems supervise offenders in the community
under the authority of adult probation or parole agencies and
those incarcerated in state or federal prisons or local
jails. (See text box below.) This report provides summary
data on the total population under the supervision of the
adult correctional systems and highlights significant changes
in the components of the population. (See Methodology.)

-----------------------------------------------------
Defining the adult correctional systems

Community supervision data collected by the Bureau of Justice
Statistics (BJS) were reported by probation and parole
agencies that supervise adults. In these data, adults are
defined as persons under the authority of an adult court or
correctional agency. Persons under age 18 who are prosecuted
as an adult in a criminal court are considered adults and are
included in these probation and parole populations, but
persons under age 18 who were under the authority of a
juvenile court or agency are excluded.

Jails are confinement facilities, usually administered
by a local law enforcement agency, that are intended
to hold adults. Local jails may also hold inmates under
age 18 before or after adjudication (7,560 in 2010), and
these inmates are included in the jail population.
***Footnote 1 See Jail Inmates at Midyear 2010-Statistical
Tables, BJS Web, NCJ 233431, for more details***.


The state and federal custody prison data were reported by
state departments of corrections and the Federal Bureau of
Prisons. (See text box on page 2 for discussion about the
difference between the custody and jurisdiction prison
populations.) In these data, adults are defined as prisoners
who were serving time in a state or federal correctional
facility or privately operated facility under state or
federal authority after being sentenced as an adult in a
criminal court. Prisoners under age 18 who were sentenced as
an adult in a criminal court (2,295 in 2010) are considered
adults and are included in the prison population.***Footnote
2 The estimate of 2,295 persons under the age of 18 who were
held in state or federal prison in 2010 is based on a June 30
reference date***.The prison custody population also includes
persons under age 18 who were held (before or after
adjudication) in correctional facilities in the six states
with combined prison-jail systems.***Footnote 3 See Prisoners
in 2010, BJS Web, NCJ 236096, for more details***.
---------------------------------------------------

At yearend 2010, the total number of offenders under the
supervision of the adult correctional authorities represented
about 3.0% of adults in the U.S. resident population, or 1 in
every 33 adults. The rate of adults under correctional
supervision has remained relatively stable since 2000 (3.1%).

At yearend 2010, about 1 in every 48 adults in the U.S. was
under supervision in the community on probation or parole,
compared to about 1 in every 104 adults in the custody of
state or federal prisons or local jails.***Footnote 4 See
Probation and Parole in the United States, 2010, BJS Web, NCJ
236019, for community supervision rates***. The respective
rates of supervision were 2,074 offenders in the community
per 100,000 adults and 962 inmates per 100,000 adults. (See
appendix tables 2 and 3 for incarceration rates.)

Community supervision and incarcerated populations declined
for the second consecutive year

About 7 in 10 persons under the supervision of adult
correctional systems were supervised in the community
(4,887,900) on probation or parole at yearend 2010, while
about 3 in 10 were incarcerated (2,266,800) in local jails or
in the custody of state or federal prisons (table 1). (See
text box below for a discussion about the difference between
the custody and jurisdiction prison population.) Both the
number of offenders under supervision in the community (down
1.3%) and incarcerated in prison or jail (down 1.1%)
decreased during 2010. This marked the second consecutive
year of decline in both correctional populations.

The decrease observed in the community supervision population
during 2010 was due to a decline in the probation population
(down 1.7%). The parole population (up 0.3%) increased
slightly during the last year. Declines in the jail
population (down 2.4%) and the custody prison population
(down 0.4%) contributed to the drop in the total incarcerated
population during 2010.

Probation population accounted for three-quarters of the
decline in the correctional population during 2010
About three-quarters of the decline in the total correctional
population (down 91,700) during 2010 was attributed to the
decline in the number of probationers (down 69,500) during
the year. The probation population (4,055,514) was the
largest component (57%) of the total correctional population
at yearend 2010 (table 2).

The decline in the number of jail inmates (down 18,700)
accounted for 20% of the decrease in the total correctional
population. The jail population represented the smallest
portion (11%) of offenders under the supervision of the adult
correctional systems in 2010. The decline in the number of
inmates in the custody of state or federal prisons (down
6,400) represented 7% of the decrease in the total
correctional population during 2010. The increase in the
parole population (up 2,900) slightly offset the decline in
the number of persons supervised by the adult correctional
systems at yearend 2010.

----------------------------------------------------
Prison populations: A comparison between the jurisdiction and
custody populations

BJS's official measure of the prison population is the count
of prisoners under the jurisdiction or legal authority of
state and federal adult correctional officials (1,605,127 in
2010) (appendix table 1). These prisoners may be held in
prison or jail facilities located outside of the state or
federal prison system. The prison population reported in
table 1 is the number held in custody or physically housed in
state (1,311,136 in 2010) and federal (206,968 in 2010) adult
correctional facilities, regardless of which entity has legal
authority over the prisoners (appendix table 2). This
includes state and federal prisoners held in privately
operated facilities. The difference between the number of
prisoners in custody and the number under jurisdiction is the
number of state and federal prisoners held in the custody of
local jails, inmates out to court, and those in transit.
Because table 1 presents data on the number of individuals
under the supervision of the adult correctional systems by
correctional status, BJS uses the count of the number of
prisoners held in custody to avoid double counting prisoners
held in local jails.
------------------------------------------------------

Methodology

Sources of data

The data were collected through five separate Bureau of
Justice Statistics (BJS) data collections:

Annual Probation Survey; Annual Parole Survey. BJS's Annual
Probation Survey and Annual Parole Survey began in 1980 and
collect data from probation and parole agencies in the U.S.
that supervise adults. In these data, adults are persons
subject to the jurisdiction of an adult court or correctional
agency. Persons under the age of 18 who were prosecuted as
adults in a criminal court are considered adults, but persons
under the age of 18 who were under the jurisdiction of a
juvenile court or agency are excluded. The National Criminal
Justice Information and Statistics Service of the Law
Enforcement Assistance Administration (LEAA), BJS's
predecessor agency, began a statistical series on parole in
1976 and probation in 1979.

The Annual Probation Survey and the Annual Parole Survey
collect data on the total number of adults supervised in the
community on January 1 and December 31 each year, the number
of adults who enter and exit supervision during the reporting
year, and characteristics of the populations at yearend, and
other information. Both surveys cover the 50 states, the
District of Columbia, and the federal system. BJS relies on
the voluntary participation of state central reporters and
separate state, county, and court agencies for its annual
data on probation and parole. For more information, go to the
Probation and Parole Population series page on the BJS
website at www.bjs.gov.

Annual Survey of Jails. BJS's Annual Survey of Jails (ASJ)
began in 1982. The ASJ collects data from a nationally
representative sample of local jails that are intended for
adults but may hold inmates under the age of 18 before or
after adjudication. The ASJ has been conducted annually
except for 1983, 1988, 1993, 1999, and 2005 in which a
complete census of U.S. local jails was conducted. It
collects data on the size of the jail inmate population at
midyear, the characteristics of the population, information
about jail capacity, and in recent years data on weekly
admissions and releases. BJS relies on the voluntary
participation of local jail administrators for the ASJ data.
For more information, go to the Prison and Jail Inmates at
Midyear series page on the BJS website at www.bjs.gov for the
Jail Inmates at Midyear statistical products. Prior to 2007,
the Jail Inmates at Midyear statistical products were titled
Prison and Jail Inmates at Midyear.

Census of Jails. BJS's Census of Jails (CJS) is part of a
series of data collection efforts aimed at studying the
nation's locally administered jails. To reduce respondent
burden, and improve data quality and timeliness, the census
was split into two data collections in 2005 and 2006: the
2005 Census of Jail Inmates (CJI) and the 2006 Census of Jail
Facilities (CJF). The census collects data on jail
jurisdictions' supervised populations and may include inmates
under the age of 18 who were held before or after
adjudication, inmate counts and movements, and persons under
jail supervision who were supervised outside a jail facility.
The Census of Jails began in 1970 and was conducted in 1972,
1978, 1983, 1988, 1993, 1999, 2002, 2005, and 2006. For more
information on the 2005 CJI, 2006 CJF, and the original
Census of Jails, go to www.bjs.gov.

National Prisoner Statistics Program. Begun in 1926 under a
mandate from Congress, the National Prisoner Statistics (NPS)
program collects data on the number of state and federal
prisoners at midyear and yearend. BJS relies on the voluntary
participation by state departments of corrections and the
Federal Bureau of Prisons for NPS data.

The NPS distinguishes between prisoners in custody and
prisoners under jurisdiction. To have custody of a prisoner,
a state or federal correctional authority must hold a
prisoner in one of their own facilities or in a private
facility under their authority. To have jurisdiction over a
prisoner, a state or federal prison must have legal authority
over the prisoner, regardless of where the prisoner is held.
The NPS custody counts include all inmates held within a
respondent's facilities, including inmates housed for other
correctional facilities; prisoners held in privately operated
facilities; prisoners under the age of 18 who were serving
time in a state or federal correctional facility after being
sentenced as an adult; and inmates in the six states in which
prisons and jails form one integrated system, including
inmates under the age of 18 who may have been held before or
after adjudication. The NPS custody counts exclude inmates
held in local jails and in other jurisdictions.

Total correctional population counts reflect data reported by
probation and parole agencies within the specific reporting
year

Respondents to the Annual Probation Survey and Annual Parole
Survey are asked to report the number of adults supervised on
probation or parole at the beginning and end of each
reporting year, the number that enter and exit supervision
during the reporting year, and characteristics of the
populations within the reporting year, and other information.
Some agencies update their probation and parole data for
different reasons after submitting their data. BJS does not
obtain updated data for prior years.

Updated data usually include data that were not entered into
the information system before the survey was submitted or
data that were not fully processed by yearend. Probation and
parole agencies also experience changes in reporting methods
over time. (See Probation and Parole in the United States,
2010, BJS Web, NCJ 236019, specifically tables 9 through 12.)
Therefore, probation and parole population counts on January
1 of the current year may differ from population counts on
December 31 of the prior reporting year.

The number of offenders supervised by the adult correctional
system in each year reflect the population counts reported by
probation and parole agencies within the reporting year. For
example, the 2009 probation and parole totals are the
December 31, 2009 population counts reported by the agencies
for the 2009 reporting year. This is a different method
compared to previously published BJS reports, when the
December 31 probation and parole population counts within a
reporting year were updated with the January 1 probation and
parole population counts from the next reporting year;
therefore, the total correctional population counts within a
year in previously published BJS reports included the January
1 probation and parole population counts from the next 
reporting year. This different method was previously used to
facilitate the estimation of annual change in the total
correctional population, as well as the probation and parole
populations, by attempting to account for annual reporting
changes or updated data. However, for this report, BJS used a
new method to estimate annual change in the total
correctional population, as well as the probation and parole
populations, as explained in Estimating annual change in the
total correctional population.

Local jail and custody prison population counts included in
the total correctional population

Respondents to the ASJ are asked to report the number of jail
inmates confined as of June 30 of each year. Therefore, the
total correctional population counts in each year include
jail population counts as of June 30 for all inmates confined
in local jails.

Respondents to the NPS are asked to report separate
population counts of the number of prisoners in the custody
of and under the jurisdiction of state or federal
correctional facilities on December 31 of each year. The
total correctional population count in each year reflects the
custody prison populations as of December 31, and differs
from the jurisdiction population counts reported in Prisoners
in 2010, BJS Web, NCJ 236096.

Estimating annual change in the total correctional population

Because probation and parole agencies may update their data
for reasons discussed in the section Total correctional
population counts reflect data reported by probation and
parole agencies within the specific reporting year, or
experience changes in reporting methods from one year to the
next, the probation and parole population counts on January 1
of the current year may differ from population counts on
December 31 of the prior reporting year. For these reasons,
annual change in the probation and parole populations was
calculated within the reporting year. (See Methodology in
Probation and Parole in the United States, 2010, BJS Web, NCJ
236019 for more information.)

The annual change in the jail and custody prison populations
was based on the change from the prior year to the current
year because respondents are only asked to report a
population count for one reference date. For example, the
annual change in the jail population for 2010 is the
difference between the June 30, 2009, and June 30, 2010,
populations. The annual change in the custody prison
population for 2010 is the difference between the December
31, 2009, and December 31, 2010, custody prison populations.

The annual change in the total correctional population for
each year was not calculated as the difference between the
yearend populations but rather the sum of the annual changes
for each correctional population. For example, the annual
change in the total correctional population during 2008 was
calculated as the sum of four components: the changes in the
probation (up 36,446) and parole (up 6,992) populations
within 2008, the change in the jail population (up 5,359), or
the difference between the June 30 population in 2007 and
2008; and the change in the custody prison population (up
4,967), or the difference between the December 31 populations
in 2007 and 2008.

Total correctional population counts adjusted to account for
offenders with multiple correctional statuses

Offenders under correctional supervision may have multiple
correctional statuses for a number of reasons. For example,
probation and parole agencies may not always be notified
immediately of new arrests, jail admissions, or prison
admissions; absconders included in a probation or parole
agency's population in one jurisdiction may actually be
incarcerated in another jurisdiction; individuals may be
admitted to jail or prison before formal revocation hearings
and potential discharge by a probation or parole agency; and
individuals may be serving separate probation and parole
sentences concurrently.

In 1998, BJS began collecting data on the number of offenders
with multiple correctional statuses and has expanded on the
information collected since then. Below are the adjustments
that were made to the total correctional population to
exclude offenders with multiple correctional statuses:

* 1998 excludes 28,805 probationers in jail and 20,734
probationers in prison

* 1999 excludes 23,906 probationers in jail and 22,758 in
prison

* 2000 excludes 20,400 probationers in jail and 22,136 in
prison

* 2001 excludes 23,415 probationers in jail and 20,226 in
prison

* 2002 excludes 29,325 probationers in jail and 20,939 in
prison

* 2003 excludes 25,497 probationers in jail and 21,478 in
prison

* 2004 excludes 34,387 probationers in jail and 21,595 in
prison

* 2005 excludes 32,630 probationers in jail, 22,073
probationers in prison, 18,325 parolees in jail, and 18,355
parolees in prison

* 2006 excludes 33,884 probationers in jail, 21,679
probationers in prison, 20,722 parolees in jail, and 15,677
parolees in prison

* 2007 excludes 19,286 probationers in jail, 23,055
probationers in prison, 18,827 parolees in jail, 14,623
parolees in prison, and 3,562 parolees on probation

* 2008 excludes 23,799 probationers in jail, 32,443
probationers in prison, 19,273 parolees in jail, 15,585
parolees in prison, and 3,905 parolees on probation

* 2009 excludes 21,356 probationers in jail, 23,130
probationers in prison, 19,123 parolees in jail, 14,339
parolees in prison, and 4,420 parolees on probation

* 2010 excludes 21,256 probationers in jail, 21,485
probationers in prison, 21,403 parolees in jail, 14,420
parolees in prison, and 8,259 parolees on probation

All of these estimates are based on reported data provided by
the probation and parole agencies that were capable of
providing the information within the specific reporting year.
Because some probation and parole agencies did not provide
these data each year, the numbers may underestimate the total
number of offenders with multiple correctional statuses
between 1998 and 2010. Because of these adjustments, the sum
of the four correctional populations in tables 1 and 2 will
not yield the total correctional population. In addition, the
sum of the probation and parole populations for 2008 through
2010 will not yield the total community supervision
population because the total was adjusted for parolees who
were also on probation.

Probation coverage expanded beginning in 1998 through 1999

To address undercoverage, the number of probation agencies
was expanded beginning in 1998 and continued through 1999 to
include misdemeanor probation agencies in a few states that
fell within the scope of this survey. In 1998, survey
coverage was expanded to include 35 additional probation
agencies, which accounted for 27,644 additional probationers.
Expansion of probation coverage continued through 1999, and
in that year an additional 178 probation agencies were added
to the collection, which accounted for 259,744 additional
probationers. Therefore, the 1998 total correctional
population reported in figure 1 includes the additional
27,644 probationers added through the expansion of coverage
in 1998. The 1999 correctional population reported in figure
1 includes the additional 259,744 probationers added through
the expansion of coverage in 1999.

To calculate the annual change in the total correctional
population between 1997 and 1998, the 27,644 probationers
added through the expansion of coverage in 1998 were
subtracted from the 1998 total correctional population
reported in figure 1. The 259,744 probationers added through
the expansion of coverage in 1999 were subtracted from the
1999 correctional population total in order to calculate the
annual change between 1998 and 1999.

Estimating some types of correctional data in specific years

Because the ASJ did not begin until 1982, the 1980 and 1981
adult jail populations were estimated based on data from the
1978 Census of Jails.

Virginia was unable to provide parole data for January 1,
2008. Virginia's parole population on January 1, 2008, was
estimated by BJS; this estimate was included in the national
probation population count for January 1, 2008, which was
used to calculate the national change in the population
within the year. (See Probation and Parole in the United
States, 2008, BJS Web, NCJ 228230.) Oklahoma was unable to
provide community supervision data in 2007. Community
supervision data for Oklahoma were estimated by BJS. (See
Probation and Parole in the United States, 2007   Statistical
Tables, BJS Web, NCJ 224707.)

Nevada was unable to provide prison data for 2007. Prison
data for Nevada were estimated by BJS. See Prisoners in 2008,
BJS Web, NCJ 228417. (The Methodology pertaining to Prisoners
in 2007, BJS Web, NCJ 224280, was updated in Prisoners in
2008

*****************************************************
Office of Justice Programs * Innovation * Partnerships *
Safer Neighborhoods * http://www.ojp.gov

The Bureau of Justice Statistics is the statistical agency of
the U.S. Department of Justice. James P. Lynch is director.

Lauren E. Glaze wrote this report. Lauren E. Glaze analyzed
the data and prepared the tables and graphs with assistance
from William J. Sabol. Todd D. Minton, E. Ann Carson, and
Paige Harrison provided statistical verification. Sheri
Simmons provided statistical review.

Jill Thomas edited the report, Tina Dorsey produced the
report, and Jayne E. Robinson prepared the report for final
printing under the supervision of Doris J. James.

December 2011, NCJ 236319

The full text of each report is available in PDF and ASCII
formats on the BJS website at www.bjs.gov. Tables are also
available in PDF and CSV formats. Related datasets are made
available on the National Archive of Criminal Justice Data
website at http://
www.icpsr.umich.edu/icpsrweb/NACJD/index.jsp.

***********************************************************

12/1/2011/ JER/ 11:08

