U.S. Department of Justice                         
                            
Office of Justice Programs
Bureau of Justice Statistics 
Executive Summary

Correctional Populations 
in the United States, 1993 

October 1995, NCJ-156675

By Tracy L. Snell
BJS Statistician

This report is one in a series.  More recent editions may be
available.  To view a list of all in the series go to
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/pubalp2.htm#cpus


(The full text of this report is available
through--
* the BJS Clearinghouse, 1-800-732-3277
* on the Internet at http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/
* on the BJS gopher: 
gopher://www.ojp.usdoj.gov:70/11/bjs/
* on the National Criminal Justice Reference 
Service Electronic Bulletin Board (set at
8-N-1, call 301-738-8895, select BJS).

An estimated 4.9 million adults were under some
form of correctional supervision in 1993.  Nearly
three-quarters of these people were on probation
or parole.  About 2.6% of the U.S. adult resident
population were under correctional care or
supervision in 1993, up from 1.1% in 1980.

Jails

Local jails are facilities that hold inmates
beyond arraignment, usually for more than 48 hours
but less than a year.  Local jails are
administered by city or county officials.

Local jails held an estimated 456,000 adults, or
about 1 in every 419 adult U.S. residents, on June
30, 1993.  Men made up 90% of adult jail inmates. 
White  non-Hispanic inmates accounted for 39% of
the total jail population; black non-Hispanics,
44%; and Hispanics, 14%.

The total number of adults in jail increased by an
estimated 13,700 inmates during the year ending
June 30, 1993, or 3.1%.  The overall increase of
273,200 adult inmates between 1980 and 1993
represents an average annual increase of 7.3%.

Probation

More than 2.8 million adults were on  probation on
December 31, 1993.  Probationers made up 58% of
all adults under correctional supervision in 1993.

Approximately 20% of the probationers were women,
a larger proportion than for any other 
correctional population.  About 64% of adults on
probation were white, and 34%, black.  Six in ten
persons discharged from probation had successfully
completed their sentences.

The number of adults on probation in the United
States increased by 31,834 (1.1%) between yearend
1992 and 1993.  From 1980 to 1993 the probation
population grew by more than 1.7 million, an
average of 7.4% annually.

Prisons

An estimated 909,000 men and women were in the
custody of State and Federal prisons at yearend
1993.  About 94% of all prisoners were men; 48%
were white, and 51%, black.

Two-thirds of sentenced prisoners entering prison
in 1993 were new court commitments and more than a
quarter were parole or other conditional release
violators.  Among persons released from prison in
1993, 78% were placed on  probation, parole, or
some other type of conditional release.

The number of prisoners rose by 6.8% during 1993,
the equivalent of nearly 58,000 inmates.  This
brought the total increase in prisoners between
1980 and 1993 to 598,588, which translates to an
average growth rate of 8.4% each year.

Parole

An estimated 671,000 adults were on parole at
yearend 1993, an increase of 2.0% from 1992.  Nine
of every ten parolees were men.  An estimated 49%
of persons on parole were white; 50%, black; and
1%, of other races.

Three-fourths of entries to parole were based on a
parole board decision.  More than half of all
exits from parole were categorized as successful
completions.  Most of the remainder were returned
to incarceration, but only a tenth of parolees
were returned to incarceration with a new
sentence.

While the parole population increased by only 2%
during the year, the average annual rate of
increase from 1980 to 1993 was 8.9%, more than
that of any other correctional population.  The
number of adults on parole doubled during the
13-year period (from 220,438).

Capital punishment

During 1993, 282 inmates were received under
sentence of death by State and Federal prisons,
and 108 had their death sentences removed by means
other than execution.  State and Federal prisons
held a total of 2,716 prisoners under sentence of
death on December 31, 1993.

An estimated 58% of those under sentence of death
at yearend were white and 41% were black.  Half of
the inmates had been under sentence of death for
at least 5« years.

Ten States executed 38 male prisoners during 1993. 
The number of executions was greater than that in
any other single year after 1976.  The total
number of prisoners executed under civil authority
in the United States from 1977 to 1993 was 226.

Details for local jails

Every 5 years the Bureau of Justice Statistics
conducts a census of the Nation's jails to obtain
detailed information on local jail inmates, staff,
facilities, and programs.  Previous censuses were
conducted in 1970, 1972, 1978, 1983, and 1988.  

Jail incarceration rates increased

On June 30, 1993, the Nation's jails held 459,804
inmates, an increase of 3.4% over the population
on June 30, 1992.  

Between 1983 and 1993 the jail inmate population
nearly doubled on a per capita basis.  During this
period the number of jail inmates per 100,000
residents rose from 96 to 178. 

In 1993, 8 States had over 200 local jail inmates
per 100,000 residents:  Louisiana (377), Georgia
(328), Texas (307), Tennessee (282), Florida
(250), Virginia (225), California (222), and
Nevada (215).  States with a jail incarceration
rate less than half that of the Nation were Iowa,
Maine, and North Dakota (57), Minnesota and
Montana (81), and South Dakota (87).

Between 1983 and 1993 the number of local jail
inmates rose the most in the South and the least
in the Midwest.  During this period the inmate
population grew 135% in the South, 102% in the 
Northeast, 81% in the West, and 79% in the
Midwest.

Jail incarceration rate among blacks 
almost 6 times that among whites

On June 30, 1993, a majority of local jail inmates
were black or Hispanic.  White non-Hispanics made
up 39% of the jail population; black
non-Hispanics, 44%; Hispanics, 15%; and other
races (Asians, Pacific Islanders, American
Indians, and Alaska Natives), 1%.

Relative to the number of residents in the U.S.
population, blacks (regardless of Hispanic origin)
were nearly 6 times more likely than whites to
have been held in a local jail at midyear 1993. 
An estimated 653 black inmates per 100,000 black
residents were held in local jails, compared with
113 white inmates per 100,000 white residents. 

A small number of jails held a 
disproportionate share of all inmates

About 6% of the jail facilities housed more than
half of all jail inmates on June 30, 1993. 
Facilities with an average daily population of 500
or more held 53% of local jail inmates. 
Facilities with fewer than 50 persons comprised
57% of all jails but housed about 8% of all
inmates.

In 1993, 5 States incarcerated slightly less than
half of all local jail inmates: 
California (69,298 inmates), Texas (55,395),
Florida (34,183), New York (29,809), and Georgia
(22,663).  

The Nation's 25 largest jail jurisdictions
accounted for more than 30% of all inmates at
midyear 1993.  The two jurisdictions with the most
inmates, Los Angeles County and New York City,
together held 37,372, or more than 8% of the
national total.

Increasing jail capacity kept pace 
with growing population

At midyear 1993 the rated capacity of the Nation's
local jails totaled 475,224.  Rated capacity is
the maximum number of beds or inmates allocated by
rating officials to each jail facility.  Between
1983 and 1993 more than 200,000 beds were added.

As of June 30, 1993, 97% of the total jail
capacity was occupied. Between 1988 and 1993 rated
capacity of the Nation's jails increased by 40%,
while the number of inmates increased by 34%.

Jail staff increased at a faster 
rate than inmates

Between 1983 and 1993, the number of inmates
increased at an annual rate of 7.5%, while the
number of full-time and part-time employees grew
at an annual rate of 9.9%.

Local jails employed an estimated 165,500 persons
on June 30, 1993.  The total staff grew by more
than 100,000 between 1983 and 1993, an increase of
156%.

In 1993 correctional officers comprised about 7 in
every 10 employees.  Relative to the number of
correctional officers, jails held 3.9 inmates per
officer in 1993, down from 5.0 in 1983.

Annual jail expenditures exceeded 
$9.6 billion

Local jails throughout the United States spent a
total of slightly more than $9.6 billion during
the year ending June 30, 1993.  This estimated
total (not adjusted for inflation) was more than
triple the $2.7 billion spent in 1983.

Excluding capital outlays in 1993, the average
cost to keep one inmate incarcerated for a year
was $14,667.  Over 10 years the cost per inmate
had risen 57% from $9,360.  Adjusted for inflation
to 1983 dollars the annual cost had decreased by
11%.
 
Ten-year trends for local jails   

                      Census of Jails   
                ---------------------------
                 1983      1988      1993
-------------------------------------------
Number of 
  inmates      223,551   343,569   459,804       
                                           
Rated
  capacity 
  of jails     261,556   339,949   475,224

Percent of 
  capacity  
  occupied         85%      101%       97%

Number of 
  jails          3,338     3,316     3,304       
                                           
Number of 
  staff         64,560    99,631   165,500

Number of 
  inmates per 
  employee         3.5       3.4       2.8

Annual 
  operating  
  expenditures
  per inmate    $9,360   $10,639   $14,667 
                                   

     * * * * *

Mail to:
Bureau of Justice Statistics Clearinghouse
P.O. Box 179, Dept. BJS
Annapolis Junction MD  20701-0179

Yes!  Send me 1 copy of Correctional Populations
in the United States, 1993 (205 pages),
NCJ-156241.

FAX to 410-792-4358, or fold, tape, and mail this
page to the address above, with first-class stamp.

Name______________________________________________

Address___________________________________________

__________________________________________________

City, State, ZIP_________________________________

Daytime phone number:  (__________)_______________


END OF FILE

