U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Programs
Bureau of Justice Statistics
                                                       
Bulletin

Correctional Populations in the United States,
2009

December 2010, NCJ 231681

Lauren E. Glaze,
BJS Statistician
December 2010 NCJ 231680
----------------------------------------------------------
This file is text only without graphics and many of the
tables. A Zip archive of the tables in this report in
spreadsheet format (.csv) and the full report including
tables and graphics in .pdf format are available from:
http://bjs.ojp.usdoj.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbdetail&iid=2316

This report is one in a series. More recent editions may be
available. To view a list of all in the series go to
http://bjs.ojp.usdoj.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbse&sid=5
-----------------------------------------------------------

Correctional authorities supervised 7,225,800 offenders at
yearend 2009, which was slightly fewer offenders (down
48,800) than in 2008 (figure 1). Correctional supervision
includes adults supervised in the community on probation or
parole and those incarcerated in state or federal prisons and
local jails. This was the first decline (down 0.7%) observed
in the total correctional population since the Bureau of
Justice Statistics (BJS) began reporting this population in
1980. ***(Footnote 1 See Methodology for a discussion about
the sources of correctional data.)*** 

This report provides summary data on the correctional
population and highlights significant changes in the
components of the population. Also, it covers adults
supervised in the community or held in adult correctional
facilities. The total prison population may include juveniles
held in adult facilities in the six states with combined
jail-prison systems.
-------------------------------------------------------------
Prison populations: A comparison between the jurisdiction and
custody populations

BJS's official measure of the prison population is the count
of prisoners under the jurisdiction or legal authority of
state and federal correctional officials (1,613,740 in 2009)
(see appendix table 1). These prisoners may be held in prison
or jail facilities located outside of the state or federal
prison system. The prison population reported in table 1 is
the custody prison population, which is different from the
jurisdiction prison population. The custody prison population
represents the number of prisoners physically housed in state
(1,319,426 in 2009) and federal (205,087 in 2009)
correctional facilities, regardless of which entity has legal
authority over the prisoners (see appendix table 2).
***(Footnote 2 For more information on the jurisdiction and
custody prison populations, see Methodology in this report
and Methodology and Definitions in Prisoners in 2009, BJS
Web, December 2010.)*** This includes state and federal
prisoners held in privately operated facilities . The
difference between the custody and jurisdiction counts is the
number of state and federal prisoners held in the custody of
local jails or inmates out to court or otherwise in transit.
Because table 1 presents data on the number of individuals
under correctional supervision by correctional status, the
custody prison population is presented instead of the
jurisdiction prison population. The custody prison population
accounts for the total number of individuals incarcerated in
state or federal prisons, eliminating the possibility of
double counting individuals who may be under the jurisdiction
of one entity but who were in the custody of another entity
-------------------------------------------------------------

The total number of offenders under correctional supervision
at yearend 2009 represented about 3.1% of adults in the U.S.
resident population, or 1 in every 32 adults (table 1).***
(Footnote 3 The total correctional population was adjusted to
account for some offenders with multiple correctional
statuses. For this reason, the change in each of the four
correctional populations during the last year will not sum to
the total change (down 48,800) in the correctional
population. See Methodology.)***  This rate has remained
relatively stable since 2000, while the growth in the
correctional population slowed during the first 8 years, and
then declined during the last year. 

Between 2000 and 2009, the increase (up 788,400 offenders) in
the number of offenders under correctional supervision was
smaller than the increases observed during the 1990s (up
1,696,000) and 1980s (up 2,215,200).***(Footnote 4 Probation
coverage was expanded beginning in 1998 through  1999. The
change and average annual rate of growth in the correctional
population during the 1990s was adjusted to account for the
expanded coverage. See Methodology.***  The slowing growth in
the correctional population since 2000 was consistent with
the smaller increase in the correctional population compared
to the two previous decades. The annual rate of growth in the
correctional population slowed to an average of 1.5% between
2000 and 2008 before declining (down 0.7%) during the last
year.

The rate of growth observed between 2000 and 2008 was less
than half the average rate observed annually between 1990 and
1999 (up 3.7%) and about a sixth of the average rate of
growth observed annually during the 1980s (up 9.2%).

Decreases in the probation, parole, and jail populations
during 2009 contributed to the decline observed in the total
correctional population 

The majority (70%) of offenders under correctional
supervision at yearend 2009 were supervised in the community
(5,018,900) either on probation or parole, remaining
relatively unchanged since 2000 (71%). The community
supervision population (down 0.9%) declined for the first
time during 2009 due to the first decreases observed in both
the probation (down 0.9% or 40,079) and parole (down 0.7% or
5,526) populations.

During 2009 the incarcerated population, including inmates
held in the custody of state or federal prisons and local
jails, declined (down 0.7%) for the first time since 1980
when BJS began reporting this population. The overall
decrease in the incarcerated population during 2009 was
attributed to the decrease in the jail population (down 2.2%
or 17,452). (See Jail Inmates at Midyear 2009-Statistical
Tables, BJS Web, 3 June 2010).

The rate of decline in the jail population during 2009 was
the highest rate of change observed among all four
correctional populations, including the probation, parole,
jail, and prison populations.

While the probation (down 0.9%), parole (down 0.7%), and jail
(down 2.2%) populations declined during 2009, the total
number of prisoners held in the custody of state or federal
prisons remained relatively stable during the year (up 0.1%
or 1,679). However, the number held in the custody of state
prisons declined (down 0.4%) during 2009 while the number
held in federal prisons increased (3.4%). During 2009, the
rate of growth in the total number of prisoners held in the
custody of state or federal prisons was the slowest annual
increase observed since 2000.

Men under correctional supervision were more likely than
women to be incarcerated; women were more likely to be
supervised in the community

In 2009, the majority (82%) of the total correctional
population was male, and 18% was female. Men comprised a
smaller portion of the total correctional population in 2009
than in 1990 (86%), while the percentage of women increased
within the total correctional population since 1990 (14%).

At yearend 2009, about two-thirds (3,911,300) of men under
correctional supervision were under community supervision
either on probation or parole, compared to about a third
(2,086,400) who were incarcerated in prison or jail (figure
2). Among men under correctional supervision, since 1990 the
portion that was incarcerated has increased from 28% to 35%
(2009). Consistent with this increase was a corresponding
decline in the portion of men under correctional supervision
who were supervised in the community between 1990 (72%) and
2009 (66%).

A smaller portion of women (15% or 198,600) under
correctional supervision were incarcerated in prison or jail
at yearend 2009, compared to men (35%) (figure 3). While
women incarcerated accounted for a slightly larger portion of
the female correctional population in 2009 compared to 1990
(13% or 78,500), the increase observed was less than the
increase in the male correctional population that was
incarcerated (28% in 1990; 35% in 2009).

Women (85%) under correctional supervision at yearend 2009
were more likely than men (66%) to be supervised in the
community on probation or parole. This finding was consistent
with a trend observed since 1990 (72% of men; 87% of women).
                                             
Methodology

Sources of data

The data in this report were collected through five separate
Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS) data collections:

Annual Probation Survey; Annual Parole Survey. BJS's Annual
Probation Survey and Annual Parole Survey began in 1980. The
National Criminal Justice Information and Statistics Service
of the Law Enforcement Assistance Administration (LEAA),
BJS's predecessor agency, began a statistical series on
parole in 1976 and probation in 1979.

The Annual Probation Survey and the Annual Parole Survey
collect data on the total number of adults supervised in the
community on January 1 and December 31 each year, and data on
the number of adults who entered and were discharged from
community supervision during each year. Both surveys also
collect data on the characteristics of the populations, and
both cover the 50 states, the District of Columbia, and the
federal system. BJS depends upon the voluntary participation
of state central reporters and separate state, county, and
court agencies for its annual data on probation and parole.
For more information, go to the Probation and Parole
Population series page on the BJS website at
<http://bjs.ojp.usdoj.gov/ index.cfm?ty=pbse&sid=42> for the
Probation and Parole in the United States annual reports.

Annual Survey of Jails. BJS's Annual Survey of Jails (ASJ)
began in 1982. The ASJ collects data from a  nationally
representative sample of local jails and has been conducted
annually except for 1983, 1988, 1993, 1999, and 2005 in which
a complete census of U.S. local jails was conducted. The ASJ
collects data on the size of the jail inmate population at
midyear, the characteristics of the population, information
about jail capacity, and in recent years data on weekly
admissions and releases. BJS depends upon the voluntary
participation of local jails and jail jurisdictions for the
ASJ data. For more information, go to the Prison and Jail
Inmates at Midyear series page on the BJS website at <http://
bjs.ojp.usdoj.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbse&sid=38> for the Jail
Inmates at Midyear statistical products. Prior to 2007, the
Jail Inmates at Midyear statistical products were titled
Prison and Jail Inmates at Midyear.

Census of Jail Inmates. BJS's Census of Jail Inmates (CJI) is
part of a series of data collection efforts aimed at studying
the nation's locally administered jails. To reduce respondent
burden and improve data quality and timeliness, the Census
was split into two data collections in 2005: the CJI and the
Census of Jail Facilities. The CJI collects data on jail
jurisdictions' supervised populations, inmate counts and
movements, and persons supervised in the community. The
Census of Jails began in 1970 and was conducted in 1972,
1978, 1983, 1988, 1993, 1999, 2002, and in 2005. For more
information on the 2005 CJI, go to <http://bjs.ojp.usdoj.gov/
index.cfm?ty=dcdetail&iid=404>. For more information on the
original Census of Jails, go to
<http://bjs.ojp.usdoj.gov/index.cfm?ty=dcdetail& iid=254>.

National Prisoner Statistics Program. Begun in 1926 under a
mandate from Congress, the National Prisoner Statistics (NPS)
program collects data on the number of state and federal
prisoners at midyear and yearend. BJS depends upon the
voluntary participation by state departments of corrections
and the Federal Bureau of Prisons for NPS data. 

The NPS distinguishes between prisoners in custody and
prisoners under jurisdiction. To have custody of a prisoner,
a state or federal correctional authority must hold a
prisoner in one of their own facilities or in a private
facility under their authority. To have jurisdiction over a
prisoner, a state of federal prison must have legal authority
over the prisoner. The NPS custody counts include all inmates
held within a respondent's facilities, including inmates
housed for other correctional facilities. The NPS custody
counts exclude inmates held in local jails and in other
jurisdictions.

Updating community supervision population counts
each year  

Some jurisdictions update their probation and parole
population counts for different reasons after submitting the
data to BJS. Updated population counts usually include data
that were not entered into the information system before the
survey was submitted or data that were not fully processed by
yearend. For these reasons and with the exception of the
probation and parole data reported for 2009, the total
correctional population counts on December
31 for years 1980 through 2008 include the January 1
probation and parole updated counts for the next reporting
year. The correctional population count for the most recent
year, which is yearend 2009, includes the probation and
parole population counts as of December 31, 2009.

Adjustments to total correctional population counts to
account for offenders with multiple correctional statuses

Offenders under correctional supervision may have multiple
correctional statuses for a number of a reasons. For example,
probation and parole agencies may not always be notified
immediately of new arrests, jail admissions, or prison
admissions; absconders included in a probation or parole
agency's population in one jurisdiction may actually be
incarcerated in another jurisdiction; individuals may be
admitted to jail or prison before formal revocation hearings
and potential discharge by a probation or parole agency; and
individuals may be serving separate probation and parole
sentences concurrently.

In 1998, BJS began collecting some data on the number of
offenders with multiple correctional statuses and has
expanded on the information collected since 1998. The total
correctional populations from 1998 through 2009 that are
reported in figure 1 and the 2000 through 2009 correctional
populations reported in table 1 were adjusted based on
available information to account for offenders with multiple
correctional statuses.

Below are the adjustments that were made to the total
correctional population to exclude offenders with multiple
correctional statuses:

* 1998 excludes 28,805 probationers in jail and 20,734
probationers in prison
                              
* 1999 excludes 23,906 probationers in jail and 22,758 in
prison

* 2000 excludes 20,400 probationers in jail and 22,136 in
prison

* 2001 excludes 23,415 probationers in jail and 20,226 in
prison

* 2002 excludes 29,325 probationers in jail and 20,939 in
prison

* 2003 excludes 25,497 probationers in jail and 21,478 in
prison

* 2004 excludes 34,387 probationers in jail and 21,595 in
prison

* 2005 excludes 32,630 probationers in jail, 22,073
probationers in prison, 18,325 parolees in jail, and 18,355
parolees in prison

* 2006 excludes 33,884 probationers in jail, 21,679
probationers in prison, 20,722 parolees in jail, and 15,677
parolees in prison

* 2007 excludes 19,286 probationers in jail, 23,055
probationers in prison, 18,827 parolees in jail, 14,623
parolees in prison, and 3,562 parolees on probation

* 2008 excludes 23,799 probationers in jail, 32,443
probationers in prison, 19,273 parolees in jail, 15,585
parolees in prison, and 3,905 parolees on probation

* 2009 excludes 21,356 probationers in jail, 23,130
probationers in prison, 19,123 parolees in jail, 14,339
parolees in prison, and 4,420 parolees on probation 

All of these estimates are based on reported data provided by
the probation and parole agencies that were capable of
providing the information within the specific year. Because
some probation and parole agencies were not capable of
providing these data each year, the numbers may underestimate
the total number of offenders with multiple correctional
statuses between 1998 and 2009. Because of these adjustments,
the details in table 1 will not sum to the total correctional
population.

Probation coverage expanded beginning in 1998 through 1999

Coverage of probation agencies was expanded beginning in 1998
and continued through 1999 to
include misdemeanor probation agencies in a few states that
fell within the scope of this survey but were previously
excluded. In 1998, survey coverage was expanded to include 35
additional probation agencies, which accounted for 27,644
additional probationers beginning with the January 1, 1998
probation population. Expansion of probation coverage
continued through 1999 and in that year, an additional 178
probation agencies were added to the collection, which
accounted for 259,744 additional probationers beginning with
the January 1, 1999 probation population.

In figure 1, the probation data used to estimate the total
correctional population for 1980-2008 represents the January
1 probation populations for the next reporting year because
agencies update their probation counts annually. Therefore,
the 1997 correctional population reported in figure 1
includes the January 1, 1998 probation population, which
includes the additional 27,644 probationers added through the
expansion of coverage in 1998. The 1998 correctional
population reported in figure 1 includes the January 1, 1999
probation population, which includes the additional 259,744
probationers added through the expansion of coverage in 1999.
This is also applies to the probation data included in
figures 2 and 3.

To calculate the annual change in the correctional population
between 1996 and 1997, the 27,644 probationers added through
the expansion of coverage in 1998 were subtracted from the
1997 total correctional population reported in figure 1. The
259,744 6 Correctional Populations in the United States, 2009
probationers added through the expansion of coverage in 1999
were subtracted from the 1998 correctional population total
in order to calculate the annual change between 1997 and
1998. In addition, the change in the correctional population
between 1990 and 1999 (1,696,000) is based on comparable
reporting agencies and excludes the additional probationers
added through expanded coverage in 1998 (27,644) and 1999
(259,744).

Estimating some types of correctional data in specific years

Because the ASJ did not begin until 1982, the 1980 and 1981
adult jail populations were estimated based on data from the
1978 Census of Jails. Oklahoma was unable to provide
community supervision data in 2007. Community supervision
data for Oklahoma were estimated by BJS and included in the
2006 probation and parole population counts, which are based
on the updated January 1, 2007 population counts. See
Probation and Parole in the United States, 2007   Statistical
Tables, available online at
<http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/abstract/ ppus07st.htm>. Nevada
was unable to provide prison data for 2007. Prison data for
Nevada were estimated by BJS. See Prisoners in 2007,
available online at <http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/abstract/
p07.htm>. Virginia was unable to provide parole data for
January 1, 2008. Virginia's parole population on January 1,
2008 was estimated by BJS and included in the 2007 parole
population count, which is based on the updated January 1,
2008 population count. See Probation and Parole in the United
States, 2008, available online at
<http://bjs.ojp.usdoj.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbdetail&
iid=1764>

Estimates of men and women under correctional supervision, by
correctional status

The number of men and women incarcerated represent the
reported number of men and women in the custody of state and
federal prisons plus the reported number of adult men and
women in the custody of local jails, within the reference
year.

The number of men and women under community supervision were
estimated through two different steps for years 1990-2006 and
three steps for years 2007-2009. First, the sex totals were
adjusted to account for nonresponse by using ratio estimation
based on the distribution of reported data. Second,  the
yearend sex totals were weighted up to the January 1
probation and parole populations from the next reporting
year, with the exception of 2009, because probation and
parole agencies update their counts; totals were weighted
using ratio estimation based on the adjusted yearend sex
distributions. The third step for years 2007-2009 was
necessary to weight to the total community supervision
population which was adjusted to account for parolees
who were also on probation (i.e., a dual community
supervision status).

Since 2007, the Annual Parole Survey has collected data on
the number of parolees who were also on probation. To
estimate the breakout of men and women, the sex distribution
among the parole population within the reference year was
applied to the total number of parolees on probation. The
estimated number of men on parole who were also on probation
was then subtracted from the total number of men under
community supervision. This same method was used to adjust
the number of women under community supervision.

The number of men and women under correctional supervision
from 1990-1997 were estimated by combining the number
incarcerated and under community supervision, by sex. For
1998-2009, the total correctional population was adjusted to
account for offenders with dual correctional statuses;
therefore, the number of men and women under correctional
supervision in these years were adjusted to add to the
control total.

Beginning in 1998, the Annual Probation Survey collected data
on the number of probationers who were in jail or prison. To
estimate the breakout of men and women within each year from
1998-2009, the sex distribution among the jail and prison
populations, respectively, within the reference year was
applied to the total number of probationers reported to be in
jail and prison, respectively, within the reference year. The
estimated number of male probationers in prison and jail was
then subtracted from the total number of men under
correctional supervision within the reference year, and this
same method was used to adjust the number of women under
correctional supervision.

Beginning in 2005, the Annual Parole Survey collected data on
the number of parolees who were in jail or prison. The same
method discussed to account for probationers in jail or
prison was used to adjust the number of men and women under
correctional supervision and account for those with parolees
with a dual incarceration status. The 2007- 2009 correctional
population totals also included adjustments to account for
offenders with dual parole and probation statuses.

The method described in the paragraph above was also used to
adjust the total number of men and women under correctional
supervision from 2007- 2009 to account for male and female
parolees who were also on probation.
---------------------------------------------------------

The Bureau of Justice Statistics is the statistical agency of
the U.S. Department of Justice. James P. Lynch is director.
Lauren E. Glaze wrote this report. Lauren E. Glaze analyzed
the data and prepared the tables and graphs with assistance
from William J. Sabol, Fan Zhang, Heather C. West, and
Todd D. Minton. Fan Zhang, Todd D. Minton, William J.
Sabol, and Thomas B. Bonczar provided statistical
verification. Sheri R. Simmons provided statistical review.

The U.S. Census Bureau served as the BJS data collection
agent for the 2009 Annual Parole Survey, 2009 Annual
Probation Survey, 2009 National Prisoners Statistics Program,
and the 2009 Annual Survey of Jails. 

Catherine Bird and Jill Thomas edited the report, Tina Dorsey
produced the report, and Jayne E. Robinson prepared the
report for final printing under the supervision of Doris J.
James.

December 2010, NCJ 231681
-------------------------------------------------------------
This report in portable document format and in ASCII and its
related statistical data and tables are available at the BJS
World Wide Web Internet site: <http://bjs.ojp.usdoj.
gov/index.cfm?ty=pbdetail&iid=2316>.         
-------------------------------------------------------------
Office of Justice Programs
Innovation * Partnerships *Safer Neighborhoods
*http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov
-------------------------------------------------------------

12/8/2010/ JER/ 12:20pm