Civil Rights Complaints in U.S. District Courts, 1990-98

U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Programs

Revised 2/22/00 pm

Bureau of Justice Statistics
Special Report
January 2000, NCJ 173427
----------------------------------------------------------------
This file is text only without graphics and many of the tables.
A Zip archive of the tables in the report updated through 2000 in spreadsheet format
(.wk1) and the full report including tables and graphics in .pdf
format are available from:
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs.abstract/crcusdc.htm. 


This report is one in a series. More recent editions may be available.  
To view a list of all in the series go to the publications 
page at:  http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/pubalp2.htm#crcusdc.

The tables
----------------------------------------------------------------

By Marika F. X. Litras, Ph.D.
BJS Statistician

Highlights

* Between 1990 and 1998 the number of cases in which plaintiffs 
sought civil remedies related to discrimination in employment, 
housing, welfare, voting, or other civil rights issues more 
than doubled from 18,793 to 42,354.

*The growth of civil rights cases has been due largely to the
increase in employment cases between private parties.

* The Federal Government was involved as a plaintiff or
defendant in about 7% of civil rights-related complaints in 1998
-- down from 13% in 1990.

* Between 1990 and 1998 the percentage of civil rights-related
complaints terminated by trial verdict dropped from 8% to 5%,
while dismissals increased from 66% to 71%. 

* Of the civil rights-related complaints terminated by trial
verdict between 1990 and 1998, the percentage decided by a jury
increased from 48% to 77%.

* Plaintiffs won just under a third of civil rights trials on
average between 1990 and 1998.

* Of the civil rights trial verdicts won by plaintiffs, the
percentage awarded monetary damages declined from 83% in 1990 to
76% in 1998.

* In 1998 median plaintiff awards ranged from $137,000 in
employment cases to $65,000 in housing cases.

End of Highlights

In 1998 plaintiffs filed over 250,000 civil complaints in U.S.
district courts.  In about 42,000 of these cases the plaintiff
filed a complaint involving a civil rights-related issue such as
discrimination in employment, housing, welfare benefits, or
voting rights.  These civil rights-related cases (which exclude
prisoner petitions) increased from 9% of all Federal civil cases
in 1990 to 17% in 1998.

This report is part of a BJS series which describes civil cases
filed in the Federal courts.  Previously, BJS has reported
findings about civil rights prisoner petitions filed by
Federal and State inmates (note: Prisoner Petitions in the
Federal Courts, 1980-96, (NCJ 164615).)  and tort trials in
Federal courts (note:  Federal Tort Trials and Verdicts, 1996-97
(NCJ 172855).)  Data on civil rights-related cases handled in
criminal courts can be found in the annual BJS Compendium of
Federal Justice Statistics.

The number of civil rights-related complaints increased between
1990 and 1998 during which time Federal civil rights laws
expanded.  New laws enacted during the 1990s include the
Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990, the Civil Rights Act of
1991, and the National Voter Registration Act of 1993.

The Civil Rights Act of 1991 amended  several Federal employment
discrimination laws including Title VII of the Civil Rights Act
of 1964, the Civil Rights Act of 1871, the Age Discrimination in
Employment Act of 1973, the Rehabilitation Act of 1973, and the
Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990. The Civil Rights Act of
1991 also made available compensatory and punitive damages in
certain discrimination claims, permitted jury trials for
plaintiffs seeking monetary damages, and overturned seven U.S.
Supreme Court decisions, effectively broadening the scope of
employment practices considered discriminatory. (note: Wards
Cove Packing Co. v. Atonio, 109 S. Ct. 2115 (1989); Patterson v.
McLean Credit Union, 109 S. Ct. 2363 (1989); Martin v. Wilks,
109 S. Ct. 2180 (1989); Price Waterhouse v. Hopkins, 109 S. Ct.
1775 (1989); Lorance v. AT&T Technologies, 109 S. Ct. 2261
(1989); Equal Employment Opportunity Commission v. Aramco, 111
S. Ct. 1227 (1991); West Virginia University Hospitals v. Casey,
111 S. Ct. 1138 (1991).) 

This study presents information about civil rights-related
complaints filed and terminated in U.S. district courts con-
cerning issues such as employment, housing and accommodations,
welfare, and voting.  Because of limited data describing the
statutory provisions  litigated, this study does not report the
number of cases filed or terminated under specific titles and
sections of the U.S. code (see Methodology).

This study also does not include civil rights-related grievances
filed, investigated, and resolved through administrative
channels of the agencies that enforce various Federal civil
rights discrimination laws such as the Equal Employment
Opportunity Commission (EEOC) in the case of employment
discrimination, or the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban
Development (HUD) in the case of housing discrimination.

Trends in civil rights complaints filed in U.S. district courts

Since the passage of the 1991 Civil Rights Act, civil rights
complaints related to employment, housing, welfare, voting,
and other civil rights-related issues more than doubled from
18,793 filings in 1990 to 43,278 in 1997 (table 1).  In 1998
this trend leveled off at 42,354 filings.  The proportion of all
civil cases that were civil rights-related complaints increased
from 9% in 1990 to 17% in 1998.

Employment

About 65% of the increase in civil rights-related cases (not
shown in a table) was due to complaints related to employment
issues which nearly tripled from 8,413 in 1990 to 23,735 in 1998
(figure 1).

A person's civil rights in an employment setting are violated
when employers discriminate with regards to hiring, promotion
or discharge practices, compensation, conditions and privileges
of employment, and deprivation of employment opportunities
because of an individual's race, color, religion, sex, national
origin (note: 42 USC Sec. 2000, 29 USC Sec. 201), age (note: 29 USC
Sec. 621-634), disability (note: 29 USC Sec. 793-794; 29 USC Sec.
12101-12213), or because of an individual having engaged in a
statutorily protected activity such as filing a charge. 

Housing and accommodations

About 2% of the increase in civil rights-related filings was
accounted for by complaints alleging discrimination in housing
and accommodations which rose from 341 to 838 cases between 
1990 and 1998.



Pursuant to the Fair Housing Act of 1972 and amendments in 1988
(note: 42 USC Sec. 3601-3619, 363), discrimination is prohibited
in the rental or lease of apartments, the sale of housing, and
the financing of housing (note: 15 USC Sec. 1691) because of an
individual's race, color, religion, sex, national origin,
disability, or families with children. These complaints may also
include discrimination in public accommodations such as restaurants
or hotels (note: Title II of 42 USC Sec. 2000).  

Welfare and voting

Complaints concerning welfare discrimination declined from 129
to 66 cases between 1990 and 1998, while complaints filed
alleging violations of voting rights peaked in 1992.  This
likely reflects challenges to redistrictings adopted following
the 1990 census.  Voting complaints, however,  remained fairly
constant at about 220 cases between 1993 and 1996, declining to
108 cases by 1998.

Violations of a person's rights relating  to welfare issues can
be brought because of the denial of social security entitlements
(note: 42 USC Sec. 1983) based on an individual's race, color,
religion, sex, or national origin, war pensions, the denial of
rehabilitation and other services for families with dependent
children, individuals who are elderly, blind, or disabled, or
whose income and resources are insufficient to meet the costs of
necessary medical services.

Voting rights are violated, for example, when redistricting
plans or methods of election prevent minority voters from
electing candidates of their choice (note: 42 USC Sec. 1973),
when minority voters who need help in casting a ballot are
prevented from receiving help or are prevented from receiving it
from a person of their choice (note: 42 USC Sec. 1973aa and
1973aa-6), when jurisdictions with substantial language
minority populations fail to provide information and assistance
in the language used by minority voters (note: 42 USC Sec.
1973aa-1a), or when polling places are inaccessible to
handicapped or elderly individuals (note: 42 USC Sec. 1973ee to
1973ee-6).

Other civil rights-related complaints

The increase in civil rights complaints concerning "other" civil
rights issues accounts for the remaining third of the overall
increase in civil rights cases filed between 1990 and 1998 (not
shown in a table).  Particular types of cases within the "other"
category cannot be distinguished for analysis.

Available data on the statutory provisions litigated suggest
that these complaints dealt with diverse issues such as the
civil rights of handicapped children (note: 20 USC Sec. 1400),
the education of children and adults with disabilities (note: 20
USC Sec. 1401 and 28 USC Sec. 2201), as well as  discrimination
dealing with vocational disabilities and rehabilitation (note:
29 USC Sec. 754-794).

Jurisdiction of civil rights-related  complaints

About 90% of the civil rights-related complaints filed in U.S.
district courts between 1990 and 1998 involved suits between
private parties as opposed to litigation involving the Federal
Government (table 2).

Nearly all of these private suits were between parties of the
same State involving complaints arising from the interpretation
and application of the U.S. Constitution, acts of Congress, or
treaties ("Federal question" jurisdiction).  This is unlike
Federal tort cases which largely are between private parties of
different States or parties of a State and citizens,
corporations, or subjects of a foreign county ("diversity of
citizenship" jurisdiction) (note: Federal Tort Trials and
Verdicts, 1996-97 (NCJ 164615)).

From 1990 to 1998, the proportion of civil rights complaints
involving private parties increased slightly from 87% of civil
rights complaints in 1990 to about 92% in 1998.

U.S. district courts exercise jurisdiction in civil actions that
are either initiated by the U.S. Government ("U.S. plaintiff")
(note: 28 USC Sec. 1345 and 1348), or are brought against the
U.S. Government for alleged negligent or wrongful acts resulting
in personal injury or property damage ("U.S. defendant")(note: 28
USC Sec. 1346).   The Federal Government was involved as a
plaintiff or defendant in about 7% of civil rights complaints
during 1998-- down from 13% in 1990 (table 2).

Private suits

Between 1990 and 1998, the number of civil rights complaints
between private parties more than doubled from 16,310 to 38,835.
This increase was due largely to the rise in employment cases
between private parties which more than tripled from 6,936 in
1990 to 21,540 in 1998 (table 3).

Similarly, civil rights filings involving a private suit related
to housing issues more than doubled from 284 cases in 1990 to
747 cases in 1998.  The number of welfare civil rights com-
plaints that were private suits declined from a high of 114
cases in 1991 to 55 in 1998.

U.S. Government as plaintiff

Civil rights-related complaints in which the U.S. Government was
the plaintiff declined between 1990 and 1996 from 747 to 486
complaints, but then increased to 672 complaints in 1998 (table
4).  This trend was driven by a decrease in employment
discrimination complaints filed by the U.S. Government.

Housing cases in which the United States was the plaintiff
increased  between 1990 to 1994 from 37 cases to 161, but
declined thereafter to 115 cases in 1995, 65 in 1996 and 56 in
1998.  The United States was the plaintiff least often in civil
rights-related voting and welfare cases.

U.S. Government as defendant

Civil rights complaints in which the United States was a
defendant increased 36% from 1,736 complaints in 1990 to 2,366
in 1998 (table 4).  This increase was due primarily to the rise
in employment-related complaints against the U.S. Government
from 876 in 1990 to 1,320 in 1998 in addition to an increase in
the number of "other" civil rights complaints.  In 1998, 31
housing, 11 welfare, and 7 voting complaints were filed against
the U.S. Government.

Box 

Civil rights-related class action suits

In class action lawsuits a single person or a small group of
people represent the interests of a larger group (note: Garner,
Bryan A. (ed.) 1996, Black's Law Dictionary, West Publishing
Co.). Class action suits related to civil rights accounted for
about 1% of all civil rights complaints filed annually between
1996 and 1998, years for which data were available (not shown in
a table).  

To maintain a class action, Federal procedure requires that --

* the class must be so large that individual suits would be
impracticable;

* there must be legal or factual questions common to the class;

* the claims or defenses of the representative parties must be
typical of those of the class;

* the representative parties must adequately address the
interests of the class (note:  Fed. R. Civ. P.23).

              Types of civil rights-related class actions suits
Year  Total   Employment    Housing   Welfare   Voting    Other

    1996      213        68        16         3         7      119
    1997      217        70        16        12         4      115
    1998      265        85        14        14         5      147

Note: Numbers do not include prisoner petitions.        

Between 1996 and 1998, the number of class action suits filed
dealing with civil rights-related issues (excluding prisoner
petitions) increased from 213 to 265.  This increase was due
largely to the rise in suits dealing with employment as well as
"other" civil rights-related issues.

Source: Annual Report of the Director, annual. Washington, D.C.:
 Administrative Office of the United States Courts (table X-5).

End of box

Box

Civil rights prisoner petitions filed in Federal courts by
Federal and State inmates 

Since 1941 prisoners have had direct access to the courts for
claims alleging violations by State officials of certain
constitutional rights such as the right to religious freedom,
speech, association, due process, protection from racial
discrimination and cruel and unusual punishment (note: Ex parte
Hull, 312 U.S. 546 (1941).). 

In 1963 the Supreme Court held that inmates also may bring
lawsuits against Federal officials who violate their
constitutional rights (note: United States v. Muniz, 374 U.S.
150 (1963).) Pursuant to the Civil Rights of Institutionalized
Persons Act (note:  Pub. L. No. 96-247, 97 Stat. 349 (1980).)
passed by Congress in 1980, however, inmates must exhaust
State-level administrative remedies before filing their
petitions in the Federal courts, thereby reserving the Federal 
courts for more serious civil rights violations and constitutional 
issues (note:42 USC Sec. 1997(e).). BJS previously reported that 
the number of Federal and State inmates that filed complaints 
alleging civil rights violations by government officials ("civil 
rights prisoner petitions") increased between 1990 and 1995 from 
25,992 to 41,679. They declined in 1996 to 41,215 and to 26,462 
by 1998.  This decline followed the Prison Litigation Reform Act 
of 1996 (note: Pub. L. No. 104-134, 110 Stat. 1321 (codified as
amended in scattered sections of 18, 28, and 42 U.S.C.).) which
placed restrictions on civil rights complaints filed by inmates
in Federal court.  The act, for example, requires inmates to
show physical injury to receive damages for mental or emotional
injury suffered while in custody, and provides for sanctions on
Federal inmates who abuse the court system. 

         Civil rights prisoner petitions filed
         in U.S. district courts by--

                         Federal     State
Year        Total*       inmates     inmates

1990        25992         1149        24843
1991        26042          999        25043
1992        30555          910        29645
1993        33933          915        33018
1994        39065         1140        37925
1995        41679         1110        40569
1996        41215         1219        39996
1997        28635          974        27658
1998        26462          983        25478

*Includes prison condition cases.

Source: Prisoner Petitions in Federal Courts, 1980-1996, BJS
report, NCJ 164615 and Annual Report of the Director, annual.
Washington, D.C.: Administrative Office of the United States
Courts (table C-2).

Civil rights prisoner petitions were brought primarily against
State officials.  Less than 5% in any given year were brought
against Federal officials. 

Civil rights prisoner petitions have included issues involving
violence by other inmates (note: Farmer v. Brennan, 114 U.S.
1970 (1994).), medical treatment (note: Estelle v. Gamble, 429
U.S. 97, 103 (1976).), due process in disciplinary hearings
(note: Wolff v. McDonnell, 418 U.S. 539 (1974).), access to law
libraries (note: Bounds v. Smith, 430 U.S. 817 (1977).), and
excessive force by correctional officers (note: Hudson v.
McMillian, 112 U.S. 995 (1992).).

See BJS discussion paper, Challenging the Conditions of Prisons
and Jails, 1995 for further discussion about prisoners' rights,
the conditions of confinement, and litigation brought under
Section 1993 of the U.S. Code.

End of box

Disposition of civil rights complaints filed

The majority of civil rights complaints terminated between 1990
and 1998 were disposed of by some form of a dismissal and about
a third by a judgment for the plaintiff or defendant (table 5). 

Dismissals include cases where: the parties settled out of court
("settled"), the plaintiff voluntarily withdrew the action from
judicial review ("voluntary"), there was lack of jurisdiction
over the subject matter or the person ("lack of jurisdiction"),
and litigant failure to pursue the case ("want of prosecution").

Apart from trial verdicts, "other" judgments for the plaintiff
or defendant include judgments by default, consent, motions
before trial, and judgments through formal arbitration
procedures adopted by the court.

Between 1990 and 1998, the percentage of civil rights complaints
dismissed from U.S. district court increased from 66% to 71%,
while judgments decreased from 34% to 29% (table 5). 

The increase in dismissals was driven by a rise in the
proportion of out of court settlements -- increasing from 31% to
35% between 1990 and 1998, as well as voluntary dismissals --
increasing from 8% to 13% (note: Section 118 of the Civil Rights
Acts of 1991 encouraged the use of alternative means of
resolving disputes such as settlements, negotiations,
conciliation, fact finding, and arbitration.).

The proportion of dismissals due to lack of jurisdiction
declined from 9% in 1990 to 2% by 1998, while civil rights
complaints dismissed because of want of prosecution remained
steady at an average of about 5% annually.

The percentage of civil rights complaints disposed of by trial
verdict or some other sort of judgment for the plaintiff or
defendant declined from 8% in 1990 to 5% in 1998.

Among employment complaints alone during 1998, about 39% were
disposed of by an out of court settlement -- up from 35% in
1990; voluntary dismissals increased from 9% to 14%.  During the
same period, the proportion of employment complaints disposed of
by trial declined from 9% in 1990 to 5% in 1998 (not shown in a
table).

Box 

Civil rights complaints filed in U.S. courts of appeal

Civil rights complaints filed in U.S. courts of appeal increased
by about 80% from 4,729 cases in 1990 to 8,466 cases in 1998. 
Over half (56%) of this increase was due to the rise in civil
rights appeals dealing with employment matters (not shown).

Civil rights-related appeals as a proportion of all civil cases
filed in U.S. courts of appeal increased from 17% in 1990 to 20%
in 1998. 

Appellate cases filed that were between private parties
increased by about 89% from 3,915 cases in 1990 to 7,405 in 1998.

Those in which the U.S. Government was the plaintiff declined
from 121 to 98 cases between 1990 and 1998.

End of box

Cases disposed of by trial

Jury and bench trials

Of the 1,386 civil rights complaints disposed of by trial in
U.S. district courts during 1990, 48% were disposed of by jury
verdict, 44% by the judgment of a judge or magistrate judge, and
8% the result of a directed verdict (table 6).  By 1998, 77% of
the 1,959 civil rights cases disposed of by trial were decided
by a jury, 17% by a judge, and 6% by directed verdict (Note: The
Civil Rights Act of 1991 allows jury trials under Title VII when
a plaintiff(s) seeks compensatory or punitive damages.) .

Among employment cases, the proportion of jury verdicts
increased from 35% in 1990 to 78% in 1998.  The proportion of
jury verdicts among housing cases increased also from 35% to 65%
during the period (figure 2). 

By contrast, jury trials were less common among welfare and
voting cases disposed of by trial in U.S. district courts.  In
1998, 1 of the 9 voting rights trials was disposed of by jury
verdict, while in 1998 a jury disposed of 1 of the 3 welfare
rights complaints disposed of by trial verdict (not shown in a
table).

Plaintiff winners and awards 

Plaintiffs won in over a quarter of civil rights-related
complaints disposed of by trial annually in U.S. district courts
between 1990 and 1998 (table 7).  

Of the civil rights trial cases won by plaintiffs, the percent
awarded monetary damages declined overall from 83% in 1990 to
76% in 1998.  Median monetary damages awarded to plaintiffs
declined between 1990 and 1993 from $184,000 to $62,000, but
rose between 1994 and 1998 from $75,000 to $125,000.

Of plaintiff winners who received monetary awards, the
percentage that were in amounts less than $500,000 increased
from 57% in 1990 to 76% in 1998.  The percentage that were in
amounts of $10 million or more increased also from 1% of damages
awarded to plaintiff winners in 1990 to 9% in 1998.

Civil rights-related complaints brought under Title VII of the
Civil Rights Act of 1964 or the Americans with Disabilities Act
of 1990 typically involve a compensatory award for economic
damages.  These types of damages may include losses associated
with back pay, interest on back pay, lost benefits, attorney
fees, some litigation costs, or other financial losses that the
court deems appropriate as a result of defendant  conduct.

The Civil Rights Act of 1991 extended what damages could be
sought by plaintiffs in these types of cases by allowing claims
for non economic compensatory damages as well as punitive
damages.  Non economic compensatory damages reimburse the
plaintiff for losses such as emotional pain, suffering,
inconvenience, mental anguish, future monetary losses, as well
as loss of enjoyment of life.

Punitive damages, on the other hand, are intended to punish a
defendant(s) who acted with recklessness, malice, or deceit and
are awarded in addition to compensatory damages except when the
respondent is a government, government agency, or political
subdivision.

The Civil Rights Act of 1991, however, capped the total amount
of compensatory and punitive damages that can be awarded,
depending on the size of the employer (the cap on awards does
not apply to complaints of ethnic or racial discrimination).

The sum of compensatory damages and punitive damages is not to
exceed $50,000 for employers with 15 to 100 employees; $100,000
for employers with 101 to 200 employees; $200,000 for employers
with 201 to 500 employees; and, $300,000 for employers with more
than 500 employees.

In this report, award amounts include both compensatory and
punitive damages.  The types of award amounts cannot be
distinguished in the data.

In addition, monetary information  presented in this report is
for civil rights cases in which monetary damages were awarded. 
Excluded from this analysis were civil rights-related complaints
in which only court costs or court costs and attorneys fees were
awarded.

Monetary damages awarded by juries and judges

Plaintiffs were more successful in jury than bench trials among
civil rights-related complaints disposed of by trial verdict in
U.S. district courts between 1990 and 1998.  On average,
plaintiffs won in about a third (35%) of jury trials annually
compared to about a quarter (23%) of bench trials (table 8). 

In addition, juries more often than judges awarded monetary
damages to plaintiff winners.  Juries awarded damages in 210 of
232 (91%) cases won by plaintiffs in 1990 while judges awarded
monetary damages in about 98 of 138 (71%) cases won by
plaintiffs.  In 1998, 396 of 494 (80%) plaintiff winners were
awarded monetary damages by juries while 50 of 89 (56%)
plaintiff winners were awarded monetary damages by judges.

Over time, however, plaintiff winners were less likely to have
been awarded monetary damages regardless of the type of trial. 
Among civil rights cases disposed of by jury trial, the
percentage of plaintiff winners who received monetary awards
declined from 91% in 1990 to 80% by 1998.  Among cases disposed
of by bench trial, the percentage of plaintiff winners awarded
monetary damages declined to 56% in 1998 from 71% in 1990
(figure 3).

Dollar amounts awarded to plaintiff winners also differed by
type of trial.  On average between 1990 and 1998, median jury
awards to plaintiff winners in civil rights trials were more
than twice the amount of damages awarded in bench trials (table
8).  The median award among jury trials in 1990 was $210,000
compared to a median award of $119,000 among bench trials.  In
1998, juries awarded a median of $129,000 to plaintiff winners
compared to $87,000 among bench trials.

In both jury and bench trials, award amounts of less than
$500,000 to plaintiff winners increased from just over half in
1990 to over three-quarters in 1998.  At the same time, award
amounts of $10 million or more increased from 2% to about 10%.  

Monetary damages awarded in different types of civil
rights-related trials

Plaintiff winners and awards varied across types of civil rights
cases disposed of by trial verdict in U.S. district courts.  The
percentage of plaintiff winners among employment trial cases
increased gradually from 24% in 1990 to 36% in 1998 (table 9).  

On average, about 8 in 10 of these plaintiff winners were
awarded monetary damages annually, with a median award of
$450,000 in 1990, which declined to $62,000 by 1993, and rose to
$137,000 in 1998.

By contrast, the percentage of plaintiff winners among civil
rights trials dealing with housing issues declined overall from
a high of 60% in 1991 to 30% in 1998 (table 9).  Each year about
three-fourths of plaintiff winners in housing trials were
awarded monetary damages with median award amounts that
declined from $150,000 in 1991, to $10,000 in 1995 and rose to
$65,000 in 1998.

Among welfare and voting civil rights-related trials disposed of
in U.S. district courts between 1990 and 1998, plaintiff winners
and monetary awards varied.  For example, among welfare cases
disposed of by trial verdict, the 1 plaintiff winner was awarded
$160,000 in damages in 1990, while in 1995, 1 out of 2 plaintiff
winners was awarded monetary damages of $40,000 (not shown in a
table).

Among the 48 plaintiff winners of voting rights cases disposed
of by trial verdict, 7 were awarded monetary damages.  All but 1
of these 7 were awarded less than $500,000 (not shown in a
table).

Employment discrimination trials in State courts of general
jurisdiction

According to BJS Bulletin Civil Trial Cases and Verdicts in
Large Counties, 1996, an estimated 311 employment discrimination
cases, 2% of all cases, were disposed of by trial in State courts
of general jurisdiction in the Nation's 75 largest counties during
1996 (note: Civil Trial Cases and Verdicts in Large Counties, 1996,
NCJ 173426.).

The most common type of case was one in which an individual sued
a corporation (62%) followed by those in which an individual
sued a State or local government (22%).

About 67% of the 311 cases were disposed of by a jury trial and
28% by a bench trial.  Plaintiffs were more successful in jury
trials -- winning 48% of the time, and less successful in bench
cases -- winning 26% of the time.

Plaintiff winners in employment discrimination cases were
awarded a total of $56,000,000 in compensatory and punitive
damages during 1996.  The median total award was $200,000. 
About 43% of plaintiff winners were awarded over $250,000 and
12% were awarded $1 million or more.

About 25 of the 128 plaintiff winners were awarded punitive
damages with a median of $205,000.  In about 8 of the 25 cases
in which punitive damages were awarded, the punitive awards were
greater than the compensatory damage award.

Civil trial cases in large counties, 1996 --15,683--Employment
discrimination cases -- 311 -- Plaintiffs won -- 128 -- Punitive
damages awarded --25.

Half of employment discrimination trials took 22 months or more
to go from filing of the complaint to final verdict or judgment.
Within 2 years about 56% of cases were disposed of.  

Criminal civil rights prosecutions 

In addition to civil cases dealing with civil rights-related
issues in which the U.S. Government is the plaintiff, the U.S.
Government also prosecutes criminal matters involving the
deprivation of federally protected rights.

Examples of criminal matters prosecuted include: allegations of
official misconduct by Federal, State and local law enforcement
personnel; acts of racial, ethnic, and religious violence where
defendants were members of organized hate groups; interference
with the exercise of religious beliefs and the destruction of
religious property; obstruction of entrance to reproductive
health care clinics; and the victimization of migrant workers
and other minorities in violation of involuntary servitude and
peonage statutes.

In 1998 U.S. attorneys concluded investigations against 2,153
suspects, up from 1,916 suspects in 1994 (note:  Data prior to
1994 are not directly comparable since they include appellate
cases handled by U.S. attorneys.).  Suspects in civil rights
criminal matters concluded accounted for about 2% of suspects
investigated in all criminal matters concluded annually.

The percentage of suspects in civil rights criminal matters
concluded that were prosecuted in U.S. district courts increased
steadily from 4.6% in 1990 to 6.9% in 1997. 

Suspects in civil rights criminal matters concluded
                                                  Percent
         All suspects              Prosecuted                 Disposed
         in criminal               in U.S                     by U.S. 
 Year    matters concluded  Number district court  Declined   magistrates

    1994       94980        1916      4.6           95.4        0.1
    1995      102309        1904      5.0           94.9        0.1
    1996       98454        1559      6.2           93.6        0.2
    1997       99459        1684      6.9           93.0        0.1
    1998      106022        2153      5.5           94.3        0.1

Note: These data are not directly comparable to data in 1993 or prior
which included appellate cases handled by U.S. attorneys.
Source: Compendium of Federal Justice Statistics,
Bureau of Justice Statistics.

In the vast majority of matters investigated, the prosecutor
declined to prosecute or did not file a case.  Declinations
averaged about 94% per year between 1990 and 1998.  Less than 1%
of matters were disposed by U.S. magistrates annually.

For more information about Federal criminal cases, see the
Compendium of Federal Justice Statistics or access the
Federal Justice Statistics Resource Center located on the
Internet at http://fjsrc.urban.org.

Case processing time

The average number of months from filing of civil rights
complaints to disposition by trial verdict declined slightly
from 15 months in 1990 to 13 months in 1998 (table 10).  Half of
the complaints were disposed of in 11 months or more.

In 1998, 88% of civil rights-related complaints went from filing
to termination within 2 years -- up from 82% in 1990.  Within 4
years, 96% of civil rights-related complaints were terminated in
1990 compared to 99% by 1998 (figure 4).

The median case processing time for civil rights-related
complaints disposed of by trial verdict declined slightly from
20 to 19 months between 1990 and 1998 (not shown in a table). 

The drop in the time from filing to trial verdict was due
primarily to a slight downward trend in the case processing time
among employment cases disposed of by trial verdict with a
median of 20 months in 1990, down to 18 months by 1998 (not
shown in a table).

On average during the time period, the median case processing
time for housing cases disposed of by trial was 16 months,
voting cases 20, and welfare cases 26 months (not shown in a
table).

Methodology

The primary source of data presented in this report is the
Administrative Office of the U.S. Courts Civil Master File. 
Data tabulations were prepared from the BJS staff analysis of
source agency data sets.  The Federal civil rights categories
used in this report are based on the codes established by the
Administrative Office of the United States Courts (AOUSC).  Case
level information is provided by individual U.S. district
courts, which submit data to the AOUSC.  As a result, no
detailed information is available about civil rights-related
cases coded as "other."  For civil rights cases that involved
more than one action filed, the AOUSC instructs the plaintiff's
attorney, if the cause fits more than one nature of suit, to
select the most definitive.  It is the first nature of the suit
code that was used in the analysis for this report.

For civil rights-related complaints where more than one basis of
jurisdiction applies, the case was coded according to the
highest priority jurisdiction.  Cases in which the U.S.
Government is the plaintiff have the highest priority, followed
by U.S. Government as defendant, then Federal questions.

Calculations pertaining to trial winners and their award amounts
were based on cases for which the winner and award amount was
known and does not include instances where both parties won the
case in part.  Differences between known amounts and those
unknown are not quantifiable.  Winners were unknown in less than
1% of trial cases yearly from 1990 to 1998.  In 4% or fewer of
cases disposed of by trial per year, both the plaintiff and
defendant won the case. 

Although the courts record the title and section of the U.S.
code for each case, this data field is not required by the AOUSC
Statistics Division.  It is not recommended for statistical
analysis.  For a more detailed explanation of the difficulties
associated with the title and section fields of the AOUSC civil
file, see the Report to the Subcommittee on Judicial Statistics
on "Increase in Civil Rights Filings," prepared by the
Analytical Services Office of the Administrative Office of the
U.S. Courts.

Appendix A.  Selected Federal civil rights statutes 

Employment

The Civil Rights Acts of 1866 and 1871 (42 USC Sec. 1983; 42 USC
Sec. 1981).  Following the U.S. Civil War (1860-65), these civil
rights acts were established to enforce the 13th, 14th, and 15th
amendments to the U.S. Constitution.  The 1866 act prohibits
racial discrimination in the making and enforcement of contracts
among public and private employers.  The 1871 act deals with
civil rights violations by government entities.  In recent
years, these civil rights acts increasingly have been used in
employment discrimination cases.

The Equal Pay Act of 1963 (29 USC Sec. 201) requires employers
to pay men and women equal pay for equal working conditions.

Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (42 USC Sec. 2000)
prohibits employers with 15 employees or more from
discriminating on the basis of race, color, religion, sex, or
national origin.

The Age Discrimination in Employment Act of 1967 (29 USC Sec.
621-634) prohibits discrimination on the basis of age against
persons 40 years of age or older.  This act applies to employers
with 20 employees or more.  This Act was amended by the Older
Workers Benefit Protection Act in 1990 (29 USC Sec. 626f) to
ensure that older workers have complete and accurate information
about their benefits and are not pressured into waiving their
rights under the Age Discrimination in Employment Act (ADEA).

The Rehabilitation Act of 1973 (29 USC Sec. 793-794) prohibits
government contractors with contracts of $2,500 or more from
discriminating against individuals with physical or mental
handicaps.  

In addition, government contracts pursuant to Executive Order
11246 must contain an equal opportunity clause and must develop
and maintain an affirmative action plan.  Vietnam veterans may
benefit from affirmative action plans in government contracts
under the Vietnam Veterans Readjustment Assistance Act of 1974,
and the employment of aliens is dealt with in the Immigration
Reform and Control Act.

The Pregnancy Discrimination Act of 1978 (42 USC Sec. 2000)
amended Title VII to prohibit discrimination against employees
or job applicants on the basis of pregnancy and required
employers to treat pregnant employees in the same way as
employees with other medical disabilities.

The Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 (29 USC Sec.
12101-12213) prohibits discrimination against individuals with
disabilities in employment, public services, and public
accommodations.

The Civil Rights Act of 1991 (42 USC Sec. 2000e) amended several
of the Federal employment discrimination laws including Title
VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, the Civil Rights Act of
1866, the (ADEA), the Rehabilitation Act, and the Americans
with Disabilities Act (ADA). 

The act, for example, amended Title VII and the ADA to provide
the right to a jury trial and punitive damages (not to exceed
$300,000); it amended the Civil Rights Act of 1866 to prohibit
racial harassment in the workplace and in post-hire employment
conduct rather than just in hiring and promotions.

Housing and accommodations

The Civil Rights Act of 1866 (42 USC Sec. 1982) ensures that
all citizens of the United States shall have the same right, in
every State and Territory, as is enjoyed by white citizens to
inherit, purchase, lease, sell, hold, and convey real and
personal property.

The Fair Housing Act (42 USC Sec. 3601-3619) prohibits
discrimination in various types of housing transactions such as
sales, renting, and financing, on the basis of race, religion,
sex, or national origin.

The Fair Housing Amendments Act of 1988 expanded the Fair Housing
Act to prohibit discriminatory housing practices based on handicap
and familial status and provided for enhanced government enforcement
of the act, including the recovery of monetary penalties in cases
where discrimination is found.

The Equal Credit Opportunity Act (15 USC Sec. 1691) prohibits
creditors from discriminating against credit applicants on the
basis of race, color, religion, national origin, sex, marital
status, age, because all or part of the applicant's income
derives from any public assistance program, or because the
applicant has in good faith exercised any right under the
Consumer Credit Protection Act.

Title II of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (42 USC Sec. 2000)
prohibits discrimination based on race, color, religion, and
national origin in places of public accommodation, such as
hotels, restaurants, and certain places of entertainment.

Voting

The Voting Rights Act of 1965 (42 USC Sec. 1973 to 1973bb-1)
protects racial and language minorities from discrimination in
the electoral process and from being denied the fair opportunity
to elect candidates of their choice.

The Voting Accessibility for the Elderly and Handicapped Act of
1984 (42 USC Sec. 1973ee to 1973ee-6) ensures access for
handicapped and elderly individuals to polling places for
Federal elections.

The Uniformed and Overseas Citizens Absentee Voting Act of 1986
(42 USC Sec. 1973ff to 1973ff-6) enables members of the Armed
Forces and other U.S. citizens who are abroad to register and
vote absentee in presidential and congressional elections.

The National Voter Registration Act of 1993 (42 USC Sec. 1973gg
to 1973gg-10), commonly referred to as the Motor Voter law,
improves access to voter registration by requiring States to
provide simultaneous voter registration and driver's license
applications, provide a mail-in application, and make
registration available at various government agencies.

Box

The Bureau of Justice Statistics is the statistical agency of
the U.S. Department of Justice.  Jan M. Chaiken, Ph.D., is
director.

BJS Special Reports address a specific topic in depth from one
or more datasets that cover many topics.  Marika F. X. Litras
wrote this report.  Lea Gifford provided statistical review. 
Maurice Galloway and Ellyn Vail of the Administrative Office of
the U.S. Courts, Mark Posner of the U.S. Department of Justice,
Civil Rights Division, William B. Fenton of the Employment
Litigation Section, David H. Hunter of the Voting Section of the
Civil Rights Division, and BJS Statisticians Carol J. DeFrances
and John Scalia provided substantive comments. Rhonda C. Keith
produced and edited the report under the supervision of Tom
Hester.  Jayne Robinson prepared the report for final
publication.

January 2000, NCJ 173427

End of box

Box

The primary source of data for tables presented in this report
is the Administrative Office of the U.S. Courts Civil Master
File.  This data file is archived for the Administrative Office
of the U.S. Courts by the Federal Judicial Center.

The AOUSC data are based on information received from the U.S.
district courts regarding the filing and termination of cases
and appeals in the Federal courts.  These data are archived at
the National Archive of Criminal Justice Data (NACJD) "Federal
Court Cases: Integrated Data Base" (Study #8429).  Data can be
obtained from the archive through 1-800-999-0960 or
http://www.icpsr.umich.edu/NACJD/home.html

The archive may also be accessed through the BJS website, where
the report, data, and supporting documentation are available:
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/

End of box


End of report
1/14/99 th, rck
2/22/00 pm


