U.S. Department of Justice Office of Justice Programs

Bureau of Justice Statistics

Compendium of State Privacy and Security Legislation: 1997  Overview

     Current status of the law
     Summary of State statutes
       by category
       by State

Criminal History Record Information

April 1998, NCJ-168964

------------------------------------------------------------------
This report is one in a series.  More recent editions
may be available.  To view a list of all in the series
go to http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/pubalp2.htm#cspsl
-------------------------------------------------------------------

U.S. Department of Justice Bureau of Justice Statistics

Jan M. Chaiken, Ph.D. Director

This report was prepared by SEARCH, The National Consortium for
Justice Information and Statistics, Kenneth E. Bischoff,
Chairman, and Gary R. Cooper, Executive Director.  The project
director was Sheila J. Barton, Deputy Director.  Paul L.
Woodard, Senior Counsel, prepared the report.  Twyla R.
Cunningham, Manager, Corporate Communications, edited the
report. Jane L. Bassett, Publishing Assistant, and Terri E.
Nyberg, Executive Secretary, provided layout and design
assistance.  The project was conducted under the direction of
Carol G. Kaplan, Chief, Criminal History Improvement Programs,
Bureau of Justice Statistics.

Report of work performed under BJS Cooperative Agreement No.
96-BJ-CX-K010 awarded to SEARCH Group, Incorporated, 7311
Greenhaven Drive, Suite 145, Sacramento, California  95831. 
Contents of this document do not necessarily reflect the views
or policies of the Bureau of Justice Statistics or the U.S.
Department of Justice.

Copyright SEARCH, The National Consortium for Justice
Information and Statistics, 1997

The U.S. Department of Justice authorizes any person to
reproduce, publish, translate or otherwise use all or any part
of the copyrighted material in the publication with the
exception of those items indicating that they are copyrighted by
or reprinted by permission of any source other than SEARCH, The
National Consortium for Justice Information and Statistics.

--------------
Foreword
--------------

This updated edition of the Compendium of State Privacy and
Security Legislation, 1997 Overview is the tenth in the series
of Bureau of Justice Statistics' publications referencing and
analyzing State laws, administrative regulations, and attorneys
general's opinions relating to the security, confidentiality,
accuracy and completeness of criminal history records.  The
first Compendium was published in 1974 in conjunction with the
development and issuance by the Law Enforcement Assistance
Administration of the Department of Justice regulations on
privacy and security of criminal history record information. 
Subsequent editions have been published in 1978, 1979, 1981,
1984, 1987, 1989, 1992, 1994 and now the current 1997 edition. 

The purpose of the volumes continues to be assistance to
legislators, planners, administrators, legal analysts and other
researchers in reviewing and contrasting the varying approaches
the States have taken to issues concerned with the maintenance
and use of criminal records.  With such information available,
States are able to take a more enlightened approach to criminal
record policymaking.

It is the hope of the Bureau of Justice Statistics that this
report will be a resource for policymakers in improving and
promoting the Nation's criminal history records.  The efficient
operation of complete and accurate record systems serves to
benefit us all. 

Jan M. Chaiken, Ph.D. Director 





TABLE OF CONTENTS

Introduction  

Section 1:  Review and analysis   

A.   Current status of the law

B.   Analysis of critical issues  

     1.   Data quality  

     2.   Access to criminal history records

             for noncriminal justice purposes    

      Section 2:  Classification category definitions 

Section 3:  Summary tables of statutes and regulations by

 classification category

A.   Survey comparison of changes in State

       statutes and regulations by classification category 

B.   Summary of State statutes and regulations by 

       classification category    

     1.   State regulatory authority   

     2.   Privacy and security council 

     3.   Dissemination regulations    

     4.   Inspection    

     5.   Right to challenge 

     6.   Judicial review of challenged information    

     7.   Purging nonconviction information 

     8.   Purging conviction information       

     9.   Sealing nonconviction information 

     10.  Sealing conviction information    

     11.  Removal of disqualifications 

     12.  Right to state nonexistence of record  

     13.  Research access    

     14.  Accuracy and completeness    

     15.  Dedication    

     16.  Civil remedies

     17.  Criminal penalties 

     18.  Public records

     19.  Separation of files

     20.  Regulation of intelligence collection  

     21.  Regulation of intelligence dissemination    

     22.  Security 

     23.  Transaction logs   

     24.  Training employees 

     25.  Listing of information systems    

     26.  Freedom of Information Act   

          (including criminal justice information)

           27. Freedom of Information Act   

          (excluding criminal justice information)

     28.  Central State repository

Section 4: Summary tables of statutes and

   regulations by State 

State code titles  

Alabama  
Alaska   
Arizona  
Arkansas 
California    
Colorado 
Connecticut
Delaware
District of Columbia
Florida
Georgia
Hawaii
Idaho
Illinois
Indiana
Iowa
Kansas
Kentucky
Louisiana
Maine
Maryland 
Massachusetts
Michigan 
Minnesota
Mississippi
Missouri
Montana
Nebraska
Nevada
New Hampshire
New Jersey
New Mexico
New York
North Carolina
North Dakota
Ohio

Oklahoma
Oregon
Pennsylvania
Puerto Rico
Rhode Island
South Carolina
South Dakota
Tennessee
Texas
Utah
Vermont
Virgin Islands
Virginia
Washington
West Virginia
Wisconsin
Wyoming


The full text (approximately 1,500 pages, order No. NCJ-151623) 
of legislation cited in this document  is available in
microfiche for $2 or in hard copy for $184 from: 

Bureau of Justice Statistics Clearinghouse P.O. Box 179
Annapolis Junction, Maryland  20701-0179 1-800-732-3277

-------------------------
Introduction

The Compendium series
-------------------------

This Compendium is the latest in a series of 10 U.S. Department
of Justice publications that reference and analyze State laws
and regulations relating to privacy and security of criminal
history record information. -1 [The term "criminal history
record information" is defined in the Department of Justice
regulations to include "information collected by criminal
justice agencies on individuals consisting of identifiable
descriptions and notations of arrests, detentions, indictments,
informations, or other formal criminal charges, and any
disposition arising therefrom, sentencing, correctional
supervision, and release."  28 C.F.R. ¤ 20.3(b) (1993).] These
compendia include:  (1) compilations of State laws and
administrative regulations, and (2) analyses of findings and
trends reflected in that body of law and policy documents.  The
purpose of these compendia is to assist legislators, planners,
administrators, legal analysts and other interested individuals
in reviewing State statutes and regulations governing the
maintenance and use of criminal records and in analyzing
national trends in this important area.  Comparing and
contrasting the various approaches reflected in the many State
laws and regulations cited in these documents should assist
planners and administrators to develop effective and fair
policies for their jurisdictions.  By facilitating such
comparisons and by furthering research in this area, the
compendia are intended to promote the evolution of enlightened
privacy and information policy.

--------------------------------------------
The first compendium was published 
by the Law Enforcement Assistance 
--------------------------------------------

Administration (LEAA) in 1974 as part of its efforts connected
with the promulgation of regulations covering the privacy and
security of criminal history record information. -2 [U.S.
Department of Justice, Law Enforcement Assistance
Administration, Office of General Counsel, Compendium of State
Laws Governing the Privacy and Security of Criminal Justice
Information (Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office,
1974).] A second compendium, published in 1978, documented the
growth of State privacy and security laws subsequent to the
earlier survey. -3 [U.S. Department of Justice, Law Enforcement
Assistance Administration, National Criminal Justice Information
and Statistics Service, Privacy and Security of Criminal History
Information, Compendium of State Legislation (Washington, D.C.:
Government Printing Office, January 1978).] At that time, LEAA
also published a companion document that provided an overview of
the significant changes in State laws that had occurred, largely
as a result of the impact of the Federal regulations, and
analyzed policy issues in specific areas of privacy and security
law. -4 [U.S. Department of Justice, Law Enforcement Assistance
Administration, Privacy and Security of Criminal History
Information: An Analysis of Privacy Issues (Washington, D.C.:
Government Printing Office, 1978).] Updating supplements to
those compendia were published in 1979 and in 1981, covering
State legislation and regulations up to July 1981.-5 [U.S.
Department of Justice, Law Enforcement Assistance
Administration, National Criminal Justice Information and
Statistics Service, Privacy and Security of Criminal History
Information: Compendium of State Legislation, 1979 Supplement,
by SEARCH Group, Inc. (Washington, D.C.: Government Printing
Office, 1979); U.S. Department of Justice, Bureau of Justice
Statistics, Privacy and Security of Criminal History
Information: Compendium of State Legislation, 1981 Supplement,
by SEARCH Group, Inc. (Washington, D.C.: Government Printing
Office, 1982).] The 1984, 1987, 1989, 1992  and 1994 volumes
replaced all of the earlier volumes in the series and referenced
all State laws and regulations up to the dates of publication.
-6 [U.S. Department of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics,
Privacy and Security of Criminal History Information: Compendium
of State Privacy and Security Legislation, 1984 Edition: 
Overview, by SEARCH Group, Inc. (Washington, D.C.: Government
Printing Office, September 1985); Privacy and Security of
Criminal  History Information: Compendium of State Privacy and
Security Legislation, 1987 Overview, by SEARCH Group, Inc.
(Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office, August 1988);
Privacy and Security of Criminal History Information: Compendium
of State Privacy and Security Legislation, 1989 Overview, by
SEARCH Group, Inc. (Washington, D.C.: Government Printing
Office, April 1990); Criminal History Record Information: 
Compendium of State Privacy and Security Legislation, 1992, by
SEARCH, The National Consortium for Justice Information and
Statistics (Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office, July
1992); Privacy and Security of Criminal History Information: 
Compendium of State Privacy and Security Legislation, 1994
Overview, by SEARCH, The National Consortium for Justice
Information and Statistics (Washington, D.C.: Government
Printing Office, January 1995).]



Scope of this Compendium

This Compendium is an up-to-date and complete document that
replaces all of the earlier volumes in the series.  It
references all current State laws up to July 1997, as well as
regulations, executive orders and opinions of State attorneys
general where applicable.  It also includes a review and
analysis section containing a general overview of State laws and
regulations and a discussion of trends and conclusions
concerning two especially important information policy issues:
(1)  requirements imposed on criminal justice agencies to
maintain record quality, and (2) dissemination and use of
criminal history information for noncriminal justice purposes.

Since this volume compiles the material from previous compendia,
as well as more recent enactments, the sheer bulk of this body
of material precludes continuing the practice of reproducing the
complete text of the State laws and regulations.  The complete
set of statutes is available on microfiche or in hard copy
format from the Bureau of Justice Statistics Clearinghouse in
Annapolis Junction, Maryland.  (A fee applies for either format.
 See page vii for ordering information.)  A full, hard-copy
library of these laws, regulations and other materials is
maintained by SEARCH, The National Consortium for Justice
Information and Statistics, at its offices in Sacramento,
California.  Copies of specific enactments may be ordered by
mail or telephone. -7 [SEARCH is located at 7311 Greenhaven
Drive, Suite 145, Sacramento, California  95831, (916) 392-2550.]

This Compendium contains four sections.  Section 1 sets out an
overview of State criminal history record laws and an analysis
of State requirements relating to data quality and noncriminal
justice access and use.  Section 2 defines the 28 subject-matter
categories into which the laws and regulations are classified in
the tables in the Compendium.  These categories are the same as
those used in previous volumes.  Section 3 sets out summary
tables showing trends and developments in criminal justice
information law and policy by classification category.  Section
4 sets out summary tables of criminal justice information
statutes and regulations by State, along with a list of the
titles of the State codes (see page 47) from which the citations
were extracted.  All of the tables in Sections 3 and 4 set out
complete citations to the official State codes or other State
compilations where the full text of the laws and regulations may
be found.  These citations should be used in ordering copies of
particular provisions from BJS or SEARCH.

The methodology used in compiling the Compendium included a
survey of State officials concerned with criminal record
programs and policy, followed by extensive library research in
the State codes to verify and augment survey responses.  The
survey and research compiled the laws of 53 jurisdictions: the
50 States, the District of Columbia, Puerto Rico and the Virgin
Islands.  In the Compendium, all of these jurisdictions are
referred to as "States."

--------------------------------------------
How to use the Compendium
--------------------------------------------

Because this volume is a complete compilation of all prior
compendia and supplements, it will not be necessary to consult
prior volumes.

To facilitate use of this volume, the laws and regulations have
been classified into 28 subject-matter categories that are
defined in Section 2.  Numerous tables are included in Sections
3 and 4 to assist readers in finding laws dealing with
particular subjects or to determine which aspects of information
policy are addressed by particular States.  The summary tables
in Section 3 list citations to all State statutes and
regulations under each of the 28 classification categories.  For
example, the table for the category "State regulatory authority"
(page 17) indicates which of the States have provisions
establishing or designating an agency to promulgate statewide
regulations governing criminal history records and provides the
legal citations to the provisions.  In addition to finding
particular citations, the reader is able to quickly identify the
concentration of States addressing a particular policy area.

Another view of State privacy and security trends is reflected
in the table on page 15 titled "Survey comparison of changes in
State statutes and regulations by classification category."  At
a glance, the table indicates the degree of attention that a
particular area of information policy has received in the States
over the past 23 years, as reflected by surveys conducted in
1974, 1977, 1979, 1981, 1984, 1987, 1989, 1991 and 1994.

A summary table for each State is included in Section 4.  These
tables use the 28 classification categories referred to above
and set out citations to all of the laws and regulations of
particular States.  If no entry appears under one or more
classification categories for a particular State, it means that
the State has no law or regulation addressing that policy area,
or that research has failed to discover any.

The State summary tables presented in Section 4 include
subdivisions of four classification categories.  Category 3,
"Dissemination Regulations," is subdivided to show whether the
States permit or prohibit access by various types of groups or
individuals (criminal justice agencies, governmental noncriminal
justice agencies and private agencies or individuals) to various
types of information (conviction, nonconviction and arrest
information).  Category 4, "Inspection," is subdivided to show
whether the States permit an individual to inspect his criminal
history record; inspect his record and take notes; or inspect
his record and obtain a copy of information contained in that
record.  Category 14, "Accuracy and Completeness," is subdivided
to permit statutes to be classified as relating to disposition
reporting, auditing, or other accuracy and completeness
requirements.  Finally, Category 22, "Security," is subdivided
to enable statutes to be classified as relating to physical,
administrative or computer security.  These classification
subdivisions should present a more accurate and detailed view of
State legislative and regulatory activity in these four
important policy areas and will make the Compendium a more
useful research tool.

--------------------------------------------
Section 1:  Review and analysis

A.  Current status of the law
--------------------------------------------

In the early 1970s, at a time when public concern about privacy,
automation and mushrooming information systems was at its
height, Congress considered several legislative proposals that
would have imposed a uniform nationwide information management
scheme for State and local handling of criminal history record
information.  Although Congress did not enact comprehensive
legislation, in 1973 it did adopt an amendment to the Omnibus
Crime Control and Safe Streets Act of 1968 (now Section 812(b)
of the Justice Assistance Act of 1984; Pub. L. 98-473). The
amendment provided in general terms that all criminal history
record information -8 [Investigative and intelligence
information is not covered.  Wanted person information, original
records of entry, court records or traffic offense records are
specifically exempted from coverage of the Department of Justice
regulations.] collected, maintained or disseminated by State and
local criminal justice agencies with financial support made
available under the Act must be kept complete and secure, must
be made available for review and challenge by record subjects,
and must be used only for law enforcement and other lawful
purposes.

In 1975, the U.S. Department of Justice's Law Enforcement
Assistance Administration issued comprehensive information
systems regulations to implement the amendment.  These
regulations, usually referred to as the Department of Justice
(DOJ) regulations, are applicable to all State and local
criminal justice agencies that have used funding for the support
of criminal history record systems.  The regulations impose
minimum general requirements for criminal history information
management, leaving the development of specific programs and
procedures to State legislation and policymaking.  As intended,
the regulations have been instrumental in stimulating many
States to enact their own laws to comply with the requirements
of the Federal government.  In addition, the regulations
triggered a reassessment of existing State privacy and security
laws that has gone beyond mere compliance, as evidenced by the
fact that about half of the States have enacted comprehensive
criminal history laws, some of which are in some respects
stricter than the requirements of the regulations.

Today, virtually all of the States have enacted legislation
governing at least  the dissemination of criminal history
records.  Although the approaches differ considerably, virtually
all of the States have followed the lead of the regulations in
distinguishing between information referring to convictions and
current arrests, on the one hand, and nonconviction data on the
other (information referring to cases without recorded
dispositions or with dispositions favorable to the accused). 
Most States have placed stricter limits on the release of
nonconviction data for noncriminal justice purposes, such as
background screening for employment and licensing purposes. 
Virtually all of the States also have established procedures to
permit record subjects to review their records and to institute
procedures to correct inaccuracies.  Finally, virtually all of
the States have established security procedures complying
generally with the requirements of the regulations.  In these
areas, as in other areas of record management, the regulations
do not require the enactment of legislation, so long as adequate
operational procedures are implemented by regulation, agency
rule or other appropriate means.  Thus, the numbers of State
statutes in these areas cited in this volume do not fully
reflect the significant progress made in these areas of privacy
protection.

Two areas of criminal history record information management
merit special analysis.  These areas are:   (1) data quality and
(2) dissemination of criminal records for noncriminal justice
purposes.  They are discussed in Section B.

--------------------------------------------
B.  Analysis of critical issues

1.  Data quality
--------------------------------------------

As noted earlier, the broad language of the 1973 Congressional
amendment provided the basis for comprehensive regulations
issued by LEAA in 1975 covering all State and local criminal
history record systems supported in whole or in part by Federal
funding. -9 ["Criminal Justice Information Systems Regulations,"
28 C.F.R. Part 20.] Among other things, the regulations require
all covered agencies to implement operational procedures
designed to ensure that criminal history record  information is
complete and accurate. -10 [28 C.F.R. ¤ 20.21(a)(1993).]

The regulations state that to be complete, a record of an arrest
must contain information concerning any disposition occurring
within the State within 90 days after the disposition has
occurred.  In order to promote the dissemination of complete
criminal history records, the regulations require that State and
local agencies establish procedures to query the State central
repository prior to disseminating information unless the agency
is assured that it is disseminating the most up-to-date
disposition data or time is of the essence and the repository is
technically incapable of responding within the necessary time
period. -11 [28 C.F.R. ¤ 20.21(a)(1)(1993).]

The provisions of the regulations dealing with accuracy define
accuracy literally to mean that "no record containing criminal
history record information shall contain erroneous information."
-12 [28 C.F.R. ¤ 20.21(a)(2)(1993).] In order to promote
accuracy, two types of operational procedures are required:  (1)
a process of data collection, entry, storage and systematic
audit that will minimize the possibility of recording and
storing inaccurate information; and (2) procedures for sending
notices of corrections to all criminal justice agencies known to
have received inaccurate information of a material nature.  As a
practical matter, this provision requires agencies to create and
maintain dissemination logs so that corrections can be sent to
recipients of erroneous information.

Finally, the regulations require agencies to give criminal
record subjects an opportunity, upon  request, to review their
criminal history record information for purposes of ensuring
accuracy and completeness. -13 [28 C.F.R. ¤ 20.21(g)(1993).]

--------------------------------------------
State statutory provisions
--------------------------------------------

As noted earlier, the regulations do not require the States to
enact legislation dealing with accuracy and completeness.  Many
States, however, have chosen to deal with the problem by State
law.  In 1974, just prior to publication of the regulations,
only 14 States had adopted statutory data quality safeguards. 
By 1978, 2 years after the adoption of the LEAA regulations, 41
States had added data quality provisions of one kind or another
to their criminal history record statutes.  That number
increased to 45 States in 1979, to 49 States in 1981, to 51
States in 1984, and to 52 States in 1991 through 1997. -14 [As
used in the Compendium, the term "State" includes the District
of Columbia, Puerto Rico and the Virgin Islands.  All except the
Virgin Islands have enacted data quality provisions.]

Although the regulations do not expressly require that the
States establish State central criminal record repositories, the
Commentary published with the regulations noted that the
provisions on accuracy and completeness were written with State
central repositories in mind.  Indeed, the provisions of the
regulations dealing with completeness state that complete
records "should" be maintained in State central repositories.
-15 [28 C.F.R. ¤ 20.21(a)(1)(1993).] Today every State, as well
as the District of Columbia and Puerto Rico, have established
State central repositories and most of them conform generally to
the model described in the Commentary.  In all of those States,
pursuant to statute, regulation or established practice,
criminal justice agencies throughout the State are required to
report arrest and disposition data to the State repositories for
all serious offenses (usually felonies and serious
misdemeanors).  All of the States have statutory provisions
expressly requiring the reporting of arrest information.  In
most cases, arrest information is reported on arrest fingerprint
cards, which include the subject's name and identification
information, arrest event information (date, place, etc.),
arrest charges and inked fingerprint impressions.

All 52 of the jurisdictions with data quality provisions also
have adopted legislation that imposes some form of disposition
reporting requirement on some types of State and local agencies.
-16 ["Disposition" is used here to mean post-arrest case
processing information, including information relating to
prosecution, court adjudication, sentencing and correctional
status.] Many of these statutes (for example, Alaska,
California, Kansas, Maryland, Missouri and Texas) are quite
specific as to the types of data to be reported, the responsible
agency or official, time requirements and sanctions.  Others,
however, merely state a general reporting requirement with
little or no detail as to how or by whom reporting is to be
accomplished, leaving these particulars to be spelled out in
regulations.

Even in those States with more detailed reporting laws, not all
types of information are covered.  Only 29 States specifically
require the reporting of prosecutor information to the central
repository -17 [Alabama, Alaska, Arkansas, District of Columbia,
Georgia, Illinois, Iowa, Kansas, Kentucky, Louisiana, Maryland,
Massachusetts, Minnesota, Mississippi, Missouri, Nebraska,
Nevada, New Jersey, New York, North Dakota, Oregon,
Pennsylvania, Rhode Island, Texas, Utah, Vermont, Washington,
West Virginia and Wyoming.] and in only a few of these States
are prosecutors required to report to the repository all of the
charges that were filed, modified or dropped.  Forty-five State
statutes require the courts (customarily the court clerks) to
report disposition information to the central repository. -18
[Alabama, Alaska, Arkansas, Arizona, California, Colorado,
Connecticut, Delaware, District of Columbia, Florida, Georgia,
Idaho, Illinois, Indiana, Iowa, Kansas, Kentucky, Louisiana,
Maine, Maryland, Michigan, Minnesota, Mississippi, Missouri,
Montana, Nebraska, Nevada, New Hampshire, New Jersey, New York,
North Carolina, North Dakota, Ohio, Oregon, Pennsylvania, Rhode
Island, South Carolina, Texas, Utah, Vermont, Virginia,
Washington, West Virginia, Wisconsin and Wyoming.] Forty-five
States require correctional agencies to report correctional
information, such as reception, release, parole, escape or
death. -19 [Alabama, Alaska, Arizona, Arkansas, California,
Colorado, Connecticut, Delaware, District of Columbia, Florida,
Georgia, Hawaii, Idaho, Illinois, Indiana, Iowa, Kansas,
Kentucky, Louisiana, Maryland, Massachusetts, Michigan,
Minnesota, Mississippi, Missouri, Montana, Nebraska, Nevada, New
Hampshire, New Jersey, New York, North Dakota, Ohio, Oregon,
Pennsylvania, Rhode Island, South Dakota, Texas, Utah, Vermont,
Virginia, Washington, West Virginia, Wisconsin and Wyoming.]

Other problems with many of the disposition reporting laws
include the failure of States to impose time limits for the
reporting of disposition data and the lack of meaningful
penalties for failure to comply.  Only 29 States prescribe
statutory time limits for the reporting of disposition data, -20
[Alabama, Alaska, Arizona, California, Delaware, Georgia, Idaho,
Illinois, Indiana, Iowa, Maryland, Mississippi, Missouri,
Montana, Nebraska, Nevada, New Jersey, New York, North Carolina,
North Dakota, Ohio, Pennsylvania, Puerto Rico, South Carolina,
Texas, Utah, Virginia, Washington and Wisconsin.] and many of
these apply only to certain types of data.  Twenty-two States
have adopted statutory provisions which expressly prescribe
administrative, civil or criminal sanctions for violations of
disposition reporting requirements, -21 [Alabama, Alaska,
Arkansas, Connecticut, Delaware, Georgia, Kansas, Louisiana,
Maine, Michigan, Minnesota, Montana, New Hampshire, New York,
North Carolina, North Dakota, Oregon, Pennsylvania, Puerto Rico,
Utah, Vermont and West Virginia.] but research has failed to
discover a single reported decision in which a criminal justice
official has actually been penalized for failing to comply with
disposition reporting requirements. -22 [See, SEARCH Group,
Inc., Liability for Mishandling Criminal Records (Sacramento,
California: SEARCH Group, Inc., April 1984).  There are reported
decisions, however, penalizing officers for failing to file
other types of reports, and one decision penalizing an agency
for failing to make a required entry in a dissemination log.]

Statutes that impose transaction log requirements are the most
common type of data quality provision other than disposition
reporting.  Thirty-three States have adopted statutory
provisions that require criminal justice agencies to maintain
logs identifying the recipients of criminal history record
information and the dates of the disseminations. -23 [Twenty-two
of the 33 States that maintain dissemination logs have specific
and relatively detailed transaction log requirements. The States
are:  Alabama, Alaska, California, Connecticut, Florida,
Georgia, Hawaii, Illinois, Kansas, Kentucky, Louisiana,
Massachusetts, Montana, Nebraska, Nevada, New Hampshire, North
Carolina, Pennsylvania, South Carolina, Vermont, Virginia and
Washington.] Statutes in 30 States require the central
repositories to conduct some type of audit. -24 [Alaska,
Arizona, Arkansas, California, Connecticut, Delaware, Florida,
Georgia, Hawaii, Illinois, Kansas, Kentucky, Louisiana,
Maryland, Massachusetts, Missouri, Montana, Nebraska, Nevada,
New Hampshire, North Carolina, Oregon, Pennsylvania, Puerto
Rico, South Carolina, South Dakota, Texas, Virginia, Washington
and Wyoming.] Auditing is generally viewed as one of the most
effective data quality procedures.  Statutes in 23 of these
States require the central repository to conduct continuing or
periodic audits of State and local agencies that submit records
to the repository. -25 [Alaska, Arizona, Connecticut, Delaware,
Florida, Georgia, Hawaii, Kentucky, Louisiana, Maryland,
Missouri, Montana, New Hampshire, North Carolina, Oregon,
Pennsylvania, Puerto Rico, South Carolina, South Dakota, Texas,
Virginia, Washington and Wyoming.] The scope of this kind of
local agency audit usually includes:  (1) adherence by the local
agency to Federal and State regulations; (2) completeness and
accuracy of criminal history record reporting; (3) adherence to
dissemination standards; (4) implementation of appropriate
security safeguards; and (5) compliance with mandated subject
access and review provisions.  Sixteen States require the
repository to conduct an in-house audit of its own records,
usually on an annual basis. -26 [Alaska, Arizona, California,
Illinois, Kentucky, Louisiana, Maryland, Missouri, New
Hampshire, North Carolina, Oregon, Pennsylvania, South Carolina,
South Dakota, Texas and Wyoming.  (Alaska requires in-house
audits every 2 years.  Arizona's law requires "periodic"
in-house audits.)] In general, the scope of these audits
parallels the scope of the audits of local agency systems. 
However, statutes in some of these States expressly require that
the in-house audit also attempt to identify case cycles with
dispositions which are likely to have occurred but which have
not been reported.  Statutes in 14 of the States require both an
in-house repository audit and audits of contributing agencies.
-27 [Alaska, Arizona, Kentucky, Louisiana, Maryland, Missouri,
New Hampshire, North Carolina, Oregon, Pennsylvania, South
Carolina, South Dakota, Texas and Wyoming.]

Finally, statutory provisions adopted in a few States impose
other kinds of data quality requirements.  Statutes in 14 States
require State and local criminal justice agencies to query the
central repository prior to disseminating criminal history
record information in order to assure that the most up-to-date
disposition information is being used. -28 [Alaska, Arizona,
Georgia, Hawaii, Louisiana, Maine, Missouri, Montana, Nevada,
Oregon, Puerto Rico, South Carolina, Virginia and Washington.]

Thirteen States have added provisions to their statutes that
require the repository to implement some kind of delinquent
disposition monitoring system (for example, a system designed to
periodically identify arrest entries for which dispositions are
probably available but not reported). -29 [Connecticut,
Delaware, Florida, Georgia, Hawaii, Illinois, Iowa, Louisiana,
Missouri, Montana, Nebraska,  New Hampshire and Washington.]
Five States have adopted statutory provisions that specifically
impose training requirements on personnel involved in entering
data into criminal history record systems. -30 [Alabama, Alaska,
Georgia, Kentucky and Louisiana.] Seven States have adopted
statutory provisions that address the use of automated programs
to provide systematic editing procedures for the purpose of
detecting missing or nonconforming data. -31 [Alaska,
Connecticut, Hawaii, Kentucky, Nebraska, South Carolina and
Virginia.]

Of course, in almost every State the bulk of data quality
requirements is expressed in regulations or administrative
policies and procedures, rather than in legislation.  However,
the extent to which State legislation addresses data quality
issues is a reflection of a State's concern about data quality.

It is clear, however, that the enactment of legislation and the
issuance of regulations are not enough to solve the problem of
data quality.  While 52 States have adopted at least some
standards for accuracy and completeness that reflect standards
in the DOJ regulations, there is little question that the
quality of criminal history data in this Nation falls short of
satisfactory.  Disposition reporting - or the lack of reporting
- remains the most serious deficiency, especially in terms of
court disposition reporting.  Next in importance is auditing. 
Numerous States have statutory provisions requiring ongoing
systematic audits and annual in-house audits; in practice,
however, many States have not made data quality auditing a
priority sufficient to comply with existing standards.

The issue is commitment: the States must be committed to put
into place, and practice, procedures to collect and maintain
complete and accurate data, and to scrupulously and regularly
conduct systematic audits to ensure compliance with those
procedures.

------------------------------------------------------------------------------
2.  Access to criminal history records for noncriminal justice
purposes

Background
------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Reversing a trend that began after issuance of the DOJ
regulations, criminal history record information is increasingly
becoming available outside of the criminal justice system.  Even
nonconviction information is now being made more available to
noncriminal justice agencies.  Twenty-nine States have adopted
open record or freedom of information statutes that cover some
types of criminal history record information.  (See the Survey
Comparison Table on page 15.)  This does not mean that criminal
history record information is publicly available in these States
in all circumstances, but it does mean that some types of
information are more available than before.

As a part of this trend, a majority of the States now permit
access to some criminal history records by at least some types
of noncriminal justice agencies and private entities.  For
example, special access rights are increasingly accorded to
governmental agencies with national security missions and to
licensing boards and some governmental and private employers
screening applicants for sensitive positions, such as those
involving public safety, supervision of children or custody of
valuable property.

The Congressional efforts of the 1970s to enact Federal
legislation setting nationwide dissemination standards for State
criminal history record systems failed.  In addition, the LEAA
regulations on criminal history record systems issued in 1975
did not undertake to set a uniform policy on noncriminal justice
access, but instead essentially left the matter up to the
legislatures and governors of the individual States.  Section
20.21(b)(2) of the regulations provides that noncriminal justice
access and use is permitted if "authorized by statute,
ordinance, executive order, or court rule, decision or order as
construed by appropriate State or local officials or agencies."

This approach, though laudable from the standpoint of States'
rights, has resulted in a great diversity of statutory schemes
in the States.  It has also resulted in a steadily increasing
volume of authorized noncriminal justice use.  Findings of a
national survey conducted in 1984 demonstrate that the State
criminal record repositories were then handling over 2 million
noncriminal justice access requests a year, -32 ["A Study to
Identify Criminal Justice Information Law, Policy and Management
Practices Needed to Accommodate Access to and Use of III for
Noncriminal Justice Purposes," prepared for the Federal Bureau
of Investigation, National Crime Information Center, by SEARCH
Group, Inc., September 28, 1984, under Contract No.
J-FBI-84-044.] and it is certain that the volume of such
requests has increased significantly since then.  In several
States, including California, Minnesota, Pennsylvania and South
Carolina, noncriminal justice traffic is greater than total
criminal justice use of the criminal record systems, and, in
several other States, noncriminal justice use is 40 percent or
more of total system use.  In many of these States, every
session of the legislature in recent years has resulted in new
statutory authority for noncriminal justice agencies and groups
to obtain criminal record checks for such purposes as public and
private employment, occupational licensing, and the issuance of
various permits, certifications and clearances.

As a result, it is probably safe to say that, in most States,
present laws and policies on noncriminal justice access and use
consist of a patchwork of statutory and regulatory provisions
resulting from independent lobbying efforts by particular groups
rather than from a comprehensive review of the issues and
development of a consistent, balanced, statewide policy.  It is
literally true that no two State statutes on noncriminal justice
access are identical.  The following analysis of State statutory
provisions confirms these observations.

--------------------------------------------
State statutory provisions
--------------------------------------------

State statutes governing dissemination of criminal history
records for noncriminal justice purposes are so varied as to
defy classification.  A few States, including Michigan,
Mississippi and New Jersey, have no statutory provisions setting
statewide policies on noncriminal justice access; in these
States, the DOJ regulations control access and use.  In a few
other States, including Maryland, New Hampshire, South Carolina
and South Dakota, the statute does nothing more than delegate to
a designated official the authority to issue rules and
regulations on noncriminal justice dissemination.  In States
that do have laws dealing with the subject, the statutory
approaches vary from those of Florida and Wisconsin, which are
"open record" States where anyone can obtain access to criminal
history records for any purpose, to that of Tennessee, which
prohibits noncriminal justice access and use except for limited
purposes specifically authorized by statute and makes it a
criminal offense to release criminal history records for
unauthorized purposes.  The other States fall somewhere in
between, with statutory approaches that differ greatly as to
what types of noncriminal justice agencies may have access to
particular types of records for particular purposes.

There are, however, some patterns and similarities, due to the
influence of the DOJ regulations.  The regulations do not place
any restrictions on the dissemination of conviction records or
open arrest records (arrest records with no recorded
disposition) less than one year old.  Nonconviction records
(favorable dispositions, including decisions not to refer or
prosecute charges and indefinite postponements, and open arrest
records over a year old and not actively pending) may be
disseminated for any purpose authorized by statute, ordinance,
executive order or court ruling.  Most of the States have
followed this approach of treating conviction records
differently from nonconviction records.  Commonly, the States
place few or no restrictions on the dissemination of conviction
records and a number of States also do not restrict the
dissemination of open arrest records less than a year old. 
Nonconviction records are restricted to a greater degree and in
some States may not be disseminated at all for noncriminal
justice purposes or may be disseminated only for particular
purposes under specified circumstances.

Another similarity among many States is that the statutory
provisions do not specifically identify particular noncriminal
justice agencies or organizations that may obtain criminal
history records.  Instead, they define classes or types of
agencies or organizations that may obtain certain types of
records for specified purposes.  Out-of-State or Federal
agencies may be included, in addition to in-State, private and
governmental agencies.  The statutes may define permitted
purposes in specific or more general terms.  For example, some
States authorize the use of criminal history records for any
occupational licensing or employment purpose, while others
authorize such use only for screening applicants for high-risk
occupations, such as those involving the public safety,
supervision of children, or custody of cash or valuable property
or information.

Many of the laws also require that certain agencies or
organizations must be able to show specific legal authority
under other statutory provisions to obtain criminal records or
that the need for the record must be approved by a designated
board, council or official.  The statutory provisions that
require separate legal authority for certain types of agencies
vary considerably from State to State.  The requirement may
simply provide that the requestor must be "authorized by law" or
must have "legal authority" or that the records must be
necessary for a "lawful purpose." -33 [For example, Alaska,
Delaware, Kansas, Montana, North Carolina and West Virginia.]
Such provisions are interpreted in some States as authorizing
the dissemination of criminal records for employment and
occupational licensing purposes where the employing or licensing
agencies are required by law to screen out applicants who are
not of "good moral character."  Other State criminal record
statutes, however, authorize the release of records for
noncriminal justice purposes only if the requesting agency is
"expressly" authorized by some other provision of State or
Federal law to obtain criminal records for use in the course of
official duties. -34 [For example, Arizona, Arkansas, Indiana,
Maine and Massachusetts.] This is a much stricter standard. 
Still stricter provisions authorize the release of criminal
records only pursuant to statutory provisions that expressly
refer to criminal conduct or to criminal records and contain
requirements, exclusions or limitations based upon such conduct
or records. -35 [For example, Connecticut, Illinois,
Pennsylvania and Virginia.]

Where prior approval by a council, board or designated official
is required for the release of criminal records for noncriminal
justice purposes, the designated standard for approval varies
among the States.  For example, criminal record laws in New
Hampshire and South Dakota delegate general discretion to the
director of the criminal history record repository to determine
who may have access, while Massachusetts law provides that the
Criminal History Systems Board must find that the public
interest in releasing criminal records to particular noncriminal
justice requesters outweighs the security and privacy interests
of the record subject.

Several States, including Alabama, Iowa, New Mexico, Ohio and
South Dakota, require that the record subject must consent in
writing to any release of his criminal history record for
noncriminal justice purposes.

--------------------------------------------
State dissemination policies
--------------------------------------------

As evident from the discussion above, the criminal history
record laws in many States provide only the framework for the
State's policies on dissemination.  Specific legal authority for
particular agencies or organizations to obtain criminal records
may be set out in separate statutory provisions, executive
orders or even local ordinances.  In addition, the actual
policies and practices of particular States may be set out in
regulations or may be based upon written or unwritten repository
policies.  These policies and practices often provide for more
restrictive dissemination approaches than the criminal record
laws require them to be.  That is, usually due to lack of staff
and facilities, many State repositories do not provide records
to all of the noncriminal justice agencies and organizations
that are authorized to obtain them under their laws.  In
addition, many States impose administrative requirements that
may not be required specifically by their laws.  For example,
some States require that the subject's fingerprints be submitted
with all requests for noncriminal justice access and that
records may be released only when a fingerprint comparison
positively verifies that the requested record relates to the
subject of the request.  All except a handful of the States
charge fees ranging from $3.00 to $44.00 for processing record
searches for noncriminal justice purposes. -36 [A survey
conducted by SEARCH in 1991 revealed that all of the States
charged fees except Arizona, Arkansas, Connecticut, Hawaii,
Mississippi and Vermont.  Fee legislation is reportedly under
consideration in some of these States.]

--------------------------------------------
Interstate dissemination
--------------------------------------------

Until recent years, the considerable disparity among State
dissemination laws was not perceived as a serious obstacle to
the interstate dissemination of criminal records for noncriminal
justice purposes, such as employment and occupational licensing.
 This was due primarily to the fact that there was no effective
system linking the State repositories together in such a way as
to permit the efficient exchange of records from State to State
for noncriminal justice purposes.  National criminal record
checks for noncriminal justice purposes have been feasible in
the past only through use of the criminal files maintained in
the FBI's Criminal Justice Information Services Division (CJIS),
which contain arrest and disposition information voluntarily
submitted by criminal justice agencies throughout the country. 
Pursuant to Federal laws and regulations, searches of these
files are conducted for Federal noncriminal justice agencies for
such purposes as civilian employment, security clearances,
military recruitment, alien registration, visas and other
official purposes, and for Federal and State law enforcement
agencies for criminal justice employment purposes.  Searches
also are conducted for State and local governmental employment
and licensing agencies with approved legal authority to request
such searches and for employment in federally chartered or
insured banks and designated segments of the securities and
commodities industries.

Although the criminal files of the U.S. Department of Justice
are made up primarily of arrest and disposition data submitted
by State and local criminal justice agencies, these records are
subject to Federal law and are disseminated by the FBI pursuant
to Federal laws and regulations authorizing record checks for
the agencies and organizations noted above.  Under this program,
inquiring Federal agencies are provided with all of the
information the FBI possesses on subject individuals, including
favorable dispositions and open arrest records without regard to
the age of the record.  Responses provided to banks, securities
firms and State employment and licensing agencies include the
subject's entire record with the exception of open arrests which
are over a year old and not actively pending.  Thus, because
most States' dissemination laws are more restrictive than the
Federal standard, it is possible for authorized Federal and
State noncriminal justice agencies to legally obtain
State-contributed records from the FBI for purposes for which
they could not, in some cases, obtain the records directly from
the States where the records originated.

This system of duplicate State and Federal files is being phased
out because of concern for the disparity among State security
and confidentiality laws and the expense of maintaining and
updating records at both the State and Federal levels.  The
system which is emerging replaces the "national repository"
concept with a system based on a national index linking State
repositories.  This system is known as the Interstate
Identification Index (usually referred to as "III" or "Triple
I").  When the system is fully operational nationwide, the III
index maintained at the national level will contain personal
identification data on individuals whose criminal records are
maintained in State criminal record repositories (State
offenders) and in the criminal files of the FBI (Federal
offenders) but it will not contain any charge or disposition
information.  The index will serve as a "pointer" to refer
inquiring criminal justice agencies to the State or Federal
files where the requested criminal history records are
maintained.  The records will be exchanged directly between the
States and between State and Federal criminal justice agencies
by means of telecommunications lines linking Federal, State and
local criminal justice agencies throughout the country. 
Dissemination and use of the records obtained from State
repositories will be governed by the laws and policies of the
individual States, rather than by the uniform dissemination
policy now used by the FBI.

It should be apparent that the disparity and restrictiveness of
State dissemination laws will present serious obstacles to
implementation of this type of interstate system as a viable
successor to the national search system previously maintained by
the FBI.  First, programming the index to screen noncriminal
justice requests on the basis of the wide variety of existing
State laws and policies would be difficult, and the inquiry
procedures would be complex.  Second, pursuant to present State
dissemination laws, substantially fewer records would be
available to noncriminal justice agencies under the
index-pointer approach than are now legally available to them
from the FBI's files. As pointed out earlier, this is because
the dissemination laws of a majority of the States are
considerably more restrictive than the FBI standard.  Some
States will provide no records to Federal or out-of-State
agencies and others will provide only convictions (sometimes
only certain convictions) and perhaps open arrest records that
are less than a year old.  It seems likely that this level of
service would be viewed by these agencies (and by other
policymakers) as insufficient to satisfy their needs. Conclusion

The absence of Federal legislation or regulations establishing a
uniform nationwide dissemination policy for State criminal
record systems has permitted the States to develop and implement
their own approaches to the release of criminal records for
noncriminal justice purposes.  This has had the laudable effect
of leaving the States free to establish their own privacy and
confidentiality laws and policies to strike a proper balance
between the rights of record subjects and the public interest. 
However, this has also resulted in the evolution of widely
varying State approaches, and in laws and policies in many
States that are more restrictive than the Federal standard that
governs noncriminal justice use of the FBI's files of
State-contributed criminal history records.  These factors are
emerging as serious obstacles to the implementation of an
"index-pointer" system for the interstate exchange of criminal
records, such as the III system now being implemented.  The
ultimate success of this national program for the interstate
exchange of criminal history records for noncriminal justice
purposes will depend upon the willingness of many of the States
to modify existing restrictions in their laws and policies in
order to provide a comparable level of service to Federal
agencies and other noncriminal justice agencies that are now
authorized to obtain records from the FBI.

A proposed interstate compact to implement the use of the III
system for noncriminal justice purposes incorporates a
noncriminal justice access and dissemination standard that is
identical to the Federal standard now applicable to the FBI's
Identification Division.  Ratification of this compact by a
State would have the effect of amending the State's criminal
record dissemination law in the manner suggested above, so that
the State could make available the level of record service
necessary for effective operation of the III system.  The
compact has been approved by the FBI Director and the Attorney
General and is expected to be submitted for Congressional review
in 1998.  After approval by the Congress, to endorse the
participation of the FBI in the system, the compact will be
submitted to the States for ratification.

--------------------------------------------------
Section 2:  Classification category definitions
--------------------------------------------------

The following are definitions of the 28 subject/matter
categories into which State laws and regulations have been
classified for both the individual and summary State tables in
this Compendium.

1.   State regulatory authority. A grant of power to a State
agency to promulgate statewide security and privacy regulations
for criminal justice information systems.

2.   Privacy and security council. A State board, committee,
commission or council whose primary statutory function is
monitoring, evaluating or supervising the confidentiality and
security of criminal justice information.

3.  Dissemination regulations.  Restrictions on dissemination of
criminal history information.

4.  Inspection.  The right of an individual to examine his or
her criminal history record.

5.  Right to challenge.  The right to an administrative
proceeding in which an individual may contest the accuracy or
completeness of his or her criminal history record.

6.  Judicial review of challenged information.  The right of an
individual to appeal to a State court an adverse agency decision
concerning challenged information.

 7.  Purging nonconviction information.  The destruction or
return to the individual of criminal justice information where
no conviction has resulted from the event triggering the
collection of the information.

 8.  Purging conviction information. The destruction or return
to an individual of criminal history information indicating a
conviction.

9.  Sealing nonconviction information.  The removal of criminal
history information from active files where no conviction has
resulted from the event triggering the collection of the
information.

10.  Sealing conviction information.  The removal from active
files of individual criminal history information indicating a
conviction.

11.  Removal of disqualifications. The restoration of rights and
privileges such as public employment to persons who have had
criminal history records purged or sealed.

12.  Right to state nonexistence of record.  The right to
indicate in response to public or private inquiries the absence
of criminal history in cases of arrest not leading to conviction
or where an arrest or conviction record has been purged.

13.  Research access.  The provision for and regulation of
access to criminal justice information by outside researchers.

14.  Accuracy and completeness. A requirement that agencies
institute procedures to ensure reasonably complete and accurate
criminal history information, including the setting of deadlines
for the reporting of prosecutorial and court dispositions.

15.  Dedication.  The requirement that computer configurations
be assigned exclusively to the criminal justice function. 16. 
Civil remedies.  Statutory actions for damages or other relief
resulting from violations of privacy and security laws.

17.  Criminal penalties.  Criminal sanctions for violations of
privacy and security laws.

18.  Public records.  Requirements that official records
maintained by public officials be open to the public.

19.  Separation of files.  Requirements that criminal history
information be stored separate from investigative and
intelligence information.

20.  Regulation of intelligence collection.  Restrictions on the
kind of intelligence information which may be collected and
retained and/or prohibition on its storage in computerized
systems.

21.  Regulation of intelligence dissemination.  Restrictions on
dissemination of intelligence information.

22.  Security.  Requirements that criminal justice agencies
institute procedures to protect their information systems from
unauthorized disclosure, sabotage and accidents.

23.  Transaction logs.  Records which must be maintained by
criminal justice agencies indicating when and to whom criminal
justice information is disseminated.

24.  Training employees.  Security and privacy instruction which
must be provided to employees handling criminal justice
information.

25.  Listing of information systems.  A mandatory disclosure of
the existence of all criminal justice information systems
describing the information contained in such systems.

26.  Freedom of Information Act (including criminal justice
information).  Provisions for public access to government
records that apply to criminal justice records.

27.  Freedom of Information Act (excluding criminal justice
information).  Provisions for public access to government
records from which criminal justice records are specifically
excluded.

28.  Central State repository. Establishment of a bureau, agency
or other entity to collect and maintain criminal history records
or criminal identification data for all criminal justice
agencies in the State.

----------------------------------------------------------
Section 3: Summary tables of statutes 
and regulations by classification category

                    Category                  '74  '78   '79  '81   '84   '87   '89   '92  '94  '97
 1 State regulatory authority                   7    38   42    46    48    48    48   48   48    48
 2 Privacy and security council                 2    10   13    22    27    26    25   23   23    23
 3 Dissemination regulations                   24    40   44    51    52    52    52   52   52    52
 4 Inspection                                  12    40   43    42    53    53    52   52   51    51
 5 Right to challenge                          10    30   36    36    41    42    42   45   45    45
 6 Judicial review of challenged information   10    20   22    17    20    21    22   24   24    24
 7 Purging nonconviction information           20    23   28    35    38    38    38   39   39    40
 8 Purging conviction information               7    13   19    24    26    27    27   27   27    26
 9 Sealing nonconviction information            8    15   16    20    21    23    26   26   29    31
10 Sealing conviction information               7    20   21    22    25    25    26   27   29    30
11 Removal of disqualifications                 6    22   22    27    27    24    24   24   24    23
12 Right to state nonexistence of record        6    13   17    22    24    25    26   28   31    33
13 Research access                              6    12   14    21    27    28    29   29   32    33
14 Accuracy and completeness                   14    41   45    49    51    51    51   52   52    52
15 Dedication                                   2     3    3     2     2     2     2    2    1     1
16 Civil remedies                               6    22   25    33    36    37    38   36   36    36
17 Criminal penalties                          18    35   39    39    43    44    45   45   44    44
18 Public records                               9    43   42    53    53    53    53   52   52    52
19 Separation of files                          5    10   10     6     7    10    10   11   13    14
20 Regulation of intelligence collection        3    10   10    12    16    18    20   20   21    21
21 Regulation of intelligence dissemination     7    24   25    18    25    23    23   24   25    26
22 Security                                    12    26   31    32    38    40    40   40   42    43
23 Transaction logs                             6    11   27    28    30    34    35   33   35    35
24 Training employees                           4    18   23    15    22    24    26   25   27    27
25 Listing of information systems               1     8    8     7     6     7     7    8    8     8
26 FOIA (including CJI)                      **   **      18    27    28    29    30   29   26    25
27 FOIA (excluding CJI)                      **   **      19    22    23    23    26   28   30    29
28 Central State repository                  **   **    **      51    52    52    52   52   52    52

*The figures presented are cumulative and may include statutes or regulations previously 
enacted but excluded from prior surveys.
**Data are unavailable for these years.

----------------------------------------------------------

A.  Survey comparison of changes in State statutes and
regulations by classification category

The table on the following page graphically depicts comparative
results of legislative survey findings for the years 1974, 1978,
1979, 1981, 1984, 1987, 1989, 1991, 1994 and 1997, which track
changes in State security and privacy statutes and regulations
by classification category.  The reader should note, however,
that each survey year is included in the results of the
succeeding survey, with the cumulative sum of the legislative
activity reflected in the current survey year.

The table shows that the leveling trend detected in the 1984
survey has continued.  Surveys through 1981 showed significant
increases in the number of States enacting new laws or
regulations in most categories.  In recent years, however, State
legislative activity dealing with criminal records has slowed. 
New or significantly amended provisions have been enacted by
only a few States in a few categories.  This probably reflects
two developments.  First, most of the States have now settled on
the basic approach they favor concerning the regulation of the
maintenance and use of criminal records, and recent legislation
has dealt with refinements in existing laws rather than
enactment of new initiatives.  Second, the basic principles of
security and privacy reflected in the Federal regulations have
become widely recognized and understood by criminal justice
officials, and procedures to prevent abuses have been
established and enforced.  As a result, security and privacy
issues and concerns are not as prevalent as they were in the
late 1960s and early 1970s, when the States were beginning to
wrestle with the problem of compliance with the regulations.

As a result, the survey comparison table shows that, in many
categories, the numbers for 1997 are the same as those for 1984
through 1994.  In most of the others, the numbers reflect new
enactments by only one or two States.

[Page 15, the table Survey comparison of changes in State
statutes and regulations by classification category, can be
found in the Excel file, PAGE15.WK1.]

----------------------------------------------------
B.  Summary of State statutes and regulations 
by classification category
----------------------------------------------------

The tables on the following pages, titled "Summary of State
statutes and regulations by classification category," contain
detailed matrixes summarizing State statutes and regulations
through July 1997.  For easy reference, the table for each
classification category is organized alphabetically by State,
and the matrix references are keyed to section numbers of the
State codes.

These summary tables, and all other tables in this Compendium,
reflect the laws of 53 jurisdictions: the 50 States and the
District of Columbia, Puerto Rico and the Virgin Islands. The
citations are to official compilations of State laws and
regulations.  Only title and section numbers are set out in
these summary tables.  For the full titles of the compilations
to which the citations refer, please refer to Section 4, page 47.

[Summary of State statutes and regulations by classification
category Tables 1-28 found in Excel.wk1 format.]

--------------------------------------------
Section 4:  Summary tables of statutes 
and regulations by State
--------------------------------------------

This section of the Compendium sets forth (1) a list of the full
titles of the official compilations of each State's laws and
regulations, (2) the full titles for each classification
category and subcategory, and (3) the citations for that
particular category or subcategory which indicate section
numbers of the State codes. These summary tables listing State
criminal history record privacy and security laws and
regulations are set out in alphabetical order by State.

The purpose of this collection is to make available to the
researcher the variety of approaches and alternatives taken by
the States with regard to their criminal history information
practices.  However, please note that this effort is current
through July 1997; thus, further review of a particular State's
legislation may be appropriate to include more recent enactments.

Readers are reminded that the full text of the State laws cited
herein is available for a small fee in microfiche form from the
Bureau of Justice Statistics Clearinghouse.  (The Clearinghouse
also offers a hard copy version for a larger fee.  See page vii
for ordering information.)  A full, hard-copy library of these
laws, regulations and other materials is maintained by SEARCH,
The National Consortium for Justice Information and Statistics,
at its offices in Sacramento, California.  Copies of specific
enactments may be ordered by mail or telephone.  (SEARCH is at
7311 Greenhaven Drive, Suite 145, Sacramento, California 95831,
916/392-2550.)


--------------------------------------------
State code titles
--------------------------------------------


Alabama Code Alaska Statutes Arizona Revised Statutes Annotated
Arkansas Statutes Annotated California (Codes listed on summary
table) Colorado Revised Statutes Connecticut General Statutes
Annotated (West) Delaware Code Annotated District of Columbia
Code Florida Statutes Annotated Georgia Code of 1981 Hawaii
Revised Statutes Idaho Code Illinois Compiled Statutes Indiana
Code Annotated Iowa Code Annotated (West) Kansas Statutes
Annotated Kentucky Revised Statutes Annotated (Baldwin)
Louisiana Revised Statutes Annotated (West) Maine Revised
Statutes Maryland Annotated Code of 1957 Massachusetts General
Laws Annotated (West) Michigan Compiled Laws Annotated Minnesota
Statutes Annotated Mississippi Code Annotated Missouri Annotated
Statutes (Vernon) Montana Revised Codes Annotated  Nebraska
Revised Statutes Nevada Revised Statutes New Hampshire Revised
Statutes Annotated New Jersey Statutes Annotated (West) New
Mexico Statutes Annotated New York (Codes listed on summary
table) North Carolina General Statutes North Dakota Century Code
Ohio Revised Code Annotated (Page) Oklahoma Statutes Annotated
(West) Oregon Revised Statutes Pennsylvania Consolidated
Statutes Annotated (Purdon) Puerto Rico Laws Annotated Rhode
Island General Laws South Carolina Code South Dakota Compiled
Laws Annotated Tennessee Code Annotated (Vernon) Texas Codes
Annotated (Vernon) Utah Code Annotated Vermont Statutes
Annotated Virgin Islands Code Annotated Virginia Code Washington
Revised Code Annotated West Virginia Code Wisconsin Statutes
Annotated (West) Wyoming Statutes

-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Summary of State statutes and regulations
by classification category

1. State regulatory authority


AL      41-9-591, 594
AK      12.62.110(5), .120(a)
AZ      41-1750; 41-2203.A.3
AR      12-12-201, 207, 211, 1003
CA      Pen. Code 11077
CO      24-33.5-401; 24-72-301
CT      54-142j
DE      11-8501, 8601, 8606
DC
FL      943.05
GA      35-3-31, 32, 33
HI      846-2.5
ID      67-2910, 2911
IL      20-3930/4, 7
IN      5-2-5-10; 10-1-2.5-1
IA      232.45, 148; 690.1; 692.10
KS      22-4704
KY      17.147, .150(6)
LA      "15:579"
ME      25-1541(4)
MD      27-746
MA      6-168
MI      28.241 et seq.
MN      299C.01, .03
MS      45-27-7(1)(a)
MO      43.509, 515
MT      44-2-201; 44-5-105
NE      29-3516
NV      179A.080
NH      106-B:14
NJ      53:1-12
NM      29-3-1; 32A-15-4
NY      Exec. Law 837(8), Subd. 8; Corr. Law 29(2); Pub. Off. Law 89(1)(b)
NC      114-10.1, .5, 12, 19; 132-1.4
ND
OH      109.57, 57.1
OK      74-150.4, Subd. 4.; 74-150.7, Subd. 2.; 74-150.7d
OR      181.066, .511, .521, .540, .555, .560, .575; 181.730(3); Reg. Ch. 257, Div. 10
PA      18-9152, 9161
PR      Act 1977 No. 129 Sect. 1; Act 4(c)
RI
SC      23-3-130
SD      23-5-5, 6; Reg. 2:02:01, 2:02:05
TN      38-6-101; 38-10-101 through 105
TX      Gov't Code 411.081
UT      53-5-201
VT      20-2051
VI
VA      9-170, 188
WA      10.97.090
WV      15-2-25
WI
WY      7-19-105; 9-1-623

---------------


2. Privacy and security council


AL      41-9-594
AK      12.62.100
AZ      41-2203
AR      12-12-201, 202, 203
CA
CO
CT
DE      "11-8603"
DC
FL      943.06, .08; Reg. 11C-5
GA      35-3-32
HI      846-2.5
ID
IL      20-3930/2, 7
IN      5-2-5-11
IA
KS
KY
LA      15:578; Reg. LAC 1-18:1
ME
MD      27-744
MA
MI      Regs.  28.5107
MN
MS      45-27-7(1)(f)
MO      43.515, 518
MT
NE      29-3505
NV      179A.080
NH      Reg. 7.C, D
NJ
NM
NY      Pub. Off. Law 89, Subd. (2)(a)
NC
ND
OH
OK      74-150.4
OR      181.540, .715; Regs.  257-10
PA
PR      Act 4(i); Act 8; Reg. 3
RI
SC
SD
TN
TX
UT
VT
----------------- 


3. Dissemination regulations


AL      26-1-4; 32-2-60, 61, 62; 41-9-621, 621(6), 639, 642; Reg. 003
AK      12.62.160(b)(1), (2), (4), (5), (6), (8), (9), (10)
AZ      4-202.E; 8-105, 230.02; 28-414.E; 36-883.02; 41-1606.02, 1750.G, 
        1750.G.1, 1750.G.2, 1964, 2204.6 
AR      12-12-211, 1008, 1009, 1010
CA      Pen. Code. 291, 291.1, .5, 11105, 11105.03, .2, .3, .4, 13203, 13300;          
        Lab. Code 432.7(f)(1); Step Foundation, Inc. v. Younger (App 1979);          
        157 Cal. Rptr. 117
CO      24-72-305
CT      29-16; 54-142k, 142n
DE      3-10128(b); 11-1448A, 8513, 8514, 8516, 8561
DC      1-1521 et seq.;  4-133.1; 1 DCMR 1004.4, .5
FL      119.07; 943.053, .0575, .0585, .059; Reg. 11C-6, 7
GA      35-3-33, 34, 34(b), 35; Reg. 140-2-.01, .04, .04(1), .04(1)(b),         
        .04(1)(b)(3), .04(1)(c), .04(1)(e), .04(1)(f), .04(1)(g), .04(2), .04(2)(b)
HI      463-5 et seq.; 846-9
ID      67-2909, 2911; Id. APA 11.10.01.013, .014
IL      15-310/10b.1; 20-10/22; 20-415/8b.1; 20-2605/55a(22), (28); 20-2630/3, 3.1, 5, 7;
        20-2635/1 et seq.; 40-5/2-156; 40-5/14-149; 40-5/15-187; 40-5/18-163; 225-10/4, 4.1, 
        4.2; 225-446/75, 80; 230-5/15, 15(3); 230-10/22; 625-5/6-106.1, 411
IN      5-2-5-4, 5; 10-1-1-21
IA      692.17, .2, .2(5); Regs. 661-11.12
KS      22-4704, 4707(b); Reg. 10-11-2, 10-12-1, 10-12-2
KY      17.150, .160, .165, .167; Reg. 502 KAR 30:060
LA      15:584, 587; 40:1300.41; 44:3; Reg. LAC 1-18:6, 6(3)
ME      16-612(3), 612(3)(A), (B), 612(A), 613(1), 613(2), 615, 617
MD      27-749; Reg. 12.15.01.10, .11, .12, .13; Reg. 15.02.05; Fam. Law 5-560 through 5-568
MA      6-168, 172, 172B, 178A; 128A-9A; 234A-33; Reg. 803 CMR 3.02-3.06, 4.01, 4.01(3), 4.02,
        5.00 et seq., 7.03, 7.03(1)(d)
MI      15.231 et seq.;  28.243, 244; 380.123; Regs. 28.5201, 28.5210; Gov. Exec. Ord. 1990-10
MN      13.82; 13.82, Subd. 15; 299C.13; 364.04(1), (2), (3); Reg. 6 S.R. 269-272
MS      45-27-7(1)(d)
MO      43.540; 610.100, .120; Reg. CSR 30-4.070, .370, .375
MT      44-5-214, 301, 301(1)(a), 301(1)(b), 302, 303
NE      29-210, 3520, 3523
NV      179A.075.4(a); 179A.100, .180 through .240
NH      Gen. 106-B:14, 14a; Reg. 3.A.2, 3.B, 3.B.2, 3.B.3, 3.B.8
NJ      53:1-16, 17; NJAC 13:59-1.1
NM      14-2-1; 14-2A-1; 28-2-3; 29-3-2, 3; 29-10-4, 5, 6, 7; 32A-2-32; 32A-3B-22; 32A-15-3
NY      Pub. Off. Law 87(2)(e); Corr. Law 29, 168-1(5); CPL 160.30, .50, .50(1)(c), .50(1)(d), 
        .55(1)(c) .55(1)(d), 170.56(3), 330.20, 720.35(1), 730; Exec. Law 837 (8-a), (6),
        837-c(c), 837(4); Arts & Cul. Affairs Law  61.11; Alco. & Bev. Contr
NC      110-90.2; 114-10, 10.1, 19, 19.3, 19.4, 415.2; 115C-332; 131D-10.3A; 132-1.4;
        Reg. NCAC 4F.0401 thru .0403, .0405 thru .0408
ND      12-60-16.5, 16.6
OH      109.57(A), Rule 109:5-1-01
OK      51-24A.2, .8; 74-150.9, .9B, .9C
OR      181.555(1), (2), 560(1), (1)(b)
PA      18-9121(a), (b), 9124, 9125
PR      Reg.  8(a), (c)(1); Act  4
RI      "12-1-4"
SC      Gen. 23-3-130, 140; Reg. 73-23, 23E.
SD      23-5-5, 6, 11, 12, 12.1; 23-6-9, 14; Reg. 2:02:02:03; 2:02:03:06
TN      4-36-202; 33-1-209; 10-7-504(a)(2); 33-1-209; 37-1-408; 38-6-106, 109; 39-17-1351; 
        40-15-106(b)
TX      Gov't Code 411.081 thru .128; Health & Saf. Code Ch. 250; TRCS Art. 6252-17a; Ops. 
        Atty. Gen. (May 14, 1976) No. 127; Ops. Atty. Gen.(Sept. 24, 1976) No. 144
UT      53-5-214; 53A-3-410; 77-18-9
VT      16-214; 20-2053, 2060; 33-309; Reg. 4.10(i); 6.30(a), (b)
VI
VA      9-187; 19.2-389, 389.1; 22.1-296.2; 63.1-198.1; Reg. 2.3
WA      10.97.030(2), .050(1) through (6); 10.98.150; 28A.400.303-306; 43.43.815, .830 
        through .845; 46
WV      15-2-24(c), (d), (e)
WI      19.35(1); 165.82, .83
WY      7-19-106(a); 9-1-627

-------------------------

4. Inspection


AL      32-2-60 through 32-2-62; 41-9-621, 643
AK      12.62.160(b)(11)
AZ      41-1750.G.5; Reg. 13-1-08
AR      12-12-211
CA      Pen. Code 11122, 11124, 13323
CO      24-72-301, 303, 306
CT      54-142k
DE      "11-8513"
DC      1-1522; 4-135; 1 DCMR 1004.1 et seq.
FL      943.056; Reg. 11C-8;
GA      35-3-37, 37(b); Reg. 140-2-.10
HI      92E-7; 846-14
ID      9-338, 342; 69-2911
IL      20-2630/7
IN      5-2-5-8
IA      692.5; Regs. 661-11.4, .5, .15
KS      22-4709, 4711; Reg. 10-13-2
KY      17.150; 61-874, 884; Reg. 502 KAR 30:070
LA      15:588; Reg. LAC 1-18:3(9)
ME      16-620(1)
MD      27-751; Reg. 12.15.01.05
MA      6-175; Reg. 803 CMR 6.02, .05, .05(5), .06
MI      15.233, .235
MN      13.03(3); 13.04, Subd. 3
MS      45-27-11
MO      Reg. CSR 30-4.070
MT      44-5-214
NE      29-3520, 3525
NV      179A.150
NH      Reg. 3.B.9
NJ
NM      14-2-1 et seq.; 14-2A-1; 29-10-6, 8; 32A-2-26, 32; 32A-3B-22
NY      CPL160.50 (1)(d), .55 (1)(d); Reg. 9 NYCRR 6050.1
NC      Reg. NCAC 4F.0404
ND      12-60-16.3 and Administrative Rules
OH
OK      51.24A.5
OR      181.540(1)(b)
PA      18-9151, 9152; Reg. 195.4
PR      Act 4(m); Reg. 9(a)
RI      38-2-3
SC      Reg. 73-25
SD      1-11-13; 23-5-12, 13; 23-6-9, 11, 14; Reg. 2:02:03:01, 06
TN      10-7-506, 507; 40-15-106; 40-32-101; 40-35-313; Regs. 1395-1-.08(1)(k)
TX      Govt Code  552.023; TRCS Art. 6252-17a; Reg. 37 TAC 27.1
UT      53-5-214(7); 63-2-85.4(5)
VT      Reg. 8.10, 8.20
VI      T.3-881(b)
VA      9-192, 193; 19.2-389; Reg. 2.3, 2.4
WA      10.97.080; 43.43.730; Reg. WAC 446-20-090
WV      29B-1-3
WI      19.35(1)
WY      7-19-109

-----------------------------

5. Right to challenge


AL      41-9-645
AK      12.62.170(b)
AZ      41-2203.A.5; Reg. 13-1-08.D
AR      12-12-211, 1013
CA      Pen. Code 11126, 13324
CO      24-72-307
CT      54-142l
DE      11-1448A,  8506(e), 8560
DC
FL      943.056; Reg. 11C-8
GA      35-3-37(b); Reg. 140-2-.10
HI      92E-11; 846-14
ID      9-342, 343
IL      20-2630/7; 20-3930/7(h)
IN      5-2-5-8(b), 10(b)
IA      692.5; Regs. 661-11.4
KS      22-4709, 4711
KY      Reg. 502 KAR 30:070
LA      15:588; Reg. LAC 1-18:4
ME      16-620(2), (3)
MD      27-752; Reg. 12.15.01.05, .06, .07
MA      6-175; Reg. 803 CMR 6.07, 6.08
MI      Regs.  28.5210
MN      13.04, Subd. 4
MS      45-27-11
MO      Reg. CSR 30-4.070
MT      44-5-215
NE      29-3525, 3526
NV      179A.150
NH      Reg. 7
NJ      NJAC 13:59-1.6(b)
NM      29-10-8
NY      Reg. 9 NYCRR 6050.2
NC      Reg. NCAC 4F.0404
ND      12-60-16.3 and Administrative Rules
OH
OK
OR      181.540(1)(b)
PA      18-9151, 9152; Reg. 195.5
PR      Act 4(o); Act 15; Reg. 9(b)
RI
SC      Reg. 73-25
SD      Reg. 2:02:03:02, 05
TN
TX      Reg. 37 TAC 27.1
UT      53-5-214(7)(b); 63-2-85.4(6)
VT      Reg. 8.30

---------------------------------

6. Judicial review of challenged information



AL      41-9-645
AK      12.62.170(c)
AZ
AR
CA      Pen. Code 11126
CO      24-72-307
CT
DE      11-1448A
DC
FL
GA      35-3-37(c); Reg. 140-2-.10
HI      "92E-11"
ID      9-342
IL
IN
IA      692.5; Regs. 661.11.6
KS
KY      17.150(5); Reg. 502 KAR 30:070, Sec. (6)
LA      Reg. LAC 1-18:4(14)
ME      16-620(4)
MD      27-753(c); Reg. 12.15.01.05, .07
MA      6-176
MI
MN      13.04, Subd. 4; 14-63 et seq.
MS      45-27-11
MO
MT
NE
NV
NH
NJ
NM      29-10-8
NY
NC
ND
OH
OK
OR      Reg. 257-10-035(5)
PA      18-9152(e)
PR      Act 16
RI
SC
SD      Reg. 2:02:05:01
TN
TX
UT
VT
VI
VA      9-192
WA      43.43.730
WV
WI
WY      7-19-109


-------------------------------

7. Purging nonconviction information


AL      41-9-625
AK      12.62.190
AZ
AR
CA      Pen. Code 851.8; H. & S. Code 11361.5
CO
CT      54-142a
DE      11-8506(c)
DC
FL      943.0585; Reg. 11C-7
GA      35-3-37(c)
HI      831-3.2; 853-1(e)
ID      67-2912
IL      20-2605/55(a); 20-2630/5
IN      35-38-5-1
IA      692.16, .17
KS
KY
LA      15:586; 44:9
ME
MD      27-736, 737
MA      6-175; Reg. 803 CMR 6.07(3)
MI      28.243
MN      152.18; 299C.11
MS      45-27-9(2), (4)
MO      610.123, 124, 125, 126
MT      44-5-202(8), 212
NE
NV      179A.075.3c; 179A.160
NH      Reg. 3.D
NJ
NM      30-31-28; 32A-2-26; 32A-3B-21, 26; 32A-20-1
NY      CPL 160.50; Family Court Act  354.1
NC      15A-146; Reg. NCAC 4F.0501, .0502
ND
OH      109.60; 2951.04.1
OK      22-18, 19, 305.4, 991C
OR      137.225
PA      18-9122
PR
RI      "12-1-12"
SC      17-1-40; Reg. 73-27
SD      23-6-8.1; Reg. 2:02:03:02, 05
TN      40-15-106; 40-32-101
TX      Code Crim. Proc. Art. 55.01
UT      53-5-214(4); 77-18-9
VT      Reg. 10.10

-----------------------

8. Purging conviction information


AL
AK      12.62.190
AZ      8-247
AR
CA      Pen. Code 1203.45; H. & S. Code 11361.5
CO
CT      54-142a
DE      11-8506(c)
DC
FL      943.0585; Reg. 11C7
GA      35-3-37(c)
HI
ID
IL
IN
IA      907.9
KS
KY
LA
ME
MD
MA      6-175; Reg. 803 CMR 6.07(3)
MI
MN      152.18; 364.04
MS      45-27-9(10), 11
MO
MT      44-5-202(8), 212
NE
NV      179A.160
NH      Reg. 3.D
NJ
NM
NY      CPL 160.55; Family Court Act  354.1
NC      15A-145; 90-96; Reg. NCAC 4F.0501, .0502
ND
OH
OK      22-991C; 63-2-410
OR      137.225
PA      18-9122
PR      Act 8
RI
SC      22-5-910; 56-5-750(G); Reg. 73-27
SD      23-6-8.1; Reg. 2:02:03:02, 05
TN
TX
UT      77-18-9
VT      Reg. 10.10
VI
VA
WA      9.94A.230; 10.97.060
WV
WI
WY      7-13-301; 35-7-1037

----------------------------

9. Sealing nonconviction information


AL
AK      12.62.180(b)
AZ      13-4051
AR      16-90-904, 905
CA      Pen. Code 851.8, .85
CO      24-72-308
CT      29-16; 54-142a
DE      "11-4372"
DC      SCR-Crim. 118
FL      943.059; Reg. 11C-7
GA      42-8-62
HI      831-3.2
ID
IL      20-2630/5
IN      35-38-5-1
IA
KS
KY      17.142
LA      "44:9"
ME
MD
MA      276-100A, B, C; Reg. 803 CMR 7.02
MI      333.7411; 750.350a(4); 762.14; 769.4a
MN      152.18; 299C.11
MS
MO      610.100, 105, 120
MT      44-5-202(8)
NE
NV      179.255, .275
NH
NJ      2C:36A-1, :52-6
NM      30-31-28; 32A-2-26
NY      CPL 160.50(1)(c), 170.56, 720.15
NC
ND
OH
OK      22-18, 19, 991c; 63-2-410
OR      137.225(1)(b)
PA
PR
RI      12-1-12.1
SC
SD
TN
TX
UT      77-18-9
VT      Reg. 10.10
VI
VA      9-190; 19.2-392.2; Reg. 2.6
WA      13.50.050
WV
WI
WY

--------------------------------

10. Sealing conviction information


AL
AK           12.62.180(b)
AZ           13-907
AR           16-90-904, 905
CA           Pen. Code 1203.45
CO           24-72-308
CT           54-142a, 142b
DE
DC           33-541(e); SCR-Crim. 118, Crim. 32(g)
FL           943.059; Reg. 11C-7
GA
HI           712-1256; 831-3.1
ID
IL
IN           35-38-5-5
IA           907.9
KS           12.4516; 21-4619
KY
LA           "44:9"
ME
MD
MA           94C-34; 127-152; 276-100A, B, C; Reg. 803 CMR 7.02
MI           712A.18e; 780.623
MN           242.31; 364.04; 609.166 through 168; 638.02, Subd. 3-5
MS
MO           610.106, 120
MT           46-18-204
NE
NV           179.245, .275; 453.336
NH           318-B:28-a ; 651:5
NJ           2C:52-2, 3, 4, 5
NM
NY           CPL 160.55(1)(c); CPL 720.15
NC
ND
OH           2953.32
OK           22-18, 19, 991c; 63-2-410
OR           137.225(1)(a)
PA
PR
RI           12-1.3-2
SC
SD           23A-27-14, 17
TN
TX
UT           77-18-9
VT           Reg. 10.10
VI
VA
WA           13.50.050
WV
WI
WY

-------------------------

11. Removal of disqualifications


AL
AK
AZ      13-905 through 912
AR
CA      Pen. Code 851.8, 1203.4, .4a, .45
CO      24-72-308
CT
DE
DC
FL      943.0585
GA      42-9-1 et seq.
HI      712-1255; 853-1
ID      18-3316
IL
IN
IA
KS      12-4516(e); 21-4619; 22-3722
KY
LA      "44:9"
ME
MD      27-641; 27-735 through 741
MA      276-100A, C
MI
MN      152.18; 242.31; 364.03
MS
MO
MT
NE
NV
NH      27.1284722222222
NJ      2C:52-27
NM      30-31-28; 32A-2-26; 32A-3B-21
NY      CPL 720.35(1)
NC
ND
OH      2951.04.1; 2953.33A
OK      22-18, 19; 63-2-410
OR      137.225
PA
PR
RI      12-1.3-4
SC
SD      23A-27-14, 17
TN      40-35-313(b)
TX
UT
VT
VI
VA
WA
WV
WI
WY

----------------------



12. Right to state nonexistence of record


AL
AK      12.62.180(d)
AZ
AR      16-90-902
CA      Pen. Code 851.8, 1203.45; Lab. Code 432.7
CO      24-72-308
CT      54-142a
DE
DC      33.541(e)
FL      943.0585
GA
HI      712-1256; 831-3.2(b)(e)
ID
IL      20-2630/7
IN
IA
KS      12-4516(e)
KY
LA
ME      16-618
MD      27-641, 739, 740
MA      94C-34; 127-152; 151B-4(a); 276-100A, C
MI      37.2205a
MN      152.18, Subd. 2
MS
MO      610.11
MT
NE
NV      179.285
NH      27.1284722222222
NJ      2C:52-27
NM      30-31-28; 32A-2-26; 32A-3B-21
NY      CPL 160.30, .60, 170.56(4)
NC      15A-145, 146; 90-96
ND
OH      2953.33(B)
OK      22-18, 19; 63-2-410
OR      137.225(3)
PA
PR
RI      12-1.3-4
SC
SD      23A-27-14, 17 (Exceptions: 23A-27-14.1, 23-3-42)
TN      40-35-313(b)
TX      Code Crim. Proc. Art. 55.03
UT      77-18-9
VT      Reg. 6.20
VI
VA      19.2-392.4
WA      10.97.030(8)
WV
WI
WY


---------------------------------

13. Research access


AL      Reg. 003
AK      12.62.160(b)(7)
AZ
AR      12-12-1010
CA      Pen. Code 13202
CO
CT      54-142m
DE      11-8513, 8514, 8516, 8521
DC
FL      943.057; Reg. 11C-6
GA      33-3-38(8); Reg. 140-2-.04(1)(f)
HI      846-9(4)
ID
IL
IN
IA      692.4, .7(1)
KS
KY      17.15
LA
ME      16-613(4)
MD      27-749; Reg. 12.15.01.12
MA      6-173; Reg. 803 CMR 8.00-8.03; 703(1)(b)
MI
MN      13.03
MS
MO
MT      44-5-304
NE
NV      179A.075.2a, .6; 179A.100.5a
NH      Reg. 3.B.7
NJ      NJAC 13:59-1.6(e)
NM      29-10-6(B)
NY      Exec. Law  837(4)
NC      Reg. NCAC 4F.0407, .0408
ND      12-60-16.3 and Administrative Rules
OH
OK
OR      Reg. 257-10-030
PA
PR      Reg. 8(c)(3)
RI
SC      Reg. 73-24D.
SD      23A-27-13.1, 16
TN
TX
UT      53-5-214(2)
VT      Reg. 8.90
VI
VA      19.2-389
WA      10.97.050(6); Reg. WAC 446-20, 190, 420
WV
WI      19.35(1)
WY      7-19-106(a)(r)

---------------------------


14. Accuracy and completeness


AL      41-9-622, 648
AK      12.62.120, .150(a)(1), (a)(7), (a)(12), (c), .170(a)
AZ      41-1751; 41-2205.A, B; Reg. 13-1-02, 04; Reg. 13-1-08E.-G
AR      12-12-209, 210, 1004, 1007, 1013, 1015
CA      Pen. Code 11079, 11107, 11115, 13100, 13125, 13127, 13150, 13151, 13152; Reg. 702(c), 707(c)
CO      24-32-412(3); 24-72-307
CT      29-11, 12, 13; 54-142h(a), (b), (c); 54-142j
DE      11-8506, 8506(f), 8507, 8508, 8509, 8510, 8511, 8512, 8525, 8607
DC      4-131, 132, 134
FL      943.052, .055, .056; Reg. 11C-4
GA      17-4-27; 35-3-33(4), 36, 36(k), 37(c); 42-8-62; Reg. 140-2-.03, .07; 1975 Atty. Gen. Op. No. 75-110
HI      846-3, 4, 5, 6, 13
ID      67-2911, 2912
IL      20-2630/2.1; 20-2635/21; 20-3930/7(i)
IN      4-1-6-2, 5; 5-2-5-3; 5-2-5-10, 10(a)(l); 10-1-1-15, 18; 10-1-2.5-4 
IA      690.4; 692.5, .13, .15, .19(6), .21; Regs. 661-11.9, .10
KS      21-2501; 22-4705(a), 4706(f); Reg. 10-10-1, 2, 3, 4
KY      17.110, .150(1), .150(1)(c), .150(6), .152, .1521, .1522
LA      15:579, 580, 581, 591, 594; Reg. LAC 1-18:2, 5, 7
ME      25-1542A, 1544, 1547; 16-612(3)(B), 616
MD      27-746(5), 747, 748, 748(6); Court Rule 1218; Reg. 12.15.01.08, .09, .16
MA      6-171, 175; 66A-2; 127-23, 27; 263-1A; Reg. 803 CMR 6.07, 6.08, 6.10
MI      28.243, .245a; 712A.11, .18; 764.29; 769.1, .16a; Regs.  28.5401
MN      299C.06, .10 through .14, .17; 299C.09, .10, .10(2), (3); Reg. 6 S.R. 273-276
MS      45-27-7(2)(c), 9
MO      43.503; Reg. CSR 30-4.040, .050, .090
MT      44-2-206; 44-5-202, 213, 213(5), (6); 44-5-215
NE      29-209, 3515, 3516, 3517, 3526
NV      179A.075.3, .080.3, .090, .150
NH      106-B:14, 14a; Reg. 4, 5
NJ      53:1-13, 14, 15, 18, 20.1, 20.2
NM      29-3-1, 3, 8
NY      CPL 160.20, .30; Exec. Law  837(4), 837-a, b, c; Family Court Act  306.1(4), 354.1 
NC      15A-502, 1382; Reg. NCAC 4F.0201, .0202, .0302, .0800
ND      12-60-16.2, 16.3 and Administrative Rules
OH      109.57(A), .61, .62; 1347.05
OK      74-150.10, .12
OR      181.511, .511(1)(b), (c), .521, .530, .555(3)
PA      18-9111, 9112, 9113, 9114, 9141, 9142, 9161; 61-2173, 2174; Reg. 195.2
PR      Act 1, 8, 12(d); Reg. 6, 7, 10
RI      12-1-7, 8, 9, 10, 11
SC      14-17-325; 20-7-780; 23-1-90; 23-3-40, 120, 130; Reg. 73-21, 22, 22E., 28
SD      23-5-4, 8; 23-6-16; Reg. 2:02:02:01, 03, 04, 05; Reg. 2:02:04:01
TN      38-6-103; 38-10-101 through 105
TX      Code of Crim. Proc., Ch. 60
UT      53-5-208, 209
VT      20-2053(b), 2054; Reg. 3.20, 4.10, 6.30(1), 6.30(b)(5), 11.10-11.40
VI
VA      9-186, 191; 16.1-299, 299.1, 301; 19.2-389D, 390; Reg. 2.2., 2.2(3), 2.7
WA      10.97.040, .045, .090(3); 10.98.050, .090, .100; Reg. WAC 446-20-260, 310
WV      15-2-24(f), (g)
WI      165.83, .84
WY      7-19-104, 105, 107, 107h, 108; 9-1-625

--------------------------

15. Dedication


AL
AK
AZ
AR
CA
CO
CT
DE
DC
FL
GA      35-3-33(13)
HI
ID
IL
IN
IA
KS
KY
LA
ME
MD
MA
MI
MN
MS
MO
MT
NE
NV
NH
NJ
NM
NY
NC
ND
OH
OK
OR
PA
PR
RI
SC
SD
TN
TX
UT
VT
VI
VA
WA
WV
WI
WY

--------------------------

16. Civil remedies


AL
AK      12.62.200
AZ      39-121.02; Reg. 13-1-05C
AR
CA      Civ. Code 1798.53; Lab. Code 432.7
CO      24-72-305; 30-10-101
CT      4-197
DE      11-1448A, 8514, 8523; 29-10005
DC      1-1527
FL      119.02
GA      35-3-39
HI
ID
IL      20-2635/1 et seq.
IN
IA      692.2(3), .6
KS      22-4707
KY      17.157; 61.882
LA      "15:596"
ME      25-1550
MD      27-753; Reg. 12.15.01.10
MA      6-168, 177; Reg. 803 CMR 5.06, 6.08(4)
MI
MN      13.08; 299C.21
MS
MO
MT      44-2-205; 44-5-112
NE      29-3528; 84-712.03, .07
NV      179A.230
NH
NJ      47:1A-4; 53:1-20
NM      14-2-12
NY      Exec. Law 837-b(3).; Corr. Law 755
NC      Reg. NCAC 4G.0201
ND
OH      149.99; 1347.10
OK
OR      192.49
PA      18-9181, 9183
PR
RI      12-1-12; 12-1.3-4
SC      23-1-90; 30-4-100
SD      Reg. 2:02:04:03
TN
TX
UT      63-2-88
VT      1-319, 320; Reg. 7.50, 13.10-13.22
VI
VA     2.1-346.1; 9-194
WA     10.97.050(8), .110; 42.17.390; 43.43.834(7); Reg. WAC 44
WV
WI     19.37
WY


---------------------------------

17. Criminal penalties


AL      32-2-63; 36-12-42; 41-9-600
AK
AZ      41-1750Y
AR      12-12-212, 1002
CA      Pen. Code 502, 11125, 11141, 11142, 11143, 13302, 
        13303, 13304; Lab. Code 432.7; Gov. Code 6200, 6201
CO      24-72-309
CT      29-17; 54-142k(e)
DE      11-1448A, 8514, 8523, 8562
DC
FL      119.02, .10
GA      35-3-38
HI      846-16
ID
IL      20-2630/7; 20-2635/1 et seq.
IN      5-2-4-7; 5-2-5-5(b)
IA      692.5, .7
KS      22-4707, 4710
KY      17.157
LA      15:596; 44:9D; Reg. LAC 1-18:1
ME      16-619
MD      27-739; State Gov't Code  10-627
MA      6-178
MI      28.243a, .246
MN      13.09; 364.10
MS      25-53-59; 45-27-13
MO      109.180; 610.115
MT
NE      29-3527
NV      179A.240, .300; 239.010
NH      106-B:14; 651:5.X
NJ      2C:52-30; 53:1-20
NM      32A-2-32; 32A-3B-22
NY
NC      14-454
ND      12-60-16.10
OH      1347.99; 2953.35
OK      21-461; 841.4
OR
PA      61-2176
PR      Act 20
RI
SC      23-1-90; 30-4-100
SD      23-5-4; 23-6-4, 5, 6, 7, 9, 10, 11, 12, 16
TN      10-7-505; 37-1-409(b), (c); 40-15-106(c); 40-32-101(c); 62-26-230
TX      Gov't Code 411.085
UT      53-5-214(9); 77-18-9
VT      20-2054(b)
VI
VA      9-195; 19.2-392.4.C; 52-8.3
WA      10.97.120; 43.43.810, .856
WV      15-2-24(j); 29B-1-5
WI      946.72(1)
WY

-----------------------------------

18. Public records


AL      36-12-40
AK      09.25.110, .120
AZ      39-121.01
AR      25-19-103, 1005
CA      Gov. Code 6251 et seq.
CO      24-72-301, 303; 30-10-101
CT      1-15, 19
DE      29-6412
DC      1-1521 et seq.
FL      119.01
GA      50-18-70 et seq.
HI      92-50
ID      9-335 et seq.
IL      5-160/1 et seq.; 20-2635/1 et seq.
IN      4-1-6-1; 5-14-3-1
IA      22.7(a); 692.2; Regs. 661-11.12
KS      45-215 et seq.
KY      61.870 et seq.
LA      44:1 et seq.
ME      1-401-410
MD      State Gov't Code  10-611 et seq.
MA      4-7, cl. 26; 6-172; 66-10; 66A-1 et seq.
MI      750.492
MN      13.01 et seq.; 13.87
MS      25-53-53; 25-59-19
MO      109.180, .190
MT      2-6-101
NE      29-3520; 84-712 et seq.
NV      179A.100; 239.010 et seq.
NH      7-A:1; 91-A:4
NJ      47:1A-1
NM      14-3-1 et seq.
NY      Pub. Off. Law 87 et seq.
NC      132-1 et seq.
ND      44-04-18
OH      149.43 et seq.
OK      51-24A
OR      181.54
PA      65-66.1 et seq.
PR      32-1781
RI      38-2-1 et seq.
SC      30-4-10 et seq.
SD      1-27-1 et seq.
TN      10-7-504 et seq.
TX      TRCS Art. 6252-17a, et seq.
UT      63-2-59 et seq.; 78-26-1 et seq.
VT      1-315 et seq.
VI      T.3-881
VA      42.1-76 et seq.
WA      10.97.030; 42.17.250
WV      29B-1-1
WI      19.35(1)
WY      16-4-201 through 205

---------------------------------

19. Separation of files


AL
AK
AZ
AR      16-90-904
CA
CO
CT
DE
DC
FL
GA      35-3-32; Reg. 140-2-.02
HI
ID
IL
IN      5-2-4-2
IA
KS
KY
LA      Reg. LAC 1-18:9(3)
ME
MD
MA
MI      15.232; 28.272
MN      260.161(3)(a)
MS
MO      610.12
MT
NE
NV      62.350.3
NH
NJ
NM      32A-20-1
NY      Family Court Act 306.1(4); Exec. Law 
NC
ND
OH
OK
OR
PA      18-9106
PR
RI
SC
SD
TN      37-10-207; Regs.  1395-1-1-.09(4)
TX
UT
VT
VI
VA
WA
WV
WI    48.396
WY

----------------------------

20. Regulation of intelligence collection


AL      41-9-639
AK
AZ
AR
CA      Civ. Code 1798.14, .15
CO
CT
DE
DC
FL      943.08
GA      35-3-32(2); Reg. 140-2-.02
HI
ID
IL
IN      5-2-4-3, 4
IA      692.8, .9
KS
KY      17.150(2)
LA
ME
MD
MA
MI
MN      13.05, Subd. 4; Reg. 6 S.R. 274
MS      25-53-53, 55
MO
MT      44-5-501 through 515
NE
NV      179A.070.2
NH
NJ      53:6-4, 5
NM      29-3-1 et seq.; 32A-20-1
NY
NC
ND
OH
OK
OR      181.575
PA      18-9106
PR
RI
SC
SD      23-5-10, 11
TN
TX
UT      53-5-203
VT      20-1954
VI
VA
WA      43.43.854
WV
WI
WY      9-1-627

----------------------------

21. Regulation of intelligence dissemination


AL          41-9-641
AK
AZ
AR
CA          Civ. Code 1798.18, .24
CO          24-72-305(5)
CT
DE
DC
FL          119.07, .072; 943.08
GA          35-3-32(4); Reg. 140-2-.02
HI          92E-3(1)(B)
ID
IL
IN          5-2-4-6
IA          692.8, .9
KS
KY
LA          Reg. LAC 1-18:9(4)
ME          16-611(8), 614
MD
MA
MI          15.243; Regs.  28.5201
MN          13.05, Subd. 4; Reg. 6 S.R. 271
MS          25-53-53, 55
MO                                                         610.1
MT          44-5-103(3)(b), 303, 404(2), 501 through 515
NE
NV          179A.120.2, .150.1
NH
NJ          53:6-5
NM          29-3-1 et seq.; 32A-15-4
NY          Pub. Off. Law 87(2)(e)
NC
ND
OH
OK
OR
PA          18-9106, 9121(d)
PR
RI
SC
SD          23-5-11
TN          10-7-504; 40-15-106(b), (c)(1), 32-101(b), (c)(1)
TX
UT          53-5-203, 211, 214
VT          20-1955
VI
VA
WA          42.17.310; 43.43.854, .856
WV
WI
WY          9-1-627


----------------------------

22. Security


AL         41-9-594, 621(9); Reg. 004, 005
AK         12.62.150(a)(3), (4), (5), (6)
AZ         13-2316
AR         12-12-1014
CA         Pen. Code 11077(a); Reg. 707, 707(a), 708
CO
CT         54-142i
DE         11-8505, 8521, 8605, 8608
DC
FL         119.031; 943.08
GA         16-9-90 et seq.; 35-3-33(13); Reg. 140-2-.02, .08, .09, .11
HI         846-7
ID         Id. APA 11.10.01.024
IL         20-2635/21
IN         4-1-6-2; 5-2-5-10(2); 5-14-3-7
IA         692.12, .14, .19(8)
KS         22-4704; Reg. 10-11-1
KY
LA         15:589; Reg. LAC 1-18:8
ME         16.614(1)(F); 25-1541(4), 2904
MD         Reg. 12.15.01.15
MA         6-171, 174; 66A-2; Reg. 803 CMR 7.06
MI         Regs.  28.5318
MN         13.05, Subd. 5; 299C.48(a)
MS         45-27-7(1)(f)
MO         Reg. CSR 30-4.090
MT         44-5-401 through 405
NE         29-3518, 3519
NV         179A.080.1, .2
NH         Reg. 1, 2
NJ         NJAC 13:59-1.8(E); S.O.P. B-33, B-34, B-35
NM
NY         Exec. Law 837 (amended); Pub. Off. Law  87, 87(2)(i)
NC         114-10(2); Reg. NCAC 4F.0101
ND         12-60-16.3 and Administrative Rules
OH         1347.05
OK         51-24A.1 et seq.
OR         Reg. 257-10-025
PA         18-9131; Gen. Reg. 195.6
PR         Act 8; Reg. 14, 16, 17
RI
SC         Reg. 73-21A.(3), 73-26
SD
TN         39-14-601 et seq.
TX
UT         53-5-214(3)(6); 76-6-702, 703
VT         Reg. 6.70, 7.10 - 7.40
VI
VA         9-191; Reg. 3.1, 3.5, 3.6
WA         10.97.090; Reg. WAC 446-20 through 230, 270, 300
WV
WI
WY         7-19-105; 9-1-627

-----------------------------

23. Transaction logs


AL      41-9-640
AK      12.62.150(a)(7)(B), .160(c)(4)
AZ
AR      12-12-1008
CA      Pen. Code 11078; Reg. 707(c)
CO
CT      54-142h(c)
DE      11-1448A, 8513(3); Reg. 1.5
DC
FL      943.055
GA      35-3-33(2); Reg. 140-2-.06
HI      846-6
ID      Id. APA 11.10.01.023
IL
IN      4-1-6-2
IA
KS      Reg. 10-14-1
KY
LA      Reg. LAC 1-18:6(6), 9(2C)
ME      16-620(5)
MD      Reg. 12.15.01.10 through .12
MA      6-172
MI      Regs.  28.5105
MN
MS      45-27-7(2)(b)
MO
MT      44-5-215, 305, 404(3)
NE      29-3517
NV      179A.130
NH      Reg. 3.C.4
NJ
NM
NY
NC      Reg. NCAC 4F.0401, .0402
ND      12-60-16.3 and Administrative Rules
OH
OK      51-24A.1 et seq.
OR      Reg. 257-10-035
PA      18-9121(f)
PR      Reg. 9(e)(f), 10
RI
SC      Reg. 73-23F.
SD      Reg. 2:02:02:05
TN
TX
UT      53-5-203(3)
VT      Reg. 6.50, 14.10-14.30
VI
VA      9-192; Reg. 2.3(5), 3.6
WA      10.97.050(7)
WV
WI
WY      7-19-106(h)

---------------------------------

24. Training employees


AL
AK      12.62.150(a)(5)
AZ
AR      12-12-210, 211
CA      Pen. Code 11077(d)
CO
CT      54-142i(d)
DE      11-1448A, 8505, 8561
DC
FL      943.08
GA      35-3-33(6); Reg. 140-2-.09(4)
HI      846-7(5)
ID      67-2911
IL
IN      4-1-6-2; 10-1-1-13
IA      692.11
KS
KY      17.147(4)
LA      Reg. LAC 1-18:10(1), (3)
ME
MD
MA      6-171
MI
MN      299C.10(2); Reg. 6 S.R. 274
MS      25-53-51(c); 45-27-7(1)(b)
MO
MT      44-2-202
NE      29-3518
NV
NH
NJ
NM      29-3-9
NY
NC      Reg. NCAC 4E.0401 through .0403
ND
OH      109.56
OK
OR      Reg. 257-10
PA
PR
RI
SC      Reg. 73-26D.
SD
TN      62-26-226
TX
UT      53-5-209(4)(b)
VT
VI
VA      Reg. 3.3, 3.4
WA      10.97.090; Reg. WAC 446-20-240
WV
WI
WY


-------------------------------

25. Listing of information systems


AL
AK
AZ
AR
CA
CO      24-30-607
CT
DE
DC
FL
GA
HI
ID
IL
IN      4-1-6-7
IA      22.11
KS
KY
LA
ME
MD
MA      Reg. 803 CMR 3.08
MI
MN      Reg. 6 S.R. 276
MS
MO
MT
NE
NV
NH      7-A:2
NJ
NM
NY
NC
ND
OH      1347.03
OK
OR
PA      18-9171
PR
RI
SC
SD
TN
TX
UT
VT
VI
VA
WA
WV
WI
WY


---------------------------

26. Freedom of Information Act 
(including criminal justice information)


AL
AK
AZ
AR
CA
CO      24-72-301, 303
CT
DE
DC      1-1521 et seq.
FL      119.01, .07; 943.053
GA      50-18-70
HI
ID
IL
IN      4-1-6-1; 5-14-3-2(6)
IA
KS      45-215 et seq.
KY      61.878
LA      44:3(4)
ME      1-401-410
MD
MA      66A-1
MI      15.231 et seq.
MN      13.03, .80 et seq.
MS      25-59-19
MO
MT
NE      29-3520
NV
NH
NJ
NM
NY      Pub. Off. Law 87(2)(e)
NC
ND      44-04-18
OH
OK      51-24A.8
OR      181.54
PA
PR
RI      38-2-1
SC
SD      "1-27-1"
TN
TX      TRCS Art. 6252-17a(3)(a)(8)
UT
VT      1-317(b)(5)
VI      T.3-881(g)
VA      2.1-342(b)(1)
WA
WV
WI
WY

-----------------------------------

27. Freedom of Information Act 
(excluding criminal justice information)


AL
AK      12.62.160(a)
AZ      39-121.01
AR      12-12-909, 1003; 25-19-105
CA      Gov. Code 6254
CO
CT      4-190(i)
DE      29-10002(d)(4)
DC

FL      119.07
GA
HI      92-50; 92E-3
ID      9-340
IL      5-140/7(1)(d)
IN
IA
KS
KY      17-150(4); 61.878
LA      44:3(4)
ME      1-401; 16-614(4A)
MD      State Gov't Code  10-611 et seq.
MA
MI
MN
MS
MO
MT
NE
NV
NH      91-A:5; 106-B:14
NJ      Exec. Order 123
NM
NY      Pub. Off. Law 87(2)(e)
NC
ND
OH      109.57(D); 1347.04
OK      51-24A.8
OR      192.5
PA
PR
RI      38-2-1
SC
SD
TN      10-7-504; 40-15-106(b), (c)(1); 40-32-101(b), (c)(1)
TX      TRCS Art. 6252-17a(3)(a)(8)
UT      63-2-59 et seq.; 63-2-89
VT      1-317(b)(5); 20-2056
VI
VA      2.1-342(b)(1); 2.1-384(3), (7)
WA      42.17.250; 43.43.710
WV      29B-1-4
WI
WY      9-1-627; 16-4-201



------------------------------------

28. Central State repository


AL      41-9-591
AK      12.62.110(1)
AZ      41-1750.A, 2205
AR      12-12-201, 207, 208, 1001
CA      Pen. Code 11105
CO      24-33.5-401, 412
CT      29-11
DE      11-8501(b)(1)
DC      4-132
FL      943.051
GA      35-3-31
HI      846-2, 2.5
ID      67-2910
IL      20-2605/55(a); 20-2630/8
IN      5-2-5-2; 10-1-1-12; 10-1-2.5-1
IA      690.1
KS      22-4705
KY      17.140, .151
LA      15:578(1)
ME      25-1541
MD      27-747(b); Reg. 12.15.01.04
MA      6-168
MI      28.241 et seq.
MN      299C.05, .06, .09
MS      45-27-7(1)(a)
MO      43.500, .540
MT      44-5-213
NE      29-209, 210
NV      179A.075.1
NH      106-B:14
NJ      53:1-13
NM      29-3-1
NY      Exec. Law 837(6)
NC      114-10.1; 132-1.4
ND      12-60-07
OH      109.57(C)
OK      74-150.9
OR      181.066
PA      18-9101
PR      Act 1, 13; Reg. 6
RI      "12-1-7"
SC      23-3-110
SD      23-5-1, 2; 23-6-1
TN      38-6-101; 38-10-101 et seq.
TX      Code Crim. Proc., Art. 60.02; Gov't Code 411.042
UT      53-5-203, 214(5)
VT      20-2051; Reg. 3.10
VI
VA      19.2-388
WA      43.43.700
WV      15-2-24
WI      165.83, .84
WY      7-19-107(a)


---------------------------

End of File
pm 5/1/98