U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Programs
Bureau of Justice Statistics
                                                           
Special Report


Characteristics of State Parole Supervising Agencies, 2006 

August 2008, NCJ 222180           
    
-------------------------------------------------------------
This file is text only without graphics and many of the
tables. A Zip archive of the tables in this report in 
spreadsheet format (.csv) and the full report including 
tables and graphics in .pdf format are available from:
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/abstract/cspsa06.htm
-------------------------------------------------------------
                                                           
-------------------------------------------------------------
                                                           
By Thomas P. Bonczar
BJS Statistician

-------------------------------------------------------------
Overview

State parole supervising agencies employed nearly 65,000
full-time and 2,900 part-time workers on June 30, 2006,
according to findings from the 2006 Census of State Parole
Supervising Agencies. The average caseload was 38 active
parolees for each full-time equivalent (FTE) position devoted
to parole supervision. About half of parole supervising
agencies had a role in releasing prisoners to parole, setting
the conditions of supervision, or conducting revocation
hearings. 

The census collected information from 52 state agencies which
included 2,287 separate administrative, regional, and other
offices (table 1). These agencies reported that they
supervised 660,959 adult parolees or about 83% of the 798,202
parolees reported at yearend 2006 in the Annual Parole
Survey. (See Probation and Parole in the United States, 2006,
available at 
<http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/ abstract/ppus06.htm>.)

Combined parole and probation agencies supervised 4 times as
many offenders on probation as on parole

On June 30, 2006, 35 of the reporting state parole
supervising agencies also supervised adults on probation.
Parole is a period of conditional supervised release
following a prison term. Criminal offenders sentenced to a
period of correctional supervision in the community are on
probation. These combined parole-probation supervision
agencies supervised about 4 times as many offenders on
probation (1,200,570) as on parole (269,416). 

The 1.2 million probationers represented about a quarter of
the estimated 4,237,023 adults on probation on December 31,
2006, as reported in the 2006 Annual Probation Survey. Among
the agencies that provided information, 17 supervised paroled
offenders only. These agencies had 503 offices less than a
quarter of the total number of offices  but they 
supervised more than half of the total parole population. 

-------------------------------------------------------------
A technical supplement has been added to this report,
including an expanded Methodology, appendix tables with
state-level data, and detailed Explanatory Notes
-------------------------------------------------------------

Seven state agencies reported that they supervised juveniles
on probation or parole in addition to adults; however, not
all agencies reported the number of juveniles on supervision.

State parole supervising agencies located in a department of
corrections supervised a smaller percentage of parolees (69%)
than probationers (77%). In comparison, agencies that were
independent of a department of corrections supervised a
larger share of parolees (25%) than probationers (16%). Ten
independent agencies were located in the executive branch of 
government; one (Alabama) was in the legislative branch (see
appendix table 1, forthcoming). Other parole agencies
supervised nearly an equal share of parolees (7%) and
probationers (8%).

Five agencies supervised half of the parole  
population

Five state agencies accounted for about half of the adults
under parole supervision on June 30, 2006 (table 2). These
five agencies include the Departments of Corrections in
California (125,067 adults on parole); ***Footnote 1: An
additional 67 parolees were under supervision by the
California Youth Authority on June 30, 2006.***  Texas
(101,175); and Illinois (33,354); and two independent
agencies, New York (53,215) and Pennsylvania (24,956, 
excluding adults supervised by county parole offices).
Pennsylvania also supervised adults on probation (3,777) at
midyear 2006. 

State parole supervising agencies employed nearly 65,000
full-time and 2,900 part-time workers

Including payroll staff, nonpayroll staff, and contract
staff, an estimated 65,000 full-time and 2,900 part-time
workers were employed by the 52 state parole supervising
agencies on June 30, 2006 (table 3). This number includes
imputed estimates for parole supervising agencies in
Illinois, Wisconsin, and Oregon that did not provide
information on staffing in the census. Nonpayroll staff
included those on the payroll of other government 
agencies, unpaid interns, and volunteers.

In the 49 state agencies that provided information, 82% of
full-time employees worked for a department of corrections,
16% worked for an independent parole agency, and 1% for
another type of agency. Nearly all part-time employees (96%)
worked for a department of corrections. When viewed by type
of population served, 66% of full-time workers and 81% of
part-time workers were employed by an agency that supervised
both parolees and probationers.

Among state agencies that provided information about their
employees, nearly all full-time workers (94%) and about half
of part-time workers (47%) were on the payroll. An equal
percentage of the remaining full-time employees were
nonpayroll staff and contract staff (3% each). Among part-
time workers, 40% were nonpayroll staff and 13% were
contractors. Men (51%) and women (49%) made up nearly equal
percentages of full-time employees. Women were 58% of
part-time employees.

Average caseload was 38 active parolees for each FTE devoted
to supervision

Respondents were asked to report the portion of full-time
equivalent (FTE) staff positions devoted to direct
supervision of adult offenders on active parole on June 30,
2006. The census included directions for counting the 
time that full-time and part-time employees had available for
supervising parolees. Respondents were also asked to count
just that portion of time available for supervision of
parolees among employees who divided their time between
supervision of parolees and other responsibilities.  

An estimated 14,000 FTE staff supervised about 528,000 adults
active on parole on June 30, 2006 in the 52 agencies included
in the census (table 4). Staff positions allocated to
supervision of offenders on active parole amounted to about 1
in 5 of the estimated 65,000 full-time and 2,900 part-
time staff members. This resulted in an average caseload at
midyear 2006 of 38 persons on active parole supervision for
each FTE staff position devoted to adult parole supervision.

An average of 49 parolees were on active supervision for each
FTE position devoted to supervision in agencies that
supervised only parolees (based on 16 agencies that provided
information). Among agencies that had authority for both
parolees and probationers, 28 parolees were on active
supervision per FTE position (based on 25 agencies). These
caseload calculations do not take into account differences in
the offenses for which parolees had been incarcerated or
differences in their required levels of supervision.

Two-thirds of paroled offenders were required to meet with a
parole officer at least once a month

Two-thirds of adult offenders on parole were required to have
face-to-face contact with a parole officer at least once a
month, including 14% who were required to have weekly
face-to-face contact (table 5). An additional 17% of 
paroled offenders were required to meet with their parole
officers less than once a month or to maintain contact by
mail, telephone, or other means. Thirteen percent of paroled
offenders were no longer required to report on a regular
basis. A reporting frequency had not yet been determined for
3% of paroled offenders. Nearly 8 in 10 adult offenders were
on active parole supervision. 

Half of parole supervising agencies had a role in releasing
prisoners to parole, setting the conditions of supervision,
or conducting revocation hearings

Twenty-six of the 50 state agencies providing information
reported that, as of June 30, 2006, they participated in
releasing persons from prison to parole supervision, setting
the terms or conditions of adult parole supervision, or  
conducting parole revocation hearings (table 6). Of the 26
agencies that performed at least one of these functions, 
14 performed all 3 functions. The remaining 24 agencies that
responded performed none of these functions. 
Two agencies did not provide information.

Nineteen of 50 parole supervising agencies reported at
midyear 2006 that they considered prisoners for release. 
In the census, 13 parole supervising agencies reported that
between July 1, 2005, and June 30, 2006, they considered
126,641 prisoners for release and released 57,850 a rate 
of 46 prisoners released per 100 considered. Some prisoners
considered for release may have been released after this
period, and some of those released may have been considered
for release before the period. North Dakota released 76
prisoners per 100 considered for release and Connecticut
released 71 (table 7). Arizona released 13 per 100. The
census did not collect information on the characteristics 
of prisoners considered for release.

Paroled offenders are frequently required to abide by one or
more conditions of supervision when released into the
community. Such conditions may include payment of supervision
fees, submission to drug testing, finding employment, and
fulfilling requirements for treatment. Adult parole 
supervising agencies in 20 states reported that they set the
terms or conditions of adult parole supervision. In 14 of
these states, the parole board also had a role. The 30 parole
supervising agencies reporting that they did not perform this
function most frequently identified the parole board (27 
jurisdictions) as the entity that set the terms or conditions
of supervision.

Failure to abide by the terms or conditions of supervision
may result in revocation of parole. Revocation can result in
the return of the paroled offender to incarceration or lead
to modification of the conditions of parole supervision. 

Seventeen of the 18 agencies that had responsibility for
conducting parole revocation hearings held 67,534 hearings
between July 1, 2005, and June 30, 2006. Based on the number
of adults on parole in these agencies during the year ending
June 30, 2006, no more than one in five parolees had a 
revocation hearing.***Footnote 2: This was calculated by
dividing 67,534 parole revocation hearings by an estimated
317,828 parolees at risk of re-incarceration.*** 
This is because some parolees may have had more than one
revocation hearing. 

A total of 317,828 parolees were at risk of re-incarceration
in these 17 agencies, including an estimated 203,125 adults
on parole on June 30, 2005, plus an estimated 114,703 who
entered parole supervision between July 1, 2005, and June 30,
2006 (not shown in table). 

Each of the 18 agencies that conducted parole revocation
hearings reported sharing this responsibility with a parole
board. Thirty of the 32 supervising agencies that did not
conduct revocation hearings identified the parole board 
as the authority performing this function.

Up to 16% of at-risk parolees in some agencies were
re-incarcerated for a failed drug test

All 50 parole supervising agencies that provided information
reported testing paroled offenders for the use of illegal
drugs during the year ending June 30, 2006. Eight agencies
were able to report the number of parolees returned to 
incarceration between July 1, 2005, and June 30, 2006, due to
a drug violation detected during agency testing. These
agencies re-incarcerated between less than 0.5% and 16% of
those estimated to have been at risk of re-incarceration
(table 8). The population at risk of re-incarceration in
these agencies included adults who were on parole on June 30,
2005, plus those who entered parole between July 1, 2005, and
June 30, 2006. 

Information about the number of paroled offenders tested and
whether testing was done upon entry to supervision, randomly,
or upon suspicion of use, was not obtained.

Nearly all agencies report use of drug, sex offender,  
or mental health treatment programs

On June 30, 2006, 47 of 49 parole supervising agencies
reported having paroled offenders enrolled in a drug
treatment program run by a formally trained professional
(table 9). In the 21 agencies that provided enrollment 
counts, an average of 10.9% of all paroled offenders (28,084
of 258,652) were enrolled in such a program. 

Nearly all agencies (46) also reported that paroled offenders
were enrolled in a self-help or drug awareness program such
as Narcotics Anonymous or Cocaine Anonymous. Seven of these
agencies, supervising 26,333 parolees, reported that 4,510
parolees (17.1%) were in these programs on June 30, 2006. The
other agencies were unable to provide counts.

Nearly all parole supervision agencies also reported having
paroled adult offenders enrolled in a sex offender treatment
program (46 agencies), or a mental health treatment program
(47) (table 10). Twenty-six agencies reported that 3.7% of
paroled offenders were enrolled in a sex offender treatment
program, and 17 agencies reported that 9.0% of paroled
offenders were enrolled in a mental health treatment program
operated by a formally trained mental health professional.
Among the agencies that provided information, a greater
percentage of paroled offenders were enrolled in drug 
treatment programs than in sex offender or mental health
programs.

2 in 5 parole supervising agencies operated  
or contracted a housing service for paroled offenders 

Respondents were asked whether their parole agency had a
program that provided assistance to parolees in obtaining
housing, beyond an occasional referral by a parole officer to
an apartment building or landlord. Among 50 state supervising
agencies that provided information, 7 reported having a
working relationship with a state or county housing agency,
and 6 had a contract with a private rental agency to refer
paroled offenders to landlords (table 11). Four agencies
operated an in-house service to provide housing referrals to
paroled offenders. Ten other agencies operated other types of
programs. 

Twenty of the 50 agencies that provided information indicated
that as of June 30, 2006, they had some type of formal
housing assistance program for paroled offenders (table 12).
Four agencies offered two or more types of housing assistance
programs.

Half of parole supervising agencies offered some type of
formal employment assistance

Other than an occasional referral by a parole officer to a
job opening or to a particular employer, the most frequent
type of formal employment assistance provided by parole
supervising agencies involved a working relationship with 
a state or county employment agency (17 agencies). Nearly
equal numbers of parole supervising agencies reported that
paroled offenders received employment assistance through a
contract with a private employment service (8 agencies), that
the parole agency operated an in-house employment service for
paroled offenders (6 agencies), or that some other type of
employment assistance was provided (6 agencies). 

Overall, 25 of the 50 adult parole supervising agencies that
provided information had some type of organized program to
provide employment assistance to paroled offenders at midyear
2006 (table 13). Seven agencies offered more than one type of
employment assistance program.

Methodology

The 2006 Census of State Parole Supervising Agencies, with a
reference date of June 30, 2006, was sent to 68 respondents,
including 50 central state reporters, the California Youth
Authority, and the District of Columbia (table 14). Sixteen
local Minnesota Community Corrections Act agencies were 
asked to provide information on staffing and supervision not
available from the state. The purpose of the census was to
collect information about parole supervising organizations.

In contrast with the parole census, the 2006 Annual Parole
Survey (APS),with a reference date of December 31, 2006, was
sent to 54 respondents, including 54 central state reporters,
the California Youth Authority, and 1 municipal agency. The
APS collected summary counts of the number of adults on
parole at the beginning and end of the year, the number of
adults entering and exiting parole supervision during the
year, and characteristics of the end of year parole
population. The APS has been conducted annually since 1977. 

Responses to the parole census included one summary response
from a central respondent in the Oregon Department of
Corrections based on summary data gathered from 36 county
governments that independently administered all adult parole
supervision in the state. Illinois provided only counts of
the adult parole population on December 31, 2007 for the
state as a whole and by parole office. Wisconsin provided no
data.

Virginia's report of 8,609 adults on parole supervision on
June 30, 2006, included additional groups of offenders that
were not previously reported. For the parole census, Virginia
included all paroled offenders for whom the state has
responsibility, paroled felons who are the responsibility of
local jurisdictions in Virginia, and offenders whose parole
was originally supervised by the courts that sentenced them.
Restricting Virginia's parole count to the groups included in
the 2006 Annual Parole Survey would result in an estimate of
4,239 adults on parole on June 30, 2006   based on an average 
of the state's adult parole population on January 1, 2006,
and December 31, 2006. 

A technical supplement to this report is forthcoming. It
includes an expanded Methodology that discusses estimation
procedures. It contains detailed Explanatory Notes with
definitions, limitations, and counting exceptions in the 
census. Also, the supplement will contain appendix tables
with state-level data and other details on findings in this
report. 

Revised 2/9/09 JER
