U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Programs
Bureau of Justice Statistics

Bulletin

National Crime Victimization Survey

Criminal Victimization, 2009

October 2010   NCJ 231327

Jennifer L. Truman, Ph.D.
Michael R. Rand 
BJS Statistician

-------------------------------------------------------------
This file is text only without graphics and many of the
tables. A Zip archive of the tables in this report in
spreadsheet format (.csv) and the full report including
tables and graphics in .pdf format are available from:
http://bjs.ojp.usdoj.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbdetail&iid=2217

Report is one in a series.  More recent editions may be
available.  To view a list of all in the series go to         
http://bjs.ojp.usdoj.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbse&lid=6
-------------------------------------------------------------

In 2009, U.S. residents age 12 or older experienced an
estimated 20 million violent and property victimizations,
according to the National Crime Victimization Survey (NCVS).
These criminal victimizations included an estimated 4.3
million violent crimes, 15.6 million property crimes, and
133,000 personal thefts. Rates of violent and property crime
in 2009 were at the lowest overall levels recorded since the
survey's inception in 1972.

The overall victimization rate for violent crimes declined
from 19.3 to 17.1 victimizations per 1,000 persons between
2008 and 2009 (table 1). A decline in simple assault (down
13%) contributed to the overall decline in the violent
crime rate during this period. Due to a decline in the rate
of theft (down 6%), the overall property crime rate also
declined between 2008 and 2009. 

Rates for every type of violent and property crime measured
by the NCVS declined from 2000 to 2009. During the 10-year
period, the violent crime rate declined by 39% and the
property crime rate decreased by 29%. Declines ranged
from 57% for rape or sexual assault to 19% for household
burglary among the individual types of crimes. 

-----------------------------------------------------------

Highlights

*An estimated 4.3 million violent crimes, 15.6 million
property crimes, and 133,000 personal thefts were committed
against U.S. residents age 12 or older in 2009.

*Rates of violent (down 39%) and property (down 29%) crimes
decreased between 2000 and 2009. 

*The overall rate of firearm violence declined from 2.4 to
1.4 victimizations per 1,000 persons age 12 or older between
2000 and 2009.

*Armed offenders committed 22% of all violent crime incidents
in 2009,including 8% by offenders with a firearm.

*Violence against males, blacks, and persons age 24 or
younger occurred at higher or somewhat higher rates than the
rates of violence against females, whites, and persons age 25
or older in 2009. 

*Females knew their offenders in almost 70% of violent crimes
committed against them; males knew their offenders in 45% of 
violent crimes committed against them.  

*About half (49%) of all violent crimes and about 40% of all
property crimes were reported to the police in 2009. Violent
crimes against females (53%) were more likely to be reported
than violent crimes against males (45%).
-------------------------------------------------------------

The 2008 to 2009 year-to-year decline in violent and property
crimes was consistent with findings from the Federal Bureau
of Investigation's (FBI)Uniform Crime Reporting (UCR)
program, which found declines in the rates of
both violent (down 6.1%) and property crimes (down 5.5%)
reported to the police. Because the NCVS and UCR measure an
overlapping but not identical set of offenses and use
different methodologies, exact congruity between the
estimates cannot be expected. Both programs have generally
demonstrated similar year-to-year increases or decreases in
the levels of violent and property crimes during the survey's
38-year history. 

A major difference between the programs is the type of data
collected. The NCVS obtains estimates of both crimes reported
and those not reported to the police. The UCR collects data
on reported crimes only. According to victims interviewed for
the NCVS, 49% of violent crimes and 39% of property crimes
were reported to the police in 2009. (For additional
information about the differences and similarities between
the NCVS and UCR, see the Nation's Two Crime Measures, BJS
Web, May 2003.)

The NCVS collects information from victims of nonfatal
violent crimes and property crimes

The NCVS collects information on nonfatal crimes reported and
not reported to the police against persons age 12 or older
from a national representative sample of U.S. households. It
produces national rates and levels of personal and property
victimization, as well as information on the characteristics
of crimes and victims, and the consequences of victimization
to victims. Information on homicide presented in this report
was obtained from the FBI's UCR program.

Violent crimes measured by the NCVS include rape, sexual
assault, robbery, aggravated assault, and simple assault.
Property crimes include household burglary, motor vehicle
theft, and theft. The survey also measures personal
theft, which includes pocket picking and purse snatching.

In 2009, 38,728 households and 68,665 individuals age 12 and
older were interviewed for the NCVS. Each household was
interviewed twice during the year. The response rate was
91.8% of households and 87.0% of eligible individuals.

Violent and property crime rates remain at historic lows in
2009

The rate of every major violent and property crime measured
by the NCVS declined between 2000 and 2009 (table 2, figure
1).***Footnote 1:  The discussion of victimization rate
trends excludes NCVS estimates for 2006 because of the
methodological inconsistencies between the data for that year
and other years. See Methodology and Criminal Victimization,
2006 Technical Notes, BJS Web, December 2007***  The overall
violent crime rate has decreased since 1994, a trend that
continued through 2009 (down 39%). Violent crime rates had
remained generally stable between 2003 and 2007 and
declined from 2007 to 2009. 

During the 10-year period from 2000 to 2009, trends in the
rates of victimization varied by the type of crime. The rate
of rape or sexual assault remained generally stable from 2000
to 2007 before declining between 2007 and 2009 (table 3).
Rates of robbery fell in the first 5-year period between 2000
and 2004 and remained stable for the second period. Rates for
both aggravated assault and simple assault fell between 2000
and 2009. 

The trend in a declining rate of overall property crime that
began in 1974 continued through 2009. The rate of overall
property crime fell by 29% during the 10-year period (figure
2). Rates of burglary declined from 2000 to 2002 and remained
generally stable between 2002 and 2009. The rate for property
theft fell in both the first and second half of the 10-year
period, with a greater decline from 2005 to 2009 than from
2000 to 2004. Rates of motor vehicle theft remained generally
stable between 2000 and 2007, and fell in 2008. There was no
change in the rate of motor vehicle theft from 2008 to
2009. 
     
-------------------------------------------------------------
Federal Bureau of Investigation, Uniform Crime Reports,
2008-2009

Violent crime as measured by the FBI through the Uniform
Crime Reporting Program (UCR)includes murder and
non-negligent manslaughter, forcible rape, robbery, and
aggravated assault. Property crimes include burglary, larceny
theft, and motor vehicle theft. The UCR measures
crimes reported to the police against both persons and
businesses. For information about the
differences and similarities of the NCVS and UCR, see the
Nation's Two Crime Measures, BJS Web, May 2003.

According to results released by the FBI, the rates of
violent crimes reported to police as measured by the UCR
declined by 6.1% between 2008 and 2009 (table 4). The rates
of property crimes reported to police declined by 5.5%
between 2008 and 2009. The UCR reported declines in the
numbers of every crime measured.
-------------------------------------------------------------
Victim characteristics in 2009 remained similar to those in
previous years

Similar to previous NCVS findings, males, blacks, and persons
age 24 or younger continued to be victimized at higher or
somewhat higher rates than females, whites, and persons age
25 or older (table 5). (See statistical differences defined
in Methodology.)

Gender of victim

Males were victims of violent crime at rates slightly higher
than females, indicating a continuing convergence of male and
female victimization. Differences between male and female
rates of simple assault were not statistically significant in
2009. This has occurred twice since 2000, in 2001 and 2007.
Consistent with previous years, males experienced higher
rates of robbery and aggravated assault than females. Females
were more likely than males to be victims of rape or sexual
assault. 

Race of victim

Blacks were more likely than whites to be victims of overall
violent crime, robbery, and aggravated assault, and somewhat
more likely than whites to be victims of rape or sexual
assault. Blacks also experienced higher rates than
persons of other races (American Indian, Alaska Native,
Asian, Native Hawaiian, and other Pacific Islander) of
overall violence, robbery, aggravated assault, and simple
assault. Persons of two or more races were victims of
overall violent crime at higher rates than whites and persons
of other races, and somewhat higher rates than blacks. 

Hispanic origin of victim

In 2009, Hispanics and non-Hispanics were equally likely to
experience overall violent crime, rape or sexual assault,
aggravated assault, and simple assault. Similar to NCVS
findings for previous years, Hispanics were victims of
robbery at rates higher than those of non-Hispanics. 

Age of victim

Overall victimization rates for violent crime declined with
victim age in 2009, a finding consistent with previous years.
Generally, persons age 25 or older experienced violent
victimization at lower rates than younger persons.
Persons ages 12 to 15 experienced simple assault at rates
higher than persons age 20 or older, and slightly higher
rates than persons ages 16 to 19.

Lower income households and larger households experienced
higher property crime rates 

Lower income households experienced property crime at higher
rates than higher income households. In general, lower income
households had higher rates of overall property crime and
household burglary, compared to higher income households
(table 6). Households in the lowest income category--less
than $7,500 per year--had the highest overall property crime
rate, and were victims of property crime at a rate that was
about 1.6 times higher than households earning $75,000 per
year or more. 

Household burglary, property theft, and motor vehicle theft
rates varied across income categories. Burglary rates of
households in the lowest income category were about 3 times
higher than households earning $75,000 per year or more.
Households earning less than $7,500 per year were more likely
to experience property theft than households in all other
income categories. Rates of motor vehicle theft were higher
for households earning $35,000 to $49,999 per year than
households earning $50,000 per year or more. 

Consistent with previous years of the NCVS, larger households
experienced property crime at higher rates than smaller
households in 2009. Overall property crime rates were greater
for larger households compared to smaller households. For
property theft and motor vehicle theft, patterns across
households of different sizes were similar to that of overall
property crime. Households with six or more persons
experienced more overall property crime, household burglary,
motor vehicle theft, and property theft than smaller
households. Households with six or more persons were about 3
times more likely to be victims of property crime than single
person households. 

Victims knew the offenders in 45% of violent crimes against
men and 68% of violent crimes against women in 2009

Females have generally been most often victimized by someone
they knew, while males have been more likely or equally
likely to be victimized by a stranger. This pattern continued
during 2009 (table 7). 

Females knew their offenders in almost 70% of violent crimes
committed against them. Females who were victims of violence
were more likely to be victimized by someone they knew (a
nonstranger) than a stranger for all measured violent
crimes, except robbery. 

The percentages of overall violence, rape or sexual assault,
robbery, aggravated assault, and simple assault committed by
strangers were higher for males than for females. Male
victims of overall violent crime were slightly more likely to
have been victimized by strangers than by nonstrangers. For
rape or sexual assault and robbery, males were more likely to
have been victimized by strangers than nonstrangers.
Offenders known to both male and female victims were most
often identified as friends or acquaintances. For overall
violent crime and assault, males and females were equally
likely to have been victimized by an acquaintance. For rape
or sexual assault, females were more likely than males to
have been victimized by an acquaintance. For robbery, males
were more likely than females to have been victimized by an
acquaintance.

The greatest difference between violent crime committed
against males and females was the percentage committed by
intimate partners. The NCVS defines intimate partners as
current or former spouses, boyfriends, or girlfriends.
The percentage of female victims (26%) of intimate partner
violence was about 5 times that of male victims (5%). There
were no significant differences in the numbers and rates of
intimate partner victimizations for males and females
from 2008 to 2009 (table 8). 

Weapons were used in 22% of all violent crimes in 2009

For overall violent crime, firearms, knives, and other
weapons were used in about equal proportions (table 9).
Robbery (47%) was the most likely offense to involve an armed
offender. Firearms were the most often used weapon in
robberies (28%). 

Between 2000 and 2009, the overall rate of firearm violence
declined from 2.4 to 1.4 victimizations per 1,000 persons age
12 or older (table 10). Firearms were used in about 8% of all
violent crime incidents in 2009. During the 10-year period,
about 6% to 9% of all violent crime incidents were committed
with firearms (not shown in table).  

Nearly half of all violent crimes and about 40% of all
property crimes were reported to the police in 2009

During 2009, a greater percentage of violent victimizations
(49%) were reported to the police, compared to property
crimes (39%) (table 11). The percentage of robberies reported
to the police (68%) was somewhat higher than the percentage
for aggravated assault (58%), and higher than the percentage
for simple assault (42%). For property crimes, motor vehicle
theft (85%) was the crime most frequently reported to the
police. 

The percentage of violent crimes reported to the police was
generally stable from 2000 to 2009 (figure 3). There was no
significant difference between the percentage of violent
crimes reported in 2000 (48%) and 2009 (49%). For property
crime, the percentage reported to the police varied during
the 10-year period. The percentage of property crimes
reported to the police in 2009 (39%) was higher than the
percentage reported in 2000 (36%), and somewhat higher than
those reported in 2001 (37%) and 2007 (37%).

In 2009, violent crimes against females (53%) were more
likely to be reported than violent crimes against males (45%)
(table 12). Overall, violent crimes against blacks were
slightly more likely to be reported than violent crimes
against whites (not shown in table). The percentage of
violent crimes reported to the police did not differ for
males or females in different racial groups.
Violent crimes against black females were more likely to be
reported to the police than those against white males, and
slightly more likely than those against males of other races.
For both males and females, there were no differences among
Hispanics and non-Hispanics in the likelihood of reporting
violent crime to the police.

The percentage of property crimes reported to the police for
households headed by males and those headed by females did
not differ. For households that had a white or black male
head of household, property crimes were more likely to be
reported than property crimes against households headed by
males of other races. Reporting did not differ by racial
group for households that had a female head of household. No
difference emerged in the percentage of property crimes
reported between Hispanic and non-Hispanic households,
regardless of whether the head of household was male or
female. 

Rates of violent crimes reported to the police remained
stable, and rates of property crime reported to the police
declined between 2008 and 2009

There was no statistical difference between the 2008 and 2009
rates of violent crimes reported to the police (table 13). 
The rate of property crimes reported to the police declined
from 2008 to 2009 due to a decline in the rate of theft
reported to the police.

Methodology

The National Crime Victimization Survey (NCVS) is an annual
data collection conducted by the U.S. Census Bureau for the
Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS). The NCVS collects
information on nonfatal crimes, reported and not reported to
the police, against persons age 12 or older from a nationally
representative sample of U.S. households. 

Violent crimes measured by the NCVS include rape or sexual
assault, robbery, aggravated assault, and simple assault.
Property crimes include household burglary, motor vehicle
theft, and theft.

The survey results presented in this report are based on data
gathered from residents living throughout the United States,
including persons living in group quarters, such as
dormitories, rooming houses, and religious group
dwellings. Armed Forces personnel living in military barracks
and institutionalized persons, such as correctional facility
inmates, were not included in the scope of this survey.

Each housing unit selected for the National Crime
Victimization Survey (NCVS) remains in the sample for 3
years, with each of seven interviews taking place
at 6-month intervals. An NCVS field representative's first
contact with a household selected for the survey is in
person. The field representative may conduct subsequent
interviews by telephone. To elicit more accurate reporting
of incidents, the NCVS uses a self-respondent method that
requires a direct interview with each person 12 years or
older in the household-except under certain specific
conditions. Proxy interviews accounted for about 3% of all
NCVS interviews in 2009.

Annual collection year estimates of the levels and rates of
victimization are derived by accumulating estimates
quarterly. The weights of all crimes reported during the
interviews in that year are summed, regardless of when the
crime occurred. The base for the collection year rate for
personal crimes is the sum of all person weights. The base
for the property crime rates is the sum of all household
weights. For more detail, see the Methodology in Criminal
Victimization in the United States, Statistical Tables, BJS
Web, March 2010. 
 
Methodological changes to the NCVS in 2006

As discussed in the previous editions in this bulletin
series, Criminal Victimization, 2006 and Criminal
Victimization, 2007, methodological changes implemented in
2006 impacted the estimates for that year to an extent that
they were considered to be not comparable to those of
previous years. Evaluation of 2007 and later data from the
NCVS conducted by BJS and the Census Bureau have found a high
degree of confidence that estimates for these years are
consistent with and comparable to those for 2005 and previous
years. For this reason, discussion of trends in the rates of
crime in this report excludes 2006. BJS and the Census Bureau
continue to examine the impact of the methodological changes
on survey estimates. The reports, Criminal Victimization,
2006 (December 2007), Criminal Victimization, 2007 (December
2008), Criminal Victimization, 2008 (September 2009),  are
available on the BJS Website at <http://bjs.ojp.usdoj.gov>.

Statistical differences defined

BJS tested the comparisons between the percentages and rates
for Criminal Victimization, 2009 to determine if observed
differences were statistically significant. Differences
described as higher, lower, or different passed a
test at the 0.05 level of statistical significance
(95%-confidence level). Differences described as somewhat,
slightly, marginally, or some indication passed a test at the
0.10 level of statistical significance (90%-confidence
level). Caution is required when comparing estimates not
explicitly discussed in this bulletin. 

Change in the rape/sexual assault rate for 2008 to 2009

While the change in the rape/sexual assault rate for 2008 to
2009 is significantly different at the 90%-confidence level,
care should be taken in interpreting this change because the
estimates of rape/sexual assault are based on a small number
of cases reported to the survey. Therefore, small absolute
changes and fluctuations in the rates of victimization can
result in large year-to-year percent change estimates. For
2009, the estimate of rape/sexual assault is based on 36
unweighted cases compared to 56 unweighted cases in 2008. The
measurement of rape and sexual assault represents one of
the most serious challenges in the field of victimization
research. Rape and sexual assault remain sensitive subjects
that are difficult to ask about in the survey context. As
part of the on-going redesign of the NCVS, BJS is
exploring methods for improving the reporting of these
crimes.
----------------------------------------------------------

The Bureau of Justice Statistics is the statistical agency of
the U.S. Department of Justice. James P. Lynch is director.

This Bulletin was written by Jennifer L.Truman, PhD and
Michael R. Rand. Matthew Durose verified the report.
Georgette Walsh and Jill Duncan edited the report, Barbara
Quinn produced the report, and Jayne Robinson prepared the
report for final printing under the supervision of Doris J.
James.

October 2010, NCJ 231327
-------------------------------------------------------------

-------------------------------------------------------------
This report in portable document format and in ASCII and its
related statistical data and tables
are available at the BJS World Wide Web Internet site:
<http://bjs.ojp.usdoj.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbdetail&iid=2217>
-------------------------------------------------------------

-------------------------------------------------------------
Office of Justice Programs
Innovation * Partnerships * Safer Neighborhoods
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov
-------------------------------------------------------------

10/07/2010/TLD/12:10 pm