U.S. Department of Justice 
Office of Justice Programs 
Bureau of Justice Statistics 

Criminal Victimization, 2010
National Crime Victimization Survey

Bulletin

Jennifer L. Truman, Ph.D., BJS Statistician 

----------------------------------------------------------
This file is text only without graphics and many of the
tables. A Zip archive of the tables in this report in
spreadsheet format (.csv) and the full report including
tables and graphics in .pdf format are available on BJS
website at:
http://www.bjs.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbdetail&iid=2224. 

This report is one in a series. More recent editions may be
available. To view a list of all in the series go to
http://www.bjs.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbse&sid=32.
-----------------------------------------------------------

During 2010, U.S. residents age 12 or older experienced an
estimated 18.7 million violent and property crime
victimizations, down from 20.1 million in 2009 and 24.2
million in 2001, according to the Bureau of Justice
Statistics' (BJS) National Crime Victimization Survey
(NCVS). These criminal victimizations in 2010 included an
estimated 3.8 million violent victimizations, 1.4 million
serious violent victimizations, 14.8 million property
victimizations, and 138,000 personal thefts. Violent and
serious violent victimizations declined by nearly 34%
between 2001 and 2010 (figure 1).

The NCVS collects information on nonfatal crimes reported and
not reported to the police against persons age 12 or older
from a nationally representative sample of U.S. households.
It produces national rates and levels of personal and
property victimization, as well as information on the
characteristics of crimes and victims, and the consequences
of victimization to victims. Because the NCVS is based on
interviews with victims, it cannot measure murder.
Information on homicide presented in this report was obtained
from the FBI's Uniform Crime Reporting Program (UCR).
-----------------------------------------------------------
HIGHLIGHTS

*The rate of total violent crime victimizations declined by
13% in 2010, which was about three times the average annual
decrease observed from 2001 through 2009 (4%).

*The decline in the rate of simple assault accounted for
about 82% of the total decrease in the rate of violent
victimization in 2010.

*In 2010 the property victimization rate declined by 6%,
compared to the average annual decrease of 3% observed from
2001 through 2009.

*From 2001 to 2010, weapon violence (26% to 22%) and
stranger-perpetrated violence (44% to 39%) declined.

*Between 2001 and 2010, about 6% to 9% of all violent
victimization were committed with firearms. This percentage
has remained stable since 2004. 

*After a slight overall decline from 2001 to 2008, the
percentage of victims of violent crimes who suffered an
injury during the victimization increased from 24% in 2008 to
29% in 2010.

*About 50% of all violent victimizations and nearly 40% of
property crimes were reported to the police in 2010. These
percentages have remained stable over the past 10 years.

*Males (15.7 per 1,000) and females (14.2 per 1,000) had
similar rates of violent victimization during 2010.
----------------------------------------------------------

The NCVS collected information from victims of nonfatal
violent crimes and property crimes

The NCVS measures the violent crimes of rape, sexual assault,
robbery, aggravated assault, and simple assault. The NCVS
classifies rape, sexual assault, robbery, and aggravated
assault as serious violent crimes. Property crimes include
household burglary, motor vehicle theft, and theft. The
survey also measures personal theft, which included pocket
picking and purse snatching.

Victimization is the basic unit of analysis used throughout
this report. Victimization is a crime as it affects one
individual person or household. For personal crimes, the
number of victimizations is equal to the number of victims
involved. The number of victimizations may be greater than
the number of incidents because more than one person may be
victimized during an incident. Each crime against a household
is assumed to involve a single victim, the affected
household.  

Victimization rate is a measure of the occurrence of
victimizations among a specified population group. For
personal crimes, this is based on the number of
victimizations per 1,000 residents age 12 or older. For
household crimes, the victimization rates are calculated
using the number of incidents per 1,000 households.

Violent and property victimizations declined in 2010

During 2010, the decline in the number of violent and
property victimizations was greater than the average rate of
decline during the nine years from 2001 through 2009. On
average, violent victimizations declined by 3% per year over
this period; however, these violent victimizations
dropped by 12% during 2010 (table 1). Property crime 
victimizations slightly declined by 5% during 2010, which was
more than two times the average annual rate of decline from
2001 to 2009.          

The number of violent victimizations declined from 4.3
million to 3.8 million from 2009 to 2010, which was a decline
of 12%. Simple assault, which accounted for 63% of all
violent victimizations, declined by 15%. This decline in
simple assault accounted for 83% of the total decrease in
violent victimizations. No measurable change occurred in the
number of serious violent victimizations from 2009 to 2010.
The number of property victimizations slightly declined by 5%
between 2009 and 2010 from 15.6 million to 14.8 million
victimizations. 

Similar to the number of violent victimizations, the violent
crime victimization rate the number of violent criminal
victimizations per 1,000 persons age 12 and older declined
from 17.1 to 14.9 victimizations per 1,000 persons between
2009 and 2010, which was a 13% decline (table 2). This
decline was more than the average annual 4% decline of the
violent victimization rates since 2001. No measurable change
occurred in the overall victimization rate for serious
violent crimes between 2009 and 2010.

The overall property crime victimization rate also declined
between 2009 and 2010 from 127.4 to 120.2 victimizations per
1,000 households, which was a 6% decline compared to the
average annual decline of 3% since 2001.

Between 2001 and 2010, rates of all major violent and
property victimizations measured by the NCVS declined. During
the 10-year period, the overall violent victimization rate
decreased by 40.5%, and the rate of serious violent
victimization declined by 40.6%. The rate of overall
property victimization fell by 28% from 2001 to 2010. 

Violent victimization rates fell to their lowest levels since
1993

The double-digit percentage decline in the violent crime
victimization rate in 2010 continued a longer-term trend.
Since 1993, the violent crime victimization rate declined
steadily from 49.9 per 1,000 persons age 12 or older in 1993
to 14.9 per 1,000 in 2010, a decline of 70% (figure 2).
Most of this decline occurred between 1993 and 2001, when the
violent crime rate declined by half to reach 25.1 in 2001.

The serious violent crime victimization rate followed a
similar pattern of decline as the violent crime victimization
rate. It declined by 73% since 1993, from 20.5 per 1,000
persons age 12 or older to 5.4 per 1,000. The serious violent
crime victimization rate declined by more than half    
between 1993 and 2000, reaching 10.1 per 1,000 persons age 12
or older in 2000. It declined by almost half again from 2000
to 2010, reaching 5.4 per 1,000 persons age 12 or older. 
     
********************************************************
Series victimization

Among ongoing research efforts associated with its redesign
of the NCVS, BJS is investigating ways to include high volume
repeat victimizations in the total estimates of criminal
victimization. The NCVS terms these high volume repeat
victimizations series victimizations. The inclusion of series
victimizations is important to obtain a more accurate
estimate of victimization. Series victimizations may also
involve certain types of victimizations, such as intimate
partner abuse or repeated attacks on adolescents at school.
***Footnote 1 Planty, M., & Strom, K.J. (2007). Understanding
the role of repeat victims in the production of annual US
victimization rates. Journal of Quantitative Criminology.***

The NCVS measures victimizations that are similar in type but
occur with such frequency that a victim is unable to recall
each individual event or to describe each event in detail.
Survey procedures allow NCVS interviewers to identify and
classify these similar victimizations as series
victimizations. The NCVS uses three questions to determine if
victimizations qualify as series victimizations: (1) Did the
incident occur six or more times in the past six months? (2)
Are the incidents similar to each other in detail? (3) Is the
respondent unable to recall enough detail of each incident to
distinguish one from another? When all three conditions are
met, the NCVS interviewer records the number of
victimizations and collects detailed information on the last
occurrence in the series. 

For various reasons, BJS has historically excluded series
victimizations from its counts and rates of criminal
victimization in prior Criminal Victimization bulletins. This
is primarily because victims are unable to provide details
for each event, and information is collected only on the last
incident in the series. Basing estimates solely on the last
incident may lead to overgeneralizing the characteristics of
the last victimization to all victimizations. Victims who
experience a large number of incidents may be unable to
provide reliable counts of the number of times these
victimizations occurred. Without such details it is difficult
to count and classify victimizations for purposes of
estimating national victimization rates. 

BJS has examined alternative methods for including series
victimizations in its annual counts and rates of
victimizations with the aim of implementing methods that
produce reliable estimates of crime levels and changes in
these levels. BJS analyzed various alternatives, including
the use of the victim's estimate of the number of times the
incident occurred, and the use of the victim's estimate with
a cap on the maximum number of incidents to minimize the
effects of extreme outliers on the rates. The findings from
these analyses resulted in the decision to count series
incidents as the number reported by the victim, but to cap
that number at 10.***Footnote 2 BJS research findings
underlying this decision will be made available in a
forthcoming report on series victimization estimates.***
For the majority of series incidents, victims report that the
incidents occurred 10 or fewer times. Research also indicates
that the fact that the respondent is unable to separate each
event suggests that these events are in fact very similar and
over generalization may not be a problem. Further, many
respondents estimate the number of incidents that occurred
using common measurements of time, such as once a month (6
times in the 6-month period) or once a week (24 times in the
6-month period).

Impact of series victimization

When series incidents are counted as the victim's estimate
with a cap of 10, the national estimates of victimization
increase, as expected. When series incidents are excluded
from the violent crime victimization rate, the rate ranges
from 23% to 37% lower than the rate obtained when series
incidents are included. This is consistent with research
conducted by BJS and others that has shown that national
victimization estimates can be highly sensitive to victims'
estimates of the number of times these events occurred.
***Footnote 3 See Series victimization: Report of a field
test, NCJ 104615, BJS web, April 1987; Rand, M., & Saltzman,
L.E. (2003). The nature and extent of recurring intimate
partner violence in the United States. Journal of Comparative
Family Studies; and Planty, M., & Strom, K.J. (2007).
Understanding the role of repeat victims in the production of
annual US victimization rates.Journal of Quantitative
Criminology.***

However, the general trends in the violent victimization rate
are not affected by the introduction of series victimizations
in these estimates. Both show a similar pattern of decline
over the period from 1993 to 2010 (figure 3). When violent
victimization rates excluded series incidents, the decline
from 1993 to 2010 was 70%; when series incidents were
included in the rates, the decline was 76%. Similarly, both
rates declined by about 40% from 2001 to 2010. The violent
victimization rate declined by 13% between 2009 and 2010 with
series victimizations excluded and declined by 14% with
series victimizations included.

The two violent crime victimization rates converged because a
decrease in the number of series incidents occurred in the
U.S. In 1993, series incidents (when counted as one
victimization) accounted for almost 7 percent of all violent
crime victimizations, and by 2010 series incidents accounted
for about 3% of all violent victimizations. Using the
counting rule when the series incidents were counted as the
victim estimate with a cap of 10, series accounted for almost
37% of all violent victimization in 1993 and 23% in 2010. 

**********************************************************

*********************************************************
Questions for series victimization

Altogether, how many times did this type of incident happen
during the last 6 months?

___ Number of incidents

How many incidents?
__1-5 incidents (not a "series")
__6 or more incidents

Are these incidents similar to each other in detail or are
they different types of crimes?

__Similar
__Different (not a "series")

Can you recall enough detail of each incident to distinguish
them from each other?

__Yes (not a "series")
__No (is a "series")
***********************************************************

***********************************************************
Both the NCVS and the preliminary UCR reported a decline in
crime from 2009 to 2010

The 2010 annual decline in violent and property
victimizations in the NCVS were consistent in direction with
preliminary findings from the FBI's Uniform Crime Reporting
Program (UCR) (table 3). Because the NCVS and UCR measure an
overlapping, but not identical, set of offenses and use
different methodologies, congruity between the estimates is
not expected. Throughout the 39-year history of the NCVS,
both programs have generally demonstrated similar
year-to-year increases or decreases in the levels of violent
and property crimes. 

Violent crime as measured by the FBI's UCR includes murder
and non-negligent manslaughter, forcible rape, robbery, and
aggravated assault. Property crimes include burglary,
larceny-theft, and motor vehicle theft. The UCR measures
crimes known to the police occurring to both persons and
businesses. The FBI obtains data on the crimes from law
enforcement agencies, while the NCVS collects data from
victims. ***Footnote 4 See The Nation's Two Crime Measures,
NCJ 122705, available online at
http://bjs.ojp.usdoj.gov/content/pub/pdf/ntcm.pdf, October
2004.***

There are significant differences between the NCVS and UCR.
The NCVS obtains estimates of crimes both reported and not
reported to the police. The UCR collects data on crimes only
known to the police. The UCR includes homicide, arson,
commercial crimes, and crimes against children under age 12;
the NCVS excludes these crime types. The UCR excludes simple
assaults and sexual assaults. Simple assaults include attacks
or attempted attacks without a weapon resulting in either no
injury or minor injury. Sexual assaults include attacks or
attempted attacks generally involving unwanted sexual contact
between the victim and offender that may or may not involve
force. Sexual assaults are commonly combined with rape
estimates in the NCVS. While the UCR and the NCVS define rape
similarly, the UCR measures the crime against women only, and
the NCVS measures it against both men and women. The NCVS
data are estimates from a nationally representative sample of
U.S. households, and the UCR data are based on the actual
counts of offenses reported by law enforcement jurisdictions.
The NCVS excludes persons in institutions (e.g., nursing
homes, etc.) and may exclude highly mobile populations and
the homeless; however, victimizations against these persons
may be included in the UCR. Given these differences, the two
measures of crime should be considered to complement each
other and provide a more comprehensive picture of crime in
the United States. 

According to preliminary results released by the FBI, between
2009 and 2010 the number of violent crimes known to the
police as measured by the UCR declined by about 6%, and the
number of property crimes declined by about 3%. Between 2009
and 2010 the number of violent crimes in the NCVS declined by
12% and the number of property crimes declined slightly by
5%. Both the UCR and the NCVS reported declines in the
numbers of violent crimes and property crimes. The UCR
reported declines in the numbers of all other crimes
measured. The change in the number of crimes reported to the
police in the NCVS from 2009 to 2010 was not statistically
significant.
********************************************************

Property victimization fell to the lowest levels since 1993

As with violent victimization rates, the property crime
victimization rate also declined over the longer term.
Property crime victimization rates were calculated based on
the number of households that were victimized; the rate was
calculated as the number of property crime victimizations per
1,000 households in the United States. The property crime
victimization rate declined 50% from 318.9 per 1,000
households in 1993 to 159.0 per 1,000 households in 2002. It
declined further to 120.2 per 1,000 households in 2010
(figure 4).

Severity and nature of violent victimization 

With the reported declines in violent and serious violent
victimization during the current decade, the nature and
severity of violence changed. The prevalence of injury in
violence increased in recent years to previous levels; weapon
use in violent victimizations and violent victimizations
perpetrated by strangers declined slightly. Reporting to the
police remained stable, with about half of all violent
victimizations reported to the police.

The prevalence of injury in violence increased in 2010 to
previous levels

In 2010, 29% of all victims of violence suffered an injury.
Of those victims of violence who were injured, 5% were
seriously injured, and 23% suffered minor injuries (not shown
in table). About 41% of all victims of serious violence
suffered an injury from their victimization in 2010. Of the
victims of serious violence who were injured, 15% were
seriously injured, and 23% suffered minor injuries. 

From 2001 to 2006, the percentage of victims experiencing
violent victimization who suffered an injury from their
victimization was relatively stable at about 28% (figure 5).
In 2008, the percentage of victims of violence who were
injured dropped to 24%. The percentage has since increased to
28% in 2009 and 29% in 2010. 

Weapon use in violent victimization declined slightly between
2001 and 2010

For overall violent victimization, weapons were used in 22%
of all violent victimizations and 61% of serious violent
victimizations in 2010. Weapon use varied by type of crime.
In 2010, 12% of rape and sexual assaults and 20% of all
assaults involved a weapon (table 4). Firearms were used in
violent victimizations more often than knives. Robbery (44%)
was the most likely offense to involve an armed offender.
Firearms were the most commonly used weapon in robberies
(29%). 

During the past decade, the pattern of weapon use in violent
victimization changed slightly. The percentage of violent
victimizations involving weapons declined slightly from 26%
in 2001 to 22% in 2010 (figure 6). 

During the 10-year period, about 6% to 9% of all violent
victimizations were committed with firearms (figure 7). The
percent of violent victimizations involving firearms has
remained generally stable from 2004 to 2010.

Violent victimizations perpetrated by strangers declined from
2001 to 2010

Strangers were offenders in about 39% of all violent
victimizations during 2010, a percentage that has declined
from 44% in 2001 (figure 8). From 2001 to 2010, close to half
of all victims of violence knew their offenders. During the
10-year period, the relationship of the offender to the
victim was unknown for an average of 9% of all violent
victimizations.

In 2010, the percentage of violence perpetrated by strangers
and nonstrangers varied by the victim's sex. Females knew
their offenders in 64% of violent victimizations committed
against them, and males knew their offenders in 40% of
violent victimizations against them (table 5). Females were
more likely to be victimized by someone they knew (a
nonstranger) than by a stranger for all measured violent
crimes except robbery. The percentages of overall violence,
robbery, or simple assaults committed by strangers were
higher for males than for females. Offenders known to both
male and female victims were most often identified as friends
or acquaintances. For overall violent victimization, robbery,
and assault, males and females were equally likely to have
been victimized by an acquaintance.

Trends in violence perpetrated by strangers and nonstrangers
from 2001 to 2010 were also slightly different for females
and males (not shown in figure). The percentage of females
who were victimized by a nonstranger remained relatively
stable near 60% each year from 2001 to 2010. The percentage
of males who were victimized by a nonstranger averaged about
39% from 2001 to 2010.

The percentage of males who were victimized by a stranger
declined from 55% to 48% over the 10-year period (not shown
in figure). For females, the percentage of
stranger-perpetrated violence remained relatively stable,
except for a decline from 2005 to 2008. While these
percentages remained stable for females, males experienced a
decrease in stranger-perpetrated violence. This may be why
the trends in stranger-perpetrated and onstranger-perpetrated
violence converged in 2005.

The percentage of female victims (22%) of intimate partner
violence was about 4 times that of male victims (5%). The
NCVS defines intimate partners as current or former spouses,
boyfriends, or girlfriends. The rate of intimate partner
violence for females decreased from 2009 to 2010. In
comparison, there were no significant differences in the
numbers and rates of intimate partner victimizations for
males from 2009 to 2010 (table 6).

The percentage of violent victimizations reported to the
police remained nearly stable from 2001 to 2010

Reporting to the police indicates whether or not the police
were notified about the victimization. The victim, other
third parties (including witnesses, other victims, household
members, or other officials, such as school officials), or
police already at the scene may report the incident. Police
notification may occur during or immediately following a
criminal incident or days or even weeks later. 

During 2010, a greater percentage of violent victimizations
(51%) than property victimizations (39%) were reported to
police (table 7). More than half of all serious violent
victimizations (58%) were reported to the police, compared to
47% of simple assaults. 

The percentage of violent and serious violent victimizations
reported to the police was generally stable from 2001 to 2010
(figure 9). No significant difference was found between the
percentage of violent victimizations (49% in 2001 and 51% in
2010) and serious violent victimizations (57% in 2001 and 58%
in 2010).

In 2010, the percentage of violent victimizations against
females (53%) and males (49%) reported to the police were
similar (table 8). The percentage of violent victimizations
reported to police against white non-Hispanic (50%), black
non-Hispanic (48%), and Hispanic (53%) males were similar.
For females, the percentage of violent victimizations
reported to the police against white non-Hispanics (52.4%),
black non-Hispanics (55.4%), Hispanics (62.5%) were also
similar.

Male and female victimization rates converged in 2010

In 2010, for the first time since the NCVS began reporting on
differences in victimizations by sex, males (15.7 per 1,000
males age 12 or older) and females (14.2 per 1,000) had
similar rates of violent victimization. This indicates a
continuing convergence of male and female victimization
(table 9). Historically, males have had higher rates of
violent victimization compared to females. For example, in
1994 the rate of violent victimization for males was 59.6
per 1,000 and 42.5 per 1,000 for females.***Footnote 5 See
Criminal Victimization 1994, NCJ 158022, BJS Web, April
1996.***

For simple assault, no detectable statistical differences
were noted between male (9.7 per 1,000) and female (9.2 per
1,000) rates during 2010. During the past decade male and
female simple assault rates have been similar three times:
2001, 2007, and 2009 (data not shown). Consistent with
previous years, the robbery victimization rate was higher for
males (2.4 per 1,000 males age 12 or older) than for females
(1.4 per 1,000). Aggravated assault rates were also higher
for males (3.4 per 1,000) than for females (2.3 per 1,000).
Females (1.3 per 1,000) were more likely than males (0.1 per
1,000) to be victims of rape or sexual assault.  

Persons of two or more races had higher rates of violent
victimization than white non-Hispanics, black non-Hispanics,
Hispanics, and Asians or Pacific Islanders 

In 2010, the overall violent victimization and aggravated
assault rates for black non-Hispanics (20.8 per 1,000 age 12
or older) were higher than for white non-Hispanics (13.6 per
1,000) and for Hispanics (15.6 per 1,000). Asians and Pacific
Islanders had the lowest rates of overall violent
victimization (6.3 per 1,000). Persons of two or more races
(52.6 per 1,000) were victims of overall violent
victimization at higher rates than persons of any other
racial or ethnic category, except American Indians and
Alaskan Natives. American Indians and Alaskan Natives (42.2
per 1,000) had higher rates of violent victimization than
white non-Hispanics (13.6 per 1,000), Hispanics (15.6 per
1,000), Asian and Pacific Islander (6.3 per 1,000), and
slightly higher rates than black non-Hispanics (20.8 per
1,000).  

Persons ages 25 or older generally experienced lower violent
victimization when compared to younger persons

Generally, persons ages 25 or older had lower violent
victimization rates than younger persons. Persons ages 18 to
20 had higher robbery rates (5.9 per 1,000) than persons ages
12 to 14 (0.7 per 1,000) and ages 25 or older (from 2.5 to
0.6 per 1,000), and slightly higher rates than persons
ages 15 to 17 (2.7 per 1,000). 

Lower income households and larger households experienced
higher property crime 

Lower income households were more likely than higher income
households to experience property crime. In general, lower
income households had higher rates of overall property crime
and household burglary, compared to higher income households
(table 10). Households in the lowest income category less
than $7,500 per year had a higher overall property
victimization rate (168.7 per 1,000 households), compared to
households earning $75,000 or more (119.3 per 1,000).
Households in the lowest income category were victims of
burglary at a rate (44.4 per 1,000) that was more than two
times higher than the rate for households earning $75,000 per
year or more (20.8 per 1,000). Households whose income was
unknown (due to missing data or refusal to provide the
household income) had lower rates of overall property
victimization (98.2 per 1,000) and property theft (74.8 per
1,000) compared to other households.***Footnote 6 Income was
not ascertained for 32% of all households.*** 

Consistent with previous years of the NCVS, property crime
rates were higher for larger households than for smaller
households in 2010. Overall, property crime rates were
greater for larger households compared to smaller households.
For property theft, patterns across households of different
sizes were similar to patterns of overall property crime.
Households with six or more persons experienced more overall
property crime and property theft, and slightly more
household burglary compared to smaller households. 


Methodology

The National Crime Victimization Survey (NCVS) is an annual
data collection conducted by the U.S. Census Bureau for the
Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS). The NCVS collects
information on nonfatal victimizations, reported and not
reported to the police, against persons age 12 or older
from a nationally representative sample of U.S. households. 

Violent crimes measured by the NCVS include rape or sexual
assault, robbery, aggravated assault, and simple assault.
Property crimes include household burglary, motor vehicle
theft, and theft. Victimizations that occurred outside of the
U.S. are excluded from this report. 

The survey results presented in this report are based on data
gathered from residents living throughout the United States,
including persons living in group quarters, such as
dormitories, rooming houses, and religious group dwellings.
Armed Forces personnel living in military barracks and
institutionalized persons, such as correctional facility
inmates, were not included in the scope of this survey.

Each housing unit selected for the National Crime
Victimization Survey (NCVS) remains in the sample for 3
years, with each of seven interviews taking place at 6-month
intervals. An NCVS field representative's first contact with
a household selected for the survey is in person. The field
representative may conduct subsequent interviews by
telephone. To elicit more accurate reporting of incidents,
the NCVS uses a self-respondent method that requires a direct
interview with each person 12 years or older in the household
except under certain specific conditions. Proxy interviews
accounted for about 4% of all NCVS interviews in 2010.

Annual collection year estimates of the levels and rates of
victimization are derived by accumulating estimates
quarterly. The weights of all crimes reported during the
interviews in that year are summed, regardless of when the
crime occurred. The base for the collection year rate for
personal crimes is the sum of all person weights. The base
for the property crime rates is the sum of all household
weights. For more detail, see the Methodology in Criminal
Victimization in the United States, Statistical Tables, BJS
Web, May 2011. 

In 2010, 40,974 households and 73,283 individuals age 12 and
older were interviewed for the NCVS. Each household was
interviewed twice during the year. The response rate was
92.3% of households and 87.5% of eligible individuals. 

Methodological changes to the NCVS in 2006 

As discussed in the previous editions in this bulletin
series, Criminal Victimization, 2006 and Criminal
Victimization, 2007, methodological changes implemented in
2006 impacted the estimates for that year to an extent that
the estimates were not considered comparable to those of
previous years. Evaluation of 2007 and later data from the
NCVS conducted by BJS and the Census Bureau have found a high
degree of confidence that estimates for these years are
consistent with and comparable to those for 2005 and previous
years. 

Standard error computations

Any time national estimates are derived from a sample rather
than the entire population, as is the case with the NCVS, it
is important to be cautious when drawing conclusions about
the size of one population estimate in comparison to another
or about whether a time series of population estimates is
changing. Although one estimate may be larger than another,
estimates based on responses from a sample of the population
each have some degree of sampling error. The sampling error
of an estimate depends on several factors, including the
amount of variation in the responses, the size and 
representativeness of the sample, and the size of the
subgroup for which the estimate is computed. 

One measure of the sampling error associated with an estimate
is the standard error. The standard error can vary from one
estimate to the next. In general, an estimate with a smaller
standard error provides a more reliable approximation of the
true value than an estimate with a higher standard error.
Estimates with relatively large standard errors are
associated with less precision and reliability and should be
interpreted with caution. 

The relative standard error (RSE) is a measure of an
estimate's reliability. The RSE is the ratio of the standard
error to the estimate. In this report, the RSE was calculated
for all estimates, and in cases where the RSE was greater
than 50% or when the estimate was based on 10 or fewer
sample cases, the estimate was noted with a "!" symbol. ("!
Interpret with caution; estimate based on 10 or fewer sample
cases, or coefficient of variation is greater than 50%.")

A statistical test is used to determine whether differences
in means or percentages are statistically significant once
sampling error is taken into account. Comparisons made in the
text were tested for statistical significance at the p < .05
level to ensure that the differences were larger than might
be expected due to sampling variation. Significance testing
calculations were conducted at BJS using statistical programs
developed specifically for the NCVS by the U.S. Census
Bureau. These programs take into consideration many aspects
of the complex NCVS sample design when calculating estimates.
Standard errors for average annual estimates were calculated
based on the ratio of the sums of victimizations and
respondents across years. 

Many of the variables examined in this report may be related
to one another and to other variables not included in the
analyses. Complex relationships among variables were not
fully explored in this report and warrant more extensive
analysis. Readers are cautioned not to draw causal inferences
based on the results presented. 

Statistical differences defined 

BJS tested the comparisons between the percentages and rates
for Criminal Victimization, 2010 to determine if observed
differences were statistically significant. Differences
described as higher, lower, or different passed a test at the
.05 level of statistical significance (95%-confidence
level). Differences described as somewhat, slightly, or
marginally different, or some indication of difference,
passed a test at the .10 level of statistical significance
(90%-confidence level).  Caution is required when comparing
estimates not explicitly discussed in this bulletin. 
                          
Average annual rate of change   

The average annual rate of change (r) was calculated as 

where
Pt = number or rate in the current year
Pt-n = number or rate in the nth prior year
n = number of years

Change in the rape or sexual assault rate for 2009 to 2010

While the change in the rape or sexual assault rate from 2009
to 2010 is significantly different at the 90%-confidence
level, care should be taken in interpreting this change
because the estimates of rape/sexual assault are based on a
small number of cases reported to the survey. Therefore,
small absolute changes and fluctuations in the rates of
victimization can result in large year-to-year percentage
change estimates. For 2010, the estimate of rape or sexual
assault is based on 57 unweighted cases compared to 36
unweighted cases in 2009. The measurement of rape or sexual
assault represents one of the most serious challenges in the
field of victimization research. Rape and sexual assault
remain sensitive subjects that are difficult to ask about in
the survey context. As part of the ongoing redesign of the
NCVS, BJS is exploring methods for improving the reporting of
these crimes.
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Office of Justice Programs * Innovation * Partnerships *
Safer Neighborhoods * http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov

----------------------------------------------------------
The Bureau of Justice Statistics is the statistical agency of
the U.S. Department of Justice. James P. Lynch is the
director.

This bulletin was written by Jennifer L. Truman. Lynn Langton
provided statistical review and verification of the report.

Vanessa Curto and Jill Thomas edited the report, Barbara
Quinn and Morgan Young produced the report, and Jayne E.
Robinson prepared the report for final printing under the
supervision of Doris J. James.
September 2011, NCJ 235508

This report in portable document format and in ASCII and its
related statistical data and tables are available on the BJS
website at:
http://www.bjs.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbdetail&iid=2224.
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

September 6, 2011 /JER/ 4:30pm