U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Programs
Bureau of Justice Statistics

Criminal Victimization, 2011

Jennifer L. Truman, Ph.D., and Michael Planty, Ph.D BJS 
Statisticians

October 2012, NCJ 239437
------------------------------------------

This file is text only without graphics and many of the
tables. A Zip archive of the tables in this report in
spreadsheet format (.csv) and the full report including
tables and graphics in .pdf format are available on BJS
website at:
http://bjs.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbdetail&iid=4494 

This report is one in a series. More recent editions may be
available. To view a list of all in the series go to
http://bjs.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbse&sid=6
-----------------------------------------------------------
In 2011, U.S. residents age 12 or older experienced an 
estimated 5.8 million violent victimizations and 17.1 
million property victimizations. Between 2010 and 2011, the 
overall victimization rate for violent crime increased 17%, 
from 19.3 to 22.5 victimizations per 1,000 persons age 12 or 
older. The increase in aggravated and simple assault 
accounted for all of the increase in total violence. Since 
1993, the rate of violent crime has declined by 72% from 
79.8 to 22.5 per 1,000 persons age 12 or older (figure 1). 
Although the 17% change in the violent victimization rate 
from 2010 to 2011 is relatively large, the actual change in 
the rate between 2010 and 2011 (3.3 per 1,000) is below the 
average annual change in rates for the past two decades (4.3 
per 1,000) (see Methodology, Historical change to the NCVS 
violent victimization rate (page 15) for more 
information).The information in this report is based on data 
from the Bureau of Justice Statistics’ (BJS) National Crime 
Victimization Survey (NCVS).

Between 2010 and 2011, no statistically significant 
difference was detected in the rate of serious violence—
defined as rape or sexual assault, robbery, and aggravated 
assault. In 2011, the rate of serious violent victimizations 
was 7.2 per 1,000 persons age 12 or older. Since 1993, the 
rate of serious violent crime has declined by 75% from 29.1 
to 7.2 per 1,000 persons age 12 or older. In addition, the 
overall property crime rate, which includes burglary and 
theft, increased 11% between 2010 and 2011, from 125.4 to 
138.7 victimizations per 1,000 households.

The NCVS collects information on nonfatal crimes reported 
and not reported to the police against persons age 12 or 
older from a nationally representative sample of U.S. 
households. It produces national rates and levels of violent 
and property victimization, as well as information on the 
characteristics of crimes and victims, and the consequences 
of victimization. Because the NCVS is based on interviews 
with victims, it does not measure homicide. Information on 
homicide presented in this report was obtained from the 
FBI’s Uniform Crime Reporting (UCR) Program.

The NCVS measures the violent crimes of rape or sexual 
assault, robbery, aggravated assault, and simple assault. 
Property crimes include household burglary, motor vehicle 
theft, and theft. The survey also measures personal larceny, 
which includes pick pocketing and purse snatching. For 
additional estimates not included in this report, see the 
NCVS Victimization Analysis Tool (NVAT) on the BJS website.
Victimization is the basic unit of analysis used throughout 
this report and is defined by the NCVS as a crime that 
affects an individual person or household. For personal 
crimes, the number of victimizations is equal to the number 
of victims present during a criminal incident. The number of 
victimizations may be greater than the number of incidents 
because more than one person may be victimized during an 
incident. Each property crime committed against a household 
is counted as having a single victim, the affected 
household. 

Victimization rate is a measure of the occurrence of 
victimizations among a specified population group. For 
personal crimes, this is based on the number of 
victimizations per 1,000 persons age 12 or older. For 
household crimes, the victimization rate is calculated using 
the number of incidents per 1,000 households.
________________________________________________

***************
HIGHLIGHTS
***************
* The rate of violent victimization increased 17%, from 19.3 
victimizations per 1,000 persons age 12 or older in 2010 to 
22.5 in 2011.
* There was no statistically significant change in the rate 
of serious violent victimization from 2010 to 2011.
* A 22% increase in the number of assaults accounted for all 
of the increase in violent crime.
* No measurable change was detected in the rate of intimate 
partner violence from 2010 to 2011.
* Increases in the rates of violent victimizations for 
whites, Hispanics, younger persons, and males accounted for 
the majority of the increase in violent crime.
* Residents in urban areas continued to experience the 
highest rates of total and serious violence.
* The rate of property crime increased 11%, from 125.4 per 
1,000 households in 2010 to 138.7 in 2011.
* From 2010 to 2011, household burglary increased 14% from 
25.8 to 29.4 per 1,000 households.
__________________________________
*********************************
Violent victimizations increased 
from 4.9 million in 2010 to 
5.8 million in 2011
*********************************

Between 2010 and 2011, the number of violent victimizations 
increased 18%, from 4.9 million to 5.8 million (table 1). 
Assaults, which accounted for 86% of all violent 
victimizations in 2011, increased by 22%. There was no 
statistically significant change in the number of serious 
violent victimization from2010 to 2011. Serious violent 
victimizations in 2011 included an estimated 244,000 rapes 
or sexual assaults, 557,000 robberies, and 1.1 million 
aggravated assaults.

As with the number of violent crimes, the rate of violent 
victimization increased, driven primarily by the increase in 
assaults. Between 2010 and 2011, the rate of simple assault 
increased by 21%, from 12.7 to 15.3 victimizations per 1,000 
persons (table 2). The rate of aggravated assault went up 
slightly, from 3.4 to 4.1 victimizations per 1,000 persons. 
Over the 10-year period between 2002 and 2011, the rate of 
violent crime declined 30% and the rate of serious violent 
crime declined 28%.

***************************************
Total domestic violent victimizations 
increased slightly
***************************************

The change in both the number and rate of violent crime 
victimization varied by the type of violence. Total domestic 
violent victimizations, or crime committed by family members 
and intimates, increased slightly from 1.1 million in 2010 
to 1.4 million domestic violent victimizations in 2011. 
However, no measurable change between 2010 and 2011 was 
detected for serious domestic violence--domestic violence 
involving rape, robbery, or aggravated assault. In addition, 
no measurable change was detected in intimate partner 
violence or serious intimate partner violence during this 
period. No measurable change was detected for serious 
violent crime involving weapons or crimes involving injury 
to the victim.

*******************************
Property crime increased by 11% 
between 2010 and 2011 
******************************* 
The total number of property victimizations increased by 11% 
between 2010 and 2011, from 15.4 million to 17.1 million 
victimizations (table 3). During the same period, the number 
of burglary victimizations increased 14%, from 3.2 million 
to 3.6 million victimizations. Theft increased by 1.2 
million victimizations, from 11.6 victimizations in 2010 to 
12.8 million in 2011. The number of motor vehicle thefts 
remained steady over this period with 628,000 victimizations 
occurring in 2011.

Similar to the increase in the number of property crimes, 
the victimization rate for property crime also increased by 
11% between 2010 and 2011, from 125.4 to 138.7 
victimizations per 1,000 households (table 4). Household 
burglary increased 14%, from 25.8 to 29.4 victimizations per 
1,000 households, and theft increased 10%, from 94.6 to 
104.2 per 1,000 households. No measurable change occurred in 
the rate of motor vehicle theft between 2010 and 2011. Over 
the 10-year period between 2002 and 2011, total property 
crime declined 18%; however, there has been no change in the 
burglary rate.

**********************************
Increases in the rates of violent 
victimizations for whites, Hispanics, 
younger persons, and males accounted 
for the majority of the increase in 
violent victimizations
***********************************

Males had a higher rate of total violent victimization than 
females in 2011 (table 5). The rate of violent 
victimizations for males increased from 20.1 victimizations 
per 1,000 males age 12 or older in 2010 to 25.4 in 2011. No 
change was detected for females. From 2010 to 2011, the 
observed increase in the rate of serious violence for males 
from (6.4 to 7.7 per 1,000) was not statistically 
significant. No change was detected for females during this 
period (about 7 serious violent victimizations per 1,000 
females age 12 or older).  

From 2010 to 2011, white non-Hispanics and Hispanics 
experienced an increase in violent victimization rates, 
while the violent victimization rate for black non-Hispanics 
was stable. In 2010, the violent victimization rate for 
black non-Hispanics was 25.9 per 1,000, which was higher 
than the rates for white non-Hispanics (18.3) and Hispanics 
(16.8). By 2011, no statistically significant differences 
were detected in the rate of violent victimization among 
white non-Hispanics (21.5 violent victimizations per 1,000 
persons), black non-Hispanics (26.4 per 1,000), and 
Hispanics (23.8 per 1,000). 

For serious violence, no differences were detected in the 
victimization rate for white non-Hispanics, black non-
Hispanics, and Hispanics from 2010 to 2011. As in 2010, the 
rate of serious violence for black non-Hispanics (10.8 per 
1,000) remained higher than the rates for white non-
Hispanics (6.5 per 1,000) and Hispanics (7.2 per 1,000) in 
2011. 

Generally, persons age 24 or younger had higher violent 
victimization rates than older persons. In 2011, persons 
ages 18 to 24 had the highest rate of violent victimization 
(49.0 per 1,000), compared to all other age groups. From 
2010 to 2011, persons ages 12 to 17 and 18 to 24 experienced 
an increase in violence. The violent victimization rate for 
persons ages 18 to 24 increased from 33.9 per 1,000 in 2010 
to 49.0 in 2011 and for persons ages 12 to 17 the rate 
increased from 28.1 to 37.7 violent victimizations per 
1,000.

From 2010 to 2011, persons who were married experienced an 
increase in violent and serious violent victimization. The 
violent victimization rate for married persons increased 
from 7.8 per 1,000 in 2010 to 11.0 in 2011, and from 2.2 to 
3.7 per 1,000 for serious violence. Married persons 
generally had the lowest rates of violence compared to 
persons never married, divorced, or separated, and this was 
also observed in 2011. Married persons experienced 11.0 
victimizations per 1,000 persons, compared to 37.8 for 
divorced, 35.5 for never married, and 72.9 for separated 
persons. 

*******************************
Residents in urban areas continue 
to experience the highest rates 
of total and serious violence
*******************************

From 2010 to 2011, residents in the Midwest and West 
experienced a slight increase in total violence (table 6). 
During this period, violent victimization rates for persons 
residing in the Midwest increased from 22.0 to 26.3 per 
1,000 persons, and from 22.4 to 27.1 for residents in the 
West. No differences were detected for residents in the 
Northeast or South. In 2011, residents in the Northeast and 
South experienced lower rates of violence compared to the 
Midwest and West. 

Persons from the suburbs experienced an increase in violent 
crime from 2010 to 2011. During this period, violent crime 
against suburban residents increased from 16.8 to 20.2 
victimizations per 1,000. The observed increase in violent 
victimizations for urban and rural residents was not 
statistically significant. As was the case in 2010, urban 
residents had higher rates of serious and total violence 
than suburban and rural residents in 2011.

_____________________________________________
*****************************************
The NCVS and preliminary UCR show different 
change in crime from 2010 to 2011
*****************************************
The 2011 annual increase in violent and property 
victimizations in the Bureau of Justice Statistics’ (BJS) 
National Crime Victimization Survey (NCVS) was inconsistent 
with many of the declines seen in the preliminary findings 
from the FBI’s Uniform Crime Reporting (UCR) Program (table 
7). Because the NCVS and UCR measure an overlapping, but not 
identical, set of offenses and use different methodologies, 
congruity between the estimates is not expected. Throughout 
the 40-year history of the NCVS, both programs have 
generally demonstrated similar year-to-year increases or 
decreases in the levels of overall violent and property 
crimes. However, this has not been the case for some years 
and for many specific crime types.

As measured by the FBI’s UCR, violent crime includes murder 
and non-negligent manslaughter, forcible rape, robbery, and 
aggravated assault. Property crime includes burglary, 
larceny-theft, arson, and motor vehicle theft. The UCR 
measures crimes known to the police occurring against both 
persons and businesses. The FBI obtains data on the crimes 
from law enforcement agencies, while the NCVS collects data 
through interviews with victims. (Additional information 
about the differences between the two programs can be found 
in The Nation’s Two Crime Measures, NCJ 122705, BJS website, 
October 2004.) 

Significant methodological and definitional differences 
exist between the NCVS and UCR. First, the NCVS obtains 
estimates of crimes both reported and not reported to the 
police, while the UCR collects data on crimes known to and 
recorded by the police. Second, the types of crimes included 
in NCVS and UCR crime rates differ. The UCR includes 
homicide, arson, and commercial crimes, while the NCVS 
excludes these crime types. The UCR excludes simple assaults 
and sexual assaults, which are included in the NCVS. 
***Footnote *Simple assaults include attacks or attempted 
attacks without a weapon resulting in either no injury or 
minor injury. Sexual assaults include attacks or attempted 
attacks generally involving unwanted sexual contact between 
the victim and offender that may or may not involve 
force.*** Third, the NCVS data are estimates from a 
nationally representative sample of U.S. households, whereas 
the UCR data are based on the actual counts of offenses 
reported by law enforcement jurisdictions. Finally, the NCVS 
excludes crimes against children under age 12, persons in 
institutions (e.g., nursing homes and correctional 
institutions), and may exclude highly mobile populations and 
the homeless; however, victimizations against these persons 
may be included in the UCR. Given these differences, the two 
measures of crime should be considered to complement each 
other and provide a more comprehensive picture of crime in 
the United States. 

According to preliminary results released by the FBI, the 
number of violent crimes known to the police as measured by 
the UCR declined by about 4% between 2010 and 2011, and the 
number of property crimes declined by about 0.8%. Between 
2010 and 2011, the number of violent crimes in the NCVS 
increased by about 18%, and the number of property crimes 
increased by 11%. Both the UCR and the NCVS reported 
increases in the numbers of burglaries. The UCR reported 
declines in the numbers of all other crimes measured. 
Looking just at NCVS victimizations that were reported to 
police, the change in the number of overall violent and 
property crimes from 2010 to 2011 was not statistically 
significant. However, the increase in the number of 
aggravated assaults reported to the police was statistically 
significant.
___________________________________

********************************
In 2011, about 50% of violent 
victimizations were reported 
to the police
********************************

Police could be notified about a victimization by the 
victim, a third party (including witnesses, other victims, 
household members, or other officials, such as school 
officials or workplace managers), or police already at the 
scene of the incident. Police notification may occur during 
or immediately following a criminal incident or at a later 
date.

From 2010 to 2011, there was no statistically significant 
change in the percent of violent victimizations reported to 
the police (table 8). In 2011, about 49% of violent 
victimizations were reported to the police. The percentage 
of serious violent victimizations reported to the police 
remained stable from 2010 to 2011. However, the percentage 
of serious violent victimizations involving a weapon and 
reported to the police increased from 55% in 2010 to 67% in 
2011. In 2011, a greater percentage of robbery (66%) and 
aggravated assault (67%) victimizations were reported to the 
police, compared to simple assault (43%) and rape or sexual 
assault (27%) victimizations. 

From 2010 to 2011, the percentage of property victimizations 
reported to the police declined from 39% to 37%. The 
percentage of reported burglaries declined from 58% to 52% 
during the same period, accounting for the majority of the 
decline in the overall number of property victimizations 
that were reported to the police. No measurable change was 
detected in the percentage of motor vehicle thefts and 
thefts that were reported to police from 2010 to 2011. In 
2011, a larger percentage of motor vehicle thefts (83%) than 
burglaries (52%) and other thefts (30%) were reported to the 
police, as was the case in previous years.

************************************
The rate of violent victimizations 
not reported to the police increased 
slightly from 9.3 to 10.8 per 
1,000 persons
************************************

The NCVS allows for an examination of crimes reported to the 
police and those that go unreported. Victims may not report 
the victimization to the police for a variety of reasons, 
including fear of retaliation or being afraid of the 
offender, believing that the police would not or could not 
do anything about it, and believing the crime to be a 
personal issue or trivial.

From 2010 to 2011, the violent victimization rate among 
incidents not reported to the police increased slightly from 
9.3 to 10.8 per 1,000 persons ages 12 or older, while no 
differences were detected in the rate of violent 
victimizations that were reported to the police (table 9). 
For serious violence, no differences were detected for 
either reported or unreported rates of victimization.  
The rate of aggravated assaults reported to the police 
increased 36%, from 2.0 to 2.7 per 1,000 persons age 12 or 
older, but no change was detected for aggravated assaults 
not reported to the police. The opposite pattern was found 
for simple assault. From 2010 to 2011, the rate of simple 
assault not reported to the police increased 26%, from 6.5 
to 8.2 per 1,000, but no change was detected in the rate of 
simple assaults reported to the police.

From 2010 to 2011, no change was detected in the rate of 
total property crime victimization reported to the police. 
However, the property crime rate for those not reported to 
the police increased 14% during the same period, from 75.3 
to 86.1 victimizations per 1,000 households. Among burglary 
victimizations, there was no measurable change in the rate 
reported to the police. Among burglary victimizations not 
reported to police, the rate of victimization increased 28%, 
from 10.6 to 13.6 per 1,000. The same general pattern was 
also found for both reported and unreported rates of theft.

______________________________

******************************
The National Crime Victimization 
Survey: Restoration and Redesign
****************************** 
In 1972, the Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS) instituted 
the National Crime Victimization Survey (NCVS), formerly 
known as the National Crime Survey (NCS), to produce 
national estimates of the levels and characteristics of 
criminal victimization in the United States, including crime 
not reported to police departments. Along with the FBI’s 
Uniform Crime Reporting Program, the NCVS constitutes a key 
component of our nation’s system to measure the extent and 
nature of crime in the United States. 

While the survey’s core methodology has been validated over 
the past three decades, the viability of the survey and its 
ability to meet the original goals had been threatened by 
declining budgets. In response to these concerns, BJS 
sponsored an expert panel study carried out by The National 
Research Council of the National Academies to review the 
survey’s methodology and provide guidelines for options to 
redesign the NCVS. The panel’s recommendations are contained 
in Surveying Victims: Options for Conducting the National 
Crime Victimization Survey (National Research Council, 
2008). 

BJS initiated a two-prong approach to redesign and restore the NCVS 
with the ultimate goals to improve the survey’s methodology, 
contain costs, assure sustainability, increase value to 
national and local stakeholders, and to better meet the 
challenges of measuring the extent, characteristics, and 
consequences of criminal victimization. The redesign efforts 
began with a series of research projects to examine 
alternative modes to data collection as a way to reduce 
costs and improve measurement. A description of these 
ongoing projects can be found on the NCVS redesign web page 
on the BJS website.
 
To restore the quality of the NCVS data, BJS and the U.S. 
Census Bureau (Census) implemented two large-scale 
interventions. First, sample cases cut in the mid-2000s were 
reinstated beginning in October 2010 and fully implemented 
by June 2011. This amounted to about a 24% increase over the 
previous sample size, which will improve the stability and 
precision between national and subgroup estimates of 
victimization. Second, beginning in August 2011, refresher 
training of all field representatives (FR) was conducted 
using an experimental split sample cluster design. This was 
the first comprehensive refresher training that had been 
conducted since the 1990s. In order to maintain consistent 
year-to-year comparisons, Census and BJS implemented the 
experiment in a manner that isolated the effects of training 
without contaminating the annual 2011 estimates. BJS 
monitored and continues to evaluate the impact of each 
intervention on the criminal victimization estimate and 
other estimates of data quality, including response rates 
and measures of interview quality.
 
********************** 
Sample reinstatement
**********************

The sample reinstatement project was designed to restore 
sample cases that were cut in the mid-2000s due to budget 
constraints as a means of improving the precision of the 
national victimization estimates. Prior to 2010, estimates 
of victimization by key crime types and demographic groups 
became less precise, as crime was at its lowest levels 
historically and the sample size was reduced. The sample 
size was returned to levels last seen in the late 1990s to 
increase the precision of the estimates for crime. Beginning 
in October 2010, the Census began restoring the sample to 
existing areas using existing FRs. The sample size increased 
approximately 24%, from about 8,500 households per month to 
10,500. The restatement was fully implemented by June 2011. 

Given the increased sample size, an initial concern was that 
more FRs would need to be hired to handle the increased 
workload. Previous assessments have shown that new FRs tend 
to produce more criminal incidents. Therefore, adding a 
large number of new FRs could lead to a substantial increase 
in crime. To reduce this source of bias in the data, Census 
and BJS determined that current FRs could handle the 
increased workload and that only a minimum number of new 
interviewers would be hired. This decision led to the 
concern that increasing the workload for existing FRs may 
cause them to hurry through their cases, which may result in 
a reduction in crime incidents reported. Currently, Census 
and BJS are monitoring the impact on estimate precision, FR 
workload, and other performance measures in the field, such 
as response rates, interview quality, and the rate of crime 
incidents collected. 

**********************
Refresher training
**********************

The Census Bureau currently has about 750 FRs across the 
United States administering the NCVS. Interviewers typically 
receive refresher training at regular intervals to ensure 
that both experienced and new interviewers understand how to 
administer the survey. Due to budget cuts the routine 
training was suspended in the 1990s. An FR refresher 
training program was developed in the summer of 2011 and 
implemented in August 2011. The refresher training aimed to 
reacquaint FRs with the purpose and content of the screener 
questions (NCVS-1) used to identify whether a respondent 
suffered a victimization. It also intended to clarify the 
information on the incident follow-up form (NCVS-2), which 
collects details about the characteristics of each incident. 
Since crime is a relatively infrequent event, many FRs 
conduct a large number of interviews without uncovering a 
criminal event. Therefore, FRs must maintain familiarity 
with the questionnaire in order to conduct a proper 
interview when a respondent reports a crime. In addition, it 
is important that FRs across every regional office conduct 
the interview in a standardized manner to ensure a high-
quality survey. 

Along with FR refresher training, Census implemented a 
series of field supervisory performance and data quality 
measures. Until this, high response rates had been the 
primary measure of FR performance. Under the revised 
performance structure, FRs are monitored on response rates 
(household and person), screener time stamps (the time it 
takes to administer the screener questions on the NCVS-1 
instrument), early and overnight interview starts 
(interviews conducted very late in the evening or very early 
in the morning), contact history with household (number of 
attempts to contact the household), and completeness of 
screener and incident instruments (level of item 
missingness). Any noncompliance with these measures led to 
supervisor notification and follow-up with the FR. The 
follow-up activity may include simple points of 
clarification (e.g., the respondent works nights and is only 
available in the early morning for an interview), additional 
FR training, or FR removal from the survey.

To measure impacts on key variables and performance, a 
phased-in experimental design was used to implement the 
refresher training project. Teams of FRs were randomly 
assigned to two cohorts, with cohort 1 receiving the 
intervention first--refresher training and field performance 
monitoring-- and cohort 2 serving as the control group. 
Cohort 1 received training starting in August 2011 and field 
performance measures and monitoring began in October 2011. 
Cohort 2 did not receive any refresher training or any 
additional field monitoring. Starting in January 2012, 
cohort 2 received refresher training with the additional 
performance measures and field monitoring. By February 2012, 
the majority of all FRs administering the NCVS collection 
had received refresher training by March 2012 and were under 
the new field monitoring and performance system.

For both cohorts, along with the new performance measures, 
key variables of interest were the number and type of crime 
incidents collected per cases worked. Crime counts per 
cohort were monitored three months before the August 
refresher training to serve as a pre-test baseline measure. 
These counts were monitored throughout the experimental 
design. Overall, the experimental design allowed Census and 
BJS to randomly assign FR teams to cohorts, account for any 
pre-existing differences in crime incident counts per sample 
case load, compare cohort 1 and 2 from August 2011 through 
January 2012, and then continue to monitor any differences 
between cohorts throughout 2012 after both were trained and 
under the new performance management system. The cohort 1 
cases used in the experimental design for the training were 
not used to generate estimates for 2011. Census and BJS 
continue to monitor the cohorts in 2012. A comprehensive 
evaluation of the 2011 experiment will be available on the 
BJS website.
___________________________________

_____________
Methodology
_____________

****************
Survey coverage
****************

The National Crime Victimization Survey (NCVS) is an annual 
data collection conducted by the U.S. Census Bureau for the 
Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS). The NCVS is a self-
report survey in which interviewed persons are asked about 
the number and characteristics of victimizations experienced 
during the prior 6 months. The NCVS collects information on 
nonfatal personal crimes (rape or sexual assault, robbery, 
aggravated assault, simple assault, and personal larceny) 
and household property crimes (burglary, motor vehicle 
theft, and other theft) both reported and not reported to 
police. In addition to providing annual level and change 
estimates on criminal victimization, the NCVS is the primary 
source of information on the nature of criminal 
victimization incidents. Survey respondents provide 
information about themselves (such as age, sex, race and 
ethnicity, marital status, education level, and income) and 
if they experienced a victimization. For crime victims, data 
are collected about each victimization incident, including 
information about the offender (such as age, race and 
ethnicity, sex, and victim-offender relationship), 
characteristics of the crime (including time and place of 
occurrence, use of weapons, nature of injury, and economic 
consequences), whether the crime was reported to police, 
reasons why the crime was or was not reported, and 
experiences with the criminal justice system.

The NCVS is administered to persons age 12 or older from a 
nationally representative sample of households in the United 
States. In 2011, about 143,120 persons age 12 or older from 
79,800 households across the country were interviewed during 
the year. Once selected, households remain in the sample for 
3 years, and eligible persons in these households are 
interviewed every 6 months for a total of seven interviews. 
New households rotate into the sample on an ongoing basis to 
replace outgoing households that have been in sample for the 
3-year period. The sample includes persons living in group 
quarters (such as dormitories, rooming houses, and religious 
group dwellings) and excludes persons living in military 
barracks and institutional settings (such as correctional or 
hospital facilities) and the homeless. (For more detail, see 
the Survey Methodology for Criminal Victimization in the 
United States, 2008, NCJ 231173, BJS website, May 2011.)

*************************************
Nonresponse and weighting adjustments
*************************************

The 79,800 households that participated in the NCVS in 2011 
represents a 90% household response rate. The person level 
response rate--the percentage of persons age 12 or older in 
participating households who completed an NCVS interview—was 
88% in 2011. 

Estimates in this report use data primarily from the 2002 to 
2011 NCVS data files weighted to produce annual estimates 
for persons age 12 or older living in U.S. households. 
Because the NCVS relies on a sample rather than a census of 
the entire U.S. population, weights are designed to inflate 
sample point estimates to known population totals and to 
compensate for survey nonresponse and other aspects of the 
sample design.

The NCVS data files include both household and person 
weights. The household weight is commonly used to calculate 
estimates of property crimes, such as motor vehicle theft or 
burglary, which are identified with the household. Person 
weights provide an estimate of the population represented by 
each person in the sample. Person weights are most 
frequently used to compute estimates of crime victimizations 
of persons in the total population. Both household and 
person weights, after proper adjustment, are also used to 
form the denominator in calculations of crime rates.

The victimization weights used in this analysis account for 
the number of persons present during an incident and for 
repeat victims of series incidents. The weight counts series 
incidents as the actual number of incidents reported by the 
victim, up to a maximum of ten incidents. Series 
victimizations are victimizations that are similar in type 
but occur with such frequency that a victim is unable to 
recall each individual event or to describe each event in 
detail. Survey procedures allow NCVS interviewers to 
identify and classify these similar victimizations as series 
victimizations and collect detailed information on only the 
most recent incident in the series. In 2011, about 2% of all 
victimizations were series incidents. Weighting series 
incidents as the number of incidents up to a maximum of ten 
produces more reliable estimates of crime levels, while the 
cap at 10 minimizes the effect of extreme outliers on the 
rates. Additional information on the series enumeration is 
detailed in Methods for Counting High Frequency Repeat 
Victimizations in the National Crime Victimization Survey, 
NCJ 237308, BJS website, April 2012. 

For this report, prior to applying the weights to the data, 
all victimizations that occurred outside of the U.S. were 
excluded. In 2011, less than 1% of the unweighted 
victimizations occurred outside of the U.S. and was excluded 
from the analyses.

********************
Series victimization
********************

As part of ongoing research efforts associated with the 
redesign of the NCVS, BJS investigated ways to include high-
frequency repeat victimizations, or series victimizations, 
in estimates of criminal victimization. Including series 
victimizations would obtain a more accurate estimate of 
victimization. The research findings are detailed in the 
report Methods for Counting High-Frequency Repeat 
Victimizations in the National Crime Victimization Survey, 
NCJ 237308, BJS website, April 2012.

The NCVS’s primary purpose is to accurately estimate the 
number and type of criminal victimizations that occur each 
year in the United States. To enumerate and classify 
victimizations, the NCVS employs an interview procedure that 
asks respondents to recall specific types of criminal events 
that occurred over the previous 6 months. Repeatedly 
victimized persons have experiences that present 
considerable challenges for the accurate counting and 
description of criminal events. These experiences involve 
multiple crimes that are often indistinguishable to victims, 
making it difficult for them to separate the details of each 
event. Such experiences may include intimate partner 
violence or bullying by schoolmates.

To handle these repeated victimizations, the NCVS employs a 
series victimization protocol. Currently, the NCVS records a 
series victimization when the respondent reported 
experiencing six or more similar crimes during the 6-month 
reference period and was unable to recall or describe each 
event in detail. If all of these conditions are met, the 
NCVS interviewer records the victim’s report of the number 
of times this type of victimization occurred and collects 
detailed information for only the most recent victimization.

Although information about series victimizations is 
collected in the NCVS, BJS typically excluded series 
victimizations from annual estimates of crime in prior 
Criminal Victimization bulletins. Given findings from the 
research, BJS now includes series victimizations using the 
victim’s estimates of the number of times the victimizations 
occurred over the past 6 months, capping the number of 
victimizations within each series at a maximum of 10. This 
strategy for counting series victimizations balances the 
desire to estimate national rates and account for the 
experiences of persons with repeat victimizations while 
noting that some estimation errors exist in the number of 
times these victimizations occurred. This bulletin is the 
first to include series victimizations throughout the entire 
report, and all victimization estimates in this report 
reflect this new counting strategy. 

Including series victimizations in national rates results in 
rather large increases in the level of violent 
victimization; however, trends in violence are generally 
similar regardless of whether series victimizations are 
included. Both show a similar pattern over the 19-year 
period from 1993 to 2011 (figure 2). When violent 
victimization rates excluded series incidents, the decline 
from 1993 to 2011 was 66%; when series incidents were 
included in the rates, the decline was 72%. Similarly, both 
rates declined by about 30% from 2002 to 2011. The violent 
victimization rate increased by 15% between 2010 and 2011 
with series victimizations excluded and increased by 17% 
with series victimizations included.

The two violent crime victimization rates converged because 
a decrease in the number of series incidents occurred in the 
U.S. In 1993, series incidents (when counted as one 
victimization) accounted for almost 7% of all violent crime 
victimizations, and by 2011 series incidents accounted for 
about 3% of all violent victimizations. When using the new 
counting rule, series accounted for almost 37% of all 
violent victimization in 1993 and 24% in 2011.

***************************
Standard error computations
****************************

When national estimates are derived from a sample, as is the 
case with the NCVS, caution must be taken when comparing one 
estimate to another or when comparing estimates over time. 
Although one estimate may be larger than another, estimates 
based on a sample have some degree of sampling error. The 
sampling error of an estimate depends on several factors, 
including the amount of variation in the responses, the size 
of the sample, and the size of the subgroup for which the 
estimate is computed. When the sampling error around the 
estimates is taken into consideration, the estimates that 
appear different may, in fact, not be statistically 
different.

One measure of the sampling error associated with an 
estimate is the standard error. The standard error can vary 
from one estimate to the next. In general, for a given 
metric, an estimate with a small standard error provides a 
more reliable approximation of the true value than an 
estimate with a large standard error. Estimates with 
relatively large standard errors are associated with less 
precision and reliability and should be interpreted with 
caution.

In order to generate standard errors around numbers and 
estimates from the NCVS, the Census Bureau produced 
generalized variance function (GVF) parameters for BJS. The 
GVFs take into account aspects of the NCVS complex sample 
design and represent the curve fitted to a selection of 
individual standard errors based on the Jackknife Repeated 
Replication technique. The GVF parameters were used to 
generate standard errors for each point estimate (such as 
counts, percentages, and rates) in the report. For average 
annual estimates, standard errors were based on the ratio of 
the sums of victimizations and respondents across years.

In this report, BJS conducted tests to determine whether 
differences in estimated numbers and percentages were 
statistically significant once sampling error was taken into 
account. Using statistical programs developed specifically 
for the NCVS, all comparisons in the text were tested for 
significance. The primary test procedure used was Student’s 
t-statistic, which tests the difference between two sample 
estimates. To ensure that the observed differences between 
estimates were larger than might be expected due to sampling 
variation, BJS set the significance level at 95%. 

Data users can use the estimates and the standard errors of 
the estimates provided in this report to generate a 
confidence interval around the estimate as a measure of the 
margin of error. The following example illustrates how 
standard errors can be used to generate confidence 
intervals:  According to the NCVS, in 2011, the victimization rate for 
violent crime was 22.5 per 1,000 persons (see table 2). 
Using the GVFs, BJS determined that the estimate has a 
standard error of 0.9 (see appendix table 2). A confidence 
interval around the estimate was generated by multiplying 
the standard errors by ±1.96 (the t-score of a normal, two-
tailed distribution that excludes 2.5% at either end of the 
distribution). Therefore, the confidence interval around the 
22.5 estimate from 2011 is 22.5 ± 0.9 X 1.96 or (20.8 to 
24.3). In others words, if different samples using the same 
procedures were taken from the U.S. population in 2011, 95% 
of the time the rate of violent crime victimizations would 
fall between 20.8 and 24.3 per 1,000.

In this report, a coefficient of variation (CV), 
representing the ratio of the standard error to the 
estimate, was also calculated for all estimates. CVs provide 
a measure of reliability and a means to compare the 
precision of estimates across measures with differing levels 
or metrics. In cases where the CV was greater than 50%, or 
the unweighted sample had 10 or fewer cases, the estimate 
was noted with a “!” symbol (interpret data with caution. 
Estimate based on 10 or fewer sample cases, or the 
coefficient of variation exceeds 50%).

****************************
Methodological changes to 
the NCVS in 2006
****************************

Methodological changes implemented in 2006 may have affected 
the crime estimates for that year to such an extent that 
they are not comparable to estimates from other years. 
Evaluation of 2007 and later data from the NCVS conducted by 
BJS and the Census Bureau found a high degree of confidence 
that estimates for 2007, 2008, 2009, and 2010 are consistent 
with and comparable to estimates for 2005 and previous 
years. The reports, Criminal Victimization, 2006, NCJ 
219413, December 2007; Criminal Victimization, 2007, NCJ 
224390, December 2008; Criminal Victimization, 2008, NCJ 
227777, September 2009; Criminal Victimization, 2009, NCJ 
231327, October 2010; and Criminal Victimization, 2010, NCJ 
235508, September 2011, are available on the BJS website.

******************************
Average annual rate of change
****************************** 
The average annual rate of change (r) was calculated as--
where
Pt = number or rate in the current year
Pt-n = number or rate in the nth prior year
n = number of years

*************************************
Historical changes to the NCVS 
violent victimization rate
*************************************

Since 1993, the rate of violent and serious violent 
victimization has declined by over 70%
Violent victimization rates by quarter and year show that 
victimization tends to fluctuate within and across years 
(figure 3). Each point on the figure represents the average 
victimization rate from the previous 4 quarters. From 
quarters 1 to 4 in 1993 to quarters 1 to 4 in 2011, the rate 
of violent victimization declined from 79.8 to 22.5 per 
1,000 persons. During this same time period, the rate of 
serious violent victimization declined from 29.1 to 7.2 per 
1,000. Since 1993, the rate of violent and serious violent 
victimization has declined by over 70%.




*************************************
The 2010 to 2011 change in the annual 
violent victimization rate of 3.3 per 
1,000 is smaller than the average 
change over the past 19 years
*************************************

From 2010 to 2011, the percentage change in the violent 
victimization rate from 19.3 to 22.5 per 1,000 persons 
represents a 17% increase. Historically, the increase of 17% 
is relatively large, but the interpretation should consider 
how percentage change is calculated. The size of the 
percentage change from one year to the next is determined by 
the size of the raw rate difference from year 1 to year 2 
and the size of the rate in year 1. The size of the 
percentage change will be larger when the change occurs on a 
smaller rate. The 2010 to 2011 change in the annual violent 
victimization rate of 3.3 crimes per 1,000 (19.3 to 22.5) is 
smaller than the average change over the past 19 years.
________________________________________

The vertical axis on the left side of the chart shows the 
absolute raw rate difference from one year to the next 
(figure 4). It is simply the difference in the violent crime 
rate from one year to the next. The two largest annual 
changes in violent crime came in 1995 and 2000 (the upper 
portion of the chart). The violent victimization rate 
declined by 9.7 violent victimizations per 1,000 persons 
from 47.2 per 1,000 in 1999 to 37.5 in 2000. Similarly, from 
1994 to 1995, the violent victimization rate declined by 9.4 
violent victimizations from a rate of 80.0 to 70.7 per 1,000 
persons. The smallest change (the lower portion of the 
chart) came in 1994, 2002, 2003, and 2005 where the annual 
change in the rate was less than 1 violent victimization per 
1,000 persons. 

For example, the rate changed from 79.8 in 1993 to 80.0 in 
1994 for an increase of 0.3 violent victimizations per 1,000 
persons. By comparison, the current increase from 2010 to 
2011 was 3.3 violent victimizations per 1,000 persons. This 
average raw rate change is smaller than the average rate 
change of 4.3 crimes per 1,000 across the entire period from 
1993 to 2011. The annual range of change from 1993 to 2011, 
either an increase or decrease, was between 0 and 9.7 
violent victimizations per 1,000 persons. 

The horizontal axis represents the violent victimization 
rate for a given year ranging from a low (left side of the 
chart) of 19.3 per 1,000 persons in 2010 (represented by the 
2011 circle) to a high (right side of the chart) of 80.0 per 
1,000 in 1994 and 1995. As the chart shows, when there is a 
large rate change on a small base (upper left portion of the 
chart), the percentage change as noted by the size of the 
circle tends to be relatively large. With the same large 
rate change on a larger base (upper right side of the 
chart), the percent change or circle size is not as large.  
For example, from 1996 to 1997 (represented by the 1997 
circle), violent crime declined by 3.7 violent 
victimizations (from 64.7 to 61.1 per 1,000 persons), a 
comparable change to the 2010 to 2011 increase of 3.3 
violent victimizations (from 19.3 to 22.5 per 1,000 
persons). However, the percentage change (denoted by the 
size of the circle) was 6% from 1996 to 1997 compared to the 
17% from 2010 to 2011. This difference was due to the 
historically smaller rate of 19.3 per 1,000 in 2010 compared 
to the relatively large rate of 64.7 per 1,000 in 1996.

***********************************************
The Bureau of Justice Statistics is the statistical agency 
of the U.S. Department of Justice. James P. Lynch is the 
director.

This report was written by Jennifer L. Truman, Ph.D., and 
Michael Planty, Ph.D. Lynn Langton verified the report.
Jill Thomas edited the report, and Barbara Quinn and Morgan 
Young produced the report under the supervision of Doris J. 
James.

October 2012, NCJ 239437
***********************************************

***************************
Office of Justice Programs 
* Innovation * Partnerships 
* Safer Neighborhoods 
* http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov
***************************

______________________
10/09/12/JER/10:00am
______________________
