U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Programs
Bureau of Justice Statistics

********************************************************
This file is text only without graphics and many of the
tables. A Zip archive of the tables in this report in
spreadsheet format (.csv) and the full report including
tables and graphics in .pdf format are available on BJS
website at: http://bjs.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbdetail&iid=5366

This report is one in a series. More recent editions 
may be available. To view a list of all in the series 
go to http://bjs.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbse&sid=6
*********************************************************
Bulletin

Criminal Victimization, 2014
 
Jennifer L. Truman, Ph.D., and Lynn Langton, Ph.D., 
BJS Statisticians

In 2014, U.S. residents age 12 or older experienced an estimated 
5.4 million violent victimizations and 15.3 million property 
victimizations, according to the Bureau of Justice Statistics’ 
(BJS) National Crime Victimization Survey (NCVS). There was no 
significant change in the overall rate of violent crime, defined 
as rape or sexual assault, robbery, aggravated assault, and 
simple assault, from 2013 (23.2 victimizations per 1,000 persons 
age 12 or older) to 2014 (20.1 per 1,000) (figure 1). However, 
the rate of violent crime in 2014 was lower than the rate in 2012 
(26.1 per 1,000). From 1993 to 2014, the rate of violent crime 
declined from 79.8 to 20.1 per 1,000.

The overall property crime rate (which includes household 
burglary, theft, and motor vehicle theft) decreased from 131.4 
victimizations per 1,000 households in 2013 to 118.1 
victimizations per 1,000 in 2014. The decline in theft accounted 
for the majority of the decrease in property crime. Since 1993, 
the rate of property crime declined from 351.8 to 118.1 
victimizations per 1,000 households.

***************************************************

*****************
HIGHLIGHTS
*****************

Violent crime
***************

* No significant change occurred in the rate of violent crime 
from 2013 (23.2 victimizations per 1,000) to 2014 (20.1 per 
1,000).

* From 2013 to 2014, no statistically significant change was 
detected in the rate of serious violence, domestic violence, 
intimate partner violence, violence resulting in an injury, and 
violence involving a firearm.

* No significant change was found in the percentage of violent 
crime reported to police from 2013 to 2014 (46%).

* About 12% of victims of serious violence and 28% of intimate 
partner violence victims received assistance from a victim 
service agency.

* No change was observed in the percentage of violent crime 
victims who received assistance from a victim service agency from 
2013 to 2014.

Property crime
***************

* The rate of property crime decreased from 131.4 victimizations 
per 1,000 households in 2013 to 118.1 per 1,000 in 2014.

Prevalence of crime
*********************

* In 2014, 1.1% of all persons age 12 or older (3 million 
persons) experienced at least one violent victimization. 

* An estimated 0.5% (1.2 million persons) experienced at least 
one serious violent victimization in 2014.

* In 2014, 8% of all households (10.4 million households) 
experienced one or more property victimizations.

* The prevalence rate of property victimization declined from 9% 
of all households in 2013 to 8% in 2014.
***************************************************

*****************************************
No change was observed in the rate of 
serious violent crime from 2013 to 2014
*****************************************

There was no statistically significant change in the rate of 
serious violent crime—defined as rape or sexual assault, robbery, 
and aggravated assault—from 2013 (7.3 per 1,000) to 2014 (7.7 per 
1,000) (table 1). The rate of simple assault declined from 15.8 
victimizations per 1,000 persons in 2013 to 12.4 per 1,000 in 
2014. Rates of total violent crime (down 29%) and simple assault 
(down 35%) were lower in 2014 than rates observed a decade 
earlier in 2005.

***************************************************

The National Crime Victimization Survey (NCVS)
The NCVS collects information on nonfatal crimes reported and not 
reported to police against persons age 12 or older from a 
nationally representative sample of U.S. households. Initial NCVS 
interviews are conducted in person with subsequent interviews 
conducted either in person or by phone. In 2014, the response 
rate was 84% for households and 87% for eligible persons. The 
NCVS produces national rates and levels of violent and property 
victimization, information on the characteristics of crimes and 
victims, and the consequences of victimization. Since NCVS is 
based on interviews with victims, it cannot measure homicide.

The NCVS measures the violent crimes of rape or sexual assault, 
robbery, aggravated assault, and simple assault. The NCVS 
classifies rape, sexual assault, robbery, and aggravated assault 
as serious violent crimes. Property crimes include household 
burglary, motor vehicle theft, and theft. The survey also 
measures personal larceny, which includes pickpocketing and purse 
snatching. For additional estimates not included in this report, 
see the NCVS Victimization Analysis Tool (NVAT) on the BJS 
website.

Victimization is the basic unit of analysis used throughout most 
of this report. A victimization is a crime as it affects one 
person or household. For personal crimes, the number of 
victimizations is equal to the number of victims present during a 
criminal incident. The number of victimizations may be greater 
than the number of incidents because more than one person may be 
victimized during an incident. Each crime against a household is 
counted as having a single victim—the affected household.

The victimization rate is a measure of the occurrence of 
victimizations among a specified population group. For personal 
crimes, the victimization rate is based on the number of 
victimizations per 1,000 residents age 12 or older. For household 
crimes, the victimization rate is calculated using the number of 
incidents per 1,000 households. Estimates are presented for 2014, 
2013, and 2005—the 10-year change.
***************************************************

*****************************************
The rate of intimate partner violence 
remained stable from 2013 to 2014
*****************************************

The rate of domestic violence, which includes crime committed by 
intimate partners and family members, remained stable from 2013 
to 2014 (4.2 per 1,000). No measurable change was detected from 
2013 to 2014 in the rate of intimate partner violence (2.4 per 
1,000), which includes victimizations committed by current or 
former spouses, boyfriends, or girlfriends. 

From 2013 to 2014, no statistically significant change was 
observed in the rate of violent victimizations committed by a 
stranger (8.1 per 1,000). However, the rate of violence committed 
by a stranger in 2014 was 30% lower than the rate 10 years 
earlier in 2005 (11.6 per 1,000). No statistically significant 
difference was found in rates of serious violent crime involving 
weapons (4.9 per 1,000) or resulting in physical injury to the 
victim (2.6 per 1,000) from 2013 to 2014. Like violent 
victimizations committed by a stranger, the rate of serious 
violent crime involving weapons in 2014 was 28% lower than the 
rate in 2005 (6.8 per 1,000).

*****************************************
No change occurred in firearm violence 
from 2013 to 2014
*****************************************

No measurable change was detected in the rate of nonfatal firearm 
violence from 2013 (1.3 per 1,000) to 2014 (1.7 per 1,000) (table 
2). An estimated 466,110 nonfatal firearm victimizations occurred 
in 2014, compared to 332,950 in 2013. The rate of firearm 
violence in 2014 was similar to the rate in 2005 (2.1 per 1,000). 
In 2014, about 82% of all serious violent crimes that involved a 
firearm were reported to police. No measurable change was 
detected in the percentage of firearm violence reported to police 
from 2013 to 2014.

*****************************************
Property crime declined from 2013 to 2014
*****************************************

Following the decline from 2012 to 2013, the number and rate of 
property crime victimization decreased again from 2013 (131.4 
victimizations per 1,000 households) to 2014 (118.1 per 1,000) 
(table 3). This recent decline was driven primarily by a decrease 
in theft. The rate of theft declined from 100.5 victimizations 
per 1,000 households in 2013 to 90.8 per 1,000 in 2014. The rate 
of household burglary decreased slightly, from 25.7 
victimizations per 1,000 households in 2013 to 23.1 per 1,000 in 
2014. During the same period, the rate of motor vehicle theft 
declined from 5.2 to 4.1 victimizations per 1,000. In 2014, rates 
of property crime, burglary, theft, and motor vehicle theft were 
lower than rates in 2005.
***************************************************

**********************
Prevalence of crime
**********************

Annual estimates of a population’s risk for criminal 
victimization can be examined using victimization rates or 
prevalence rates. Historically, Bureau of Justice Statistics 
(BJS) reports using National Crime Victimization Survey (NCVS) 
data have relied on victimization rates, which measure the extent 
to which victimizations occur in a specified population during a 
specific time. Victimization rates are used throughout this 
bulletin. For crimes affecting persons, NCVS victimization rates 
are estimated by dividing the number of victimizations that occur 
during a specified time (T) by the population at risk for those 
victimizations and multiplying the rate by 1,000.

Victimization rate T = Number of victimizations experienced 
by a specified population T X 1000
Number of persons in the specified population T

Prevalence rates also describe the level of victimization but are 
based on the number of unique persons (or households) in the 
population who experienced at least one victimization during a 
specified time. The key distinction between a victimization rate 
and a prevalence rate is whether the numerator consists of the 
number of victimizations or the number of victims. For example, a 
person who experienced two robberies on separate occasions within 
the past year would be counted twice in the victimization rate 
but counted once in the prevalence rate. Prevalence rates are 
estimated by dividing the number of victims in the specified 
population by the total number of persons in the population and 
multiplying the rate by 100. This is the percentage of the 
population victimized at least once in a given period.

Prevalence rate T = Number of victims in a specified 
population T X 100
Number of persons in the specified population T

Victimization and prevalence rates may also be produced for 
household crimes, such as burglary. In these instances, the 
numerators and denominators are adjusted to reflect households 
rather than persons. To better understand the percentage of the 
population that is victimized at least once in a given period, 
prevalence rates are presented by type of crime and certain 
demographic characteristics. (For more information about 
measuring prevalence in the NCVS, see Measuring the Prevalence of 
Crime with the National Crime Victimization Survey, NCJ 241656, 
BJS web, September 2013.)

*****************************************
In 2014, 0.5% of all persons age 12 or 
older experienced serious violent crime
*****************************************

In 2014, 1.1% of all persons age 12 or older (3 million persons) 
experienced at least one violent victimization (table 4). During 
the same period, 0.5% of all persons age 12 or older (1.2 million 
persons) experienced at least one serious violent victimization 
(rape or sexual assault, robbery, and aggravated assault). No 
measurable change occurred in the prevalence rate of total 
violent or serious violent victimization from 2013 to 2014. 
During the same period, the prevalence rates of simple assault 
declined slightly from about 0.8% to 0.7%.

Less than 0.5% of all persons age 12 or older experienced one or 
more domestic violence (0.2%) or intimate partner violence (0.1%) 
victimizations in 2014. No measurable change occurred in the 
prevalence rates of domestic violence and intimate partner 
violence from 2013 to 2014. The prevalence of serious violence 
committed by strangers declined slightly from 2013 (0.19%) to 
2014 (0.23%).

In 2014, 8.0% of all households (10.4 million households) 
experienced one or more property victimizations. The prevalence 
rate of property victimization declined from 9.0% in 2013 to 8.0% 
in 2014. During the same period, the prevalence of household 
burglary, motor vehicle theft, and theft also declined. Similar 
to the property victimization rate, the decline in the prevalence 
rate of theft accounted for the majority of the decline in the 
prevalence rate of property victimization.

*****************************************
Prevalence of violent crime among males 
and females remained stable from 
2013 to 2014
*****************************************

In 2014, 1.2% of all males age 12 or older (1.5 million males) 
and 1.1% of all females (1.5 million females) experienced one or 
more violent victimizations (table 5). No measureable change 
occurred in the prevalence of violent crime for males or females 
from 2013 to 2014. Unlike in 2005 when a higher percentage of 
males than females were victims of one or more violent crimes, no 
significant difference was detected in the 2014 prevalence rates 
for males (1.2%) and females (1.1%) in 2014.

No measurable change occurred in the prevalence rate for non-
Hispanic whites or blacks from 2013 to 2014. While there were 
more than 3 times more white victims (1.8 million) than black 
victims (453,650) in 2014, blacks (1.4%) had higher prevalence 
rates than whites (1.1%). Unlike in 2013 when Hispanics had 
higher prevalence rates than whites, no significant difference 
was observed in Hispanic (1.1%) and white (1.1%) prevalence rates 
in 2014. This difference was because the prevalence of violent 
crime declined slightly for Hispanics from 2013 to 2014, but 
remained the same for whites. 

The prevalence of violent crime declined for persons ages 12 to 
17 from 2013 (2.2%) to 2014 (1.7%). In 2013, persons ages 12 to 
17 had the highest prevalence of violent crime of all age groups. 
In 2014, no significant difference was observed in the prevalence 
of violent crime among persons ages 12 to 17 (1.7%), ages 18 to 
24 (1.6%), and ages 25 to 34 (1.5%). Persons age 65 or older 
(0.3%) had the lowest prevalence rate of violent crime. 

Persons who were never married had a higher prevalence rate of 
violent crime (1.6%) than persons who were married (0.6%) in 
2014. Persons who were separated (3.0%) had the highest 
prevalence of violent crime in 2014. From 2013 to 2014, the 
prevalence of violent crime remained stable for persons of all 
marital statuses.
***************************************************

*****************************************
In 2014, 46% of violent victimizations 
were reported to police
*****************************************

The NCVS allows for examination of crimes reported and not 
reported to police. Victims may not report the victimization for 
a variety of reasons, including fear of reprisal or getting the 
offender in trouble, believing that police would not or could not 
do anything to help, and believing the crime to be a personal 
issue or too trivial to report. Police notification can come from 
the victim, a third party (including witnesses, other victims, 
household members, or other officials, such as school officials 
or workplace managers), or police being at the scene of the 
incident. Police notification may occur during or immediately 
following a criminal incident or at a later date. Police may 
include municipal police departments, sheriff’s offices, or other 
state or local law enforcement agencies.

From 2013 to 2014, no statistically significant change was 
observed in the percentage of violent and serious violent 
victimizations reported to police (table 6). In 2014, 46% of 
violent victimizations and 56% of serious violent victimizations 
were reported to police. A greater percentage of robberies (61%) 
and aggravated assaults (58%) were reported to police than simple 
assaults (40%) and rape or sexual assaults (34%).

In 2014, 37% of property victimizations were reported to police. 
From 2013 to 2014, no measurable change was detected in the 
percentage of total property victimizations, burglaries, or 
thefts reported to police. The percentage of reported motor 
vehicle thefts increased slightly from 75% to 83% during the same 
period. Similar to previous years, a larger percentage of motor 
vehicle thefts (83%) than burglaries (60%) and other thefts (29%) 
were reported to police in 2014.

*****************************************
Rates of property crime reported and not 
reported to police declined from 
2013 to 2014
*****************************************

From 2013 to 2014, no significant differences were detected in 
rates of any type of violent crime reported to police (table 7). 
With the exception of a slight decline in simple assault, rates 
of violent crime not reported to police also remained stable. 

In comparison, overall rates of property crime reported and not 
reported to police declined from 2013 to 2014. The overall rate 
of property crime reported to police decreased from 47.4 
victimizations per 1,000 households in 2013 to 43.7 per 1,000 in 
2014. This decline was driven largely by a slight decrease in 
thefts reported to police from 2013 (28.7 per 1,000) to 2014 
(26.4 per 1,000). 

The rate of unreported property crime declined from 83.1 
victimizations per 1,000 households in 2013 to 72.8 per 1,000 in 
2014. The decline in unreported property crime occurred across 
all types of property crime measured by the NCVS.

*****************************************
No change occurred in the percentage of 
violent crime victims who received 
assistance from a victim service agency 
over a 10-year span
*****************************************


Victim service agencies are publicly or privately funded 
organizations that provide victims with support and services to 
aid their physical and emotional recovery, offer protection from 
future victimizations, guide them through the criminal justice 
system process, and assist them in obtaining restitution. From 
2013 to 2014, no significant change was observed in the overall 
percentage of violent crime victims who received assistance from 
a victim service agency (10.5%) (table 8). In addition, no 
significant difference was detected in the percentage of violent 
crime victims who received assistance in 2014 compared to 10 
years earlier in 2005.

*****************************************
Violent crime decreased for Hispanics 
and young persons
*****************************************

From 2013 to 2014, the rate of violent victimization for 
Hispanics declined 35% from 24.8 victimizations per 1,000 persons 
to 16.2 per 1,000 (table 9). With the decline, the violent 
victimization rate for Hispanics dropped below that for non-
Hispanic blacks (22.5 per 1,000). This was a change from 2013, 
when blacks and Hispanics had similar rates of violent crime. No 
statistically significant difference was observed in rates of 
violent crime for non-Hispanic whites and Hispanics in 2013 and 
2014.

The decline in overall violent crime for Hispanics was largely 
driven by a decline in simple assault (not shown). The Hispanic 
rate of serious violent victimization remained relatively 
unchanged from 2013 (7.5 per 1,000) to 2014 (8.3 per 1,000).

From 2013 to 2014, the violent victimization rate declined for 
persons ages 12 to 17, from 52.1 to 30.1 victimizations per 
1,000. In 2013, persons ages 12 to 17 (52.1 per 1,000) had a 
higher rate of violent victimization than persons in any other 
age group. In 2014, no significant difference was observed in 
violent crime rates across persons ages 12 to 17, ages 18 to 24, 
or ages 25 to 34 (28.5 per 1,000). 

Like the decline in violence for Hispanics, the decline for 
persons ages 12 to 17 was largely driven by declines in simple 
assault (not shown). No significant difference was detected in 
the 2013 (10.8 per 1,000) and 2014 (8.8 per 1,000) rates of 
serious violence for persons ages 12 to 17. No other age groups 
had a measurable change in rates of violence or serious violence 
from 2013 to 2014.

Rates of violent victimization were relatively unchanged from 
2013 to 2014 for persons of all marital statuses, other than 
those who were never married. Violent victimization rates for 
persons who were never married decreased from 36.3 victimizations 
per 1,000 persons in 2013 to 27.9 per 1,000 in 2014. In 2014, 
persons who were separated had the highest rate of violent crime 
(52.8 per 1,000). 

Violent crime declined in the Northeast 
and the West
*****************************************
 
From 2013 to 2014, rates of violent victimization decreased at 
least slightly in the Northeast and in the West, with no change 
detected in the South or Midwest (table 10). The rate of violent 
crime declined slightly in the West, from 27.3 to 20.3 
victimizations per 1,000 persons. In the Northeast, the rate 
declined from 27.5 to 18.9 victimizations per 1,000 persons. No 
significant differences were observed in rates of violence or 
serious violence across any of the four regions in 2014. 

During the same period, there were also no significant 
differences in rates of violent crime across urban, suburban, and 
rural areas. Rates of serious violence were slightly higher in 
urban areas (9.3 per 1,000) in 2014 than in suburban (6.9 per 
1,000) and rural (6.5 per 1,000) areas. 

From 2013 to 2014, property crime rates decreased in all regions 
of the country, except the Northeast where no significant change 
was detected in the rate. As in 2013, property crime rates were 
highest in the West (153.0 per 1,000) and lowest in the Northeast 
(85.8 per 1,000) in 2014. 

Property crime rates also declined in urban and suburban areas 
from 2013 to 2014, but did not change significantly in rural 
areas. Urban areas (148.8 per 1,000) had a higher rate of 
property crime victimization than suburban (101.7 per 1,000) 
and rural (103.2 per 1,000) areas. 

***************************************************

*****************************************
NCVS and UCR showed similar declines 
in property crime from 2013 to 2014
*****************************************

In the first half of 2014, preliminary findings from the FBI’s 
Uniform Crime Reporting (UCR) program showed a 5% decline in the 
number of serious violent crimes (table 11). The Bureau of 
Justice Statistics’ (BJS) National Crime Victimization Survey 
(NCVS) showed an apparent decline in serious violent 
victimizations which was not statistically significant.

Because the NCVS and UCR measure an overlapping, but not 
identical, set of offenses and use different methodologies, 
congruity between the estimates is not expected. Throughout the 
40-year history of the NCVS, both programs have generally 
demonstrated similar year-to-year increases or decreases in the 
levels of overall violent and property crimes. While this has not 
always been the case for certain crime types over the past 5 
years, the two have generally shown similar declines in the two 
most recent reporting periods.

The UCR measures the violent crimes of murder and nonnegligent 
manslaughter, forcible rape, robbery, and aggravated assault. For 
property crime, the UCR measures burglary, larceny-theft, and 
motor vehicle theft. The UCR measures crimes known to law 
enforcement, occurring against both persons and businesses. The 
FBI obtains data on crimes from law enforcement agencies, while 
the NCVS collects data through interviews with victims. 
Additional information about the differences between the two 
programs can be found in The Nation’s Two Crime Measures (NCJ 
246832, BJS web, September 2014).

Significant methodological and definitional differences exist 
between the NCVS and UCR:

* The NCVS obtains estimates of crimes both reported and not 
reported to police, while the UCR collects data on crimes known 
to and recorded by law enforcement.

* The UCR includes homicide and commercial crimes, while the NCVS 
excludes these crime types.

* The UCR excludes simple assault and sexual assault, which are 
included in the NCVS.*
 
* The NCVS estimates are based on data from a nationally 
representative sample of U.S. households. The UCR percentage 
changes are based on counts of offenses reported by a large 
sample of law enforcement agencies.

*Simple assaults include attacks or attempted attacks without a 
weapon resulting in either no injury or minor injury. Sexual 
assaults include attacks or attempted attacks generally involving 
unwanted sexual contact between the victim and offender that may 
or may not involve force.

* The NCVS excludes crimes against children age 11 or younger, 
persons in institutions (e.g., nursing homes and correctional 
institutions), and may exclude highly mobile populations and 
persons who are homeless. Victimizations against these persons 
are included in the UCR.

Given these differences, the two measures of crime should 
complement each other and provide a more comprehensive picture of 
crime in the United States.

In the first half of 2014, compared to the same period in 2013, 
the UCR showed declines in all types of serious violent and 
property crimes known to law enforcement. The number of NCVS 
motor vehicle thefts also declined 19% from 2013 to 2014, but the 
apparent decline in the NCVS estimate of overall serious violent 
crime was not statistically significant. While most of the NCVS 
estimates of crime reported to police did not change 
significantly from 2013 to 2014, the general direction of change 
in the NCVS estimates appeared to be consistent with the declines 
in UCR numbers.
***************************************************

***************
Methodology
***************

Survey coverage
*****************

The National Crime Victimization Survey (NCVS) is an annual data 
collection conducted by the U.S. Census Bureau for the Bureau of 
Justice Statistics (BJS). The NCVS is a self-report survey in 
which interviewed persons are asked about the number and 
characteristics of victimizations experienced during the prior 6 
months. The NCVS collects information on nonfatal personal crimes 
(rape or sexual assault, robbery, aggravated and simple assault, 
and personal larceny) and household property crimes (burglary, 
motor vehicle theft, and other theft) both reported and not 
reported to police. In addition to providing annual level and 
change estimates on criminal victimization, the NCVS is the 
primary source of information on the nature of criminal 
victimization incidents.

Survey respondents provide information about themselves (e.g., 
age, sex, race and Hispanic origin, marital status, education 
level, and income) and whether they experienced a victimization. 
The NCVS collects information for each victimization incident 
about the offender (e.g., age, race and Hispanic origin, sex, and 
victim–offender relationship), characteristics of the crime 
(including time and place of occurrence, use of weapons, nature 
of injury, and economic consequences), whether the crime was 
reported to police, reasons the crime was or was not reported, 
and victim experiences with the criminal justice system.

The NCVS is administered to persons age 12 or older from a 
nationally representative sample of households in the United 
States. The NCVS defines a household as a group of persons who 
all reside at a sampled address. Persons are considered household 
members when the sampled address is their usual place of 
residence at the time of the interview and when they have no 
usual place of residence elsewhere. Once selected, households 
remain in the sample for 3 years, and eligible persons in these 
households are interviewed every 6 months either in person or 
over the phone for a total of seven interviews.

All first interviews are conducted in person with subsequent 
interviews conducted either in person or by phone. New households 
rotate into the sample on an ongoing basis to replace outgoing 
households that have been in the sample for the 3-year period. 
The sample includes persons living in group quarters, such as 
dormitories, rooming houses, and religious group dwellings, and 
excludes persons living in military barracks and institutional 
settings such as correctional or hospital facilities, and persons 
who are homeless.

Nonresponse and weighting adjustments
****************************************

In 2014, 90,380 households and 158,090 persons age 12 or older 
were interviewed for the NCVS. Each household was interviewed 
twice during the year. The response rate was 84% for households 
and 87% for eligible persons. Victimizations that occurred 
outside of the United States were excluded from this report. In 
2014, less than 1% of the unweighted victimizations occurred 
outside of the United States and were excluded from the analyses.

Estimates in this report use data from the 1993 to 2014 NCVS data 
files, weighted to produce annual estimates of victimization for 
persons age 12 or older living in U.S. households. Because the 
NCVS relies on a sample rather than a census of the entire U.S. 
population, weights are designed to inflate sample point 
estimates to known population totals and to compensate for survey 
nonresponse and other aspects of the sample design.

The NCVS data files include both person and household weights. 
Person weights provide an estimate of the population represented 
by each person in the sample. Household weights provide an 
estimate of the U.S. household population represented by each 
household in the sample. After proper adjustment, both household 
and person weights are also typically used to form the 
denominator in calculations of crime rates.

Victimization weights used in this analysis account for the 
number of persons present during an incident and for high-
frequency repeat victimizations (i.e., series victimizations). 
Series victimizations are similar in type but occur with such 
frequency that a victim is unable to recall each individual event 
or describe each event in detail. Survey procedures allow NCVS 
interviewers to identify and classify these similar 
victimizations as series victimizations and to collect detailed 
information on only the most recent incident in the series.

The weight counts series incidents as the actual number of 
incidents reported by the victim, up to a maximum of 10 
incidents. Including series victimizations in national rates 
results in large increases in the level of violent victimization; 
however, trends in violent crime are generally similar, 
regardless of whether series victimizations are included. In 
2014, series incidents accounted for about 1% of all 
victimizations and 4% of all violent victimizations. Weighting 
series incidents as the number of incidents up to a maximum of 10 
incidents produces more reliable estimates of crime levels, while 
the cap at 10 minimizes the effect of extreme outliers on rates. 
Additional information on the series enumeration is detailed in 
the report Methods for Counting High-Frequency Repeat 
Victimizations in the National Crime Victimization Survey (NCJ 
237308, BJS web, April 2012).

Standard error computations
*****************************

When national estimates are derived from a sample, as with the 
NCVS, caution must be used when comparing one estimate to another 
estimate or when comparing estimates over time. Although one 
estimate may be larger than another, estimates based on a sample 
have some degree of sampling error. The sampling error of an 
estimate depends on several factors, including the amount of 
variation in the responses and the size of the sample. When the 
sampling error around an estimate is taken into account, the 
estimates that appear different may not be statistically 
different.

One measure of the sampling error associated with an estimate is 
the standard error. The standard error can vary from one estimate 
to the next. Generally, an estimate with a small standard error 
provides a more reliable approximation of the true value than an 
estimate with a large standard error. Estimates with relatively 
large standard errors are associated with less precision and 
reliability and should be interpreted with caution.

To generate standard errors around numbers and estimates from the 
NCVS, the Census Bureau produced generalized variance function 
(GVF) parameters for BJS. The GVFs take into account aspects of 
the NCVS complex sample design and represent the curve fitted to 
a selection of individual standard errors based on the Jackknife 
Repeated Replication technique. The GVF parameters were used to 
generate standard errors for each point estimate (e.g., counts, 
percentages, and rates) in this report.

BJS conducted tests to determine whether differences in estimated 
numbers, percentages, and rates in this report were statistically 
significant once sampling error was taken into account. Using 
statistical programs developed specifically for the NCVS, all 
comparisons in the text were tested for significance. The primary 
test procedure was the Student’s t-statistic, which tests the 
difference between two sample estimates. Differences described as 
higher, lower, or different passed a test at the 0.05 level of 
statistical significance (95% confidence level). Differences 
described as somewhat, slightly, or marginally different, or with 
some indication of difference, passed a test at the 0.10 level of 
statistical significance (90% confidence level). Caution is 
required when comparing estimates not explicitly discussed in 
this report.

Data users can use the estimates and the standard errors of the 
estimates provided in this report to generate a confidence 
interval around the estimate as a measure of the margin of error. 
The following example illustrates how standard errors can be used 
to generate confidence intervals:

  According to the NCVS, in 2014, the violent victimization rate 
among persons age 12 or older was 20.1 per 1,000 persons (see 
table 1). Using the GVFs, it was determined that the estimated 
victimization rate has a standard error of 1.2 (see appendix 
table 2). A confidence interval around the estimate was generated 
by multiplying the standard errors by ±1.96 (the t-score of a 
normal, two-tailed distribution that excludes 2.5% at either end 
of the distribution). Therefore, the 95% confidence interval 
around the 20.1 estimate from 2014 is 20.1 ± (1.2 X 1.96) or 
(17.7 to 22.5). In others words, if different samples using the 
same procedures were taken from the U.S. population in 2014, 95% 
of the time the violent victimization rate would fall between 
17.7 and 22.5 per 1,000 persons.

In this report, BJS also calculated a coefficient of variation 
(CV) for all estimates, representing the ratio of the standard 
error to the estimate. CVs provide a measure of reliability and a 
means for comparing the precision of estimates across measures 
with differing levels or metrics. 

*****************************************
NCVS measurement of rape and sexual 
assault
*****************************************

Definition of rape and sexual assault
**************************************

The measurement of rape and sexual assault presents many 
challenges. Victims may not be willing to reveal or share their 
experiences with an interviewer. The level and type of sexual 
violence reported by victims is sensitive a variety of factors 
related to the interview process, including how items are worded, 
definitions are used, and the data collection mode. In addition, 
the legal definitions of rape and sexual assault vary across 
jurisdictions.

For the NCVS, survey respondents are asked to respond to a series 
of questions about the nature and characteristics of their 
victimization. The NCVS classifies victimizations as rape or 
sexual assault even if other crimes, such as robbery or assault, 
occurred at the same time. Then, the NCVS uses the following rape 
and sexual assault definitions:

  Rape is the unlawful penetration of a person against the will 
of the victim, with use or threatened use of force, or attempting 
such an act. Rape includes psychological coercion and physical 
force, and forced sexual intercourse means vaginal, anal, or oral 
penetration by the offender. Rape also includes incidents where 
penetration is from a foreign object (e.g., a bottle), 
victimizations against male and female victims, and both 
heterosexual and homosexual rape. Attempted rape includes verbal 
threats of rape.

  Sexual assault is defined across a wide range of 
victimizations, separate from rape or attempted rape. These 
crimes include attacks or attempted attacks generally involving 
unwanted sexual contact between a victim and offender. Sexual 
assault may or may not involve force and includes grabbing or 
fondling. 

From 2005 to 2014, 30% of NCVS rape and sexual assault 
victimizations were classified as completed rape (table 12). 
Attempted rape or other sexual assault accounted for nearly 50% 
of rape or sexual assault victimizations. About 1 in 5 (18%) were 
verbal threats of rape or sexual assault. 

Comparison of NCVS estimates to other 
survey estimates
*****************************************

Over the past several decades, a number of other surveys have 
also been used to study rape and sexual assault in the general 
population. BJS estimates of rape and sexual assault from the 
NCVS have typically been lower than estimates derived from other 
federal and private surveys. However, the NCVS methodology and 
definitions of rape and sexual assault differ from many of these 
surveys in important ways that contribute to the variation in 
estimates of the prevalence and incidence of these victimization. 
Additional information about differences in self-report estimates 
of rape and sexual assault is available on the BJS website. BJS 
continues an active research program on the collection of rape 
and sexual assault data in an effort to improve the quality and 
accuracy of these estimates.

Despite the current differences in methods and estimates that 
exist between the NCVS and other surveys, a strength of the NCVS 
is its capacity to be used to make comparisons over time, as 
year-to-year comparisons are not affected by the NCVS 
methodology. Methodological differences that exist between the 
NCVS and the other surveys that lead to higher estimates of the 
levels of rape and sexual assault in the other surveys should not 
affect the within-NCVS comparisons of estimates from 2013 to 
2014. 

*****************************************
Methodological changes to the 
NCVS in 2006
*****************************************

Methodological changes implemented in 2006 may have affected the 
crime estimates for that year to such an extent that they are not 
comparable to estimates from other years. Evaluation of 2007 and 
later data from the NCVS conducted by BJS and the Census Bureau 
found a high degree of confidence that estimates for 2007, 2008, 
2009, 2010, 2011, 2012, 2013, and 2014 are consistent with and 
comparable to estimates for 2005 and previous years. The reports, 
Criminal Victimization, 2006 (NCJ 219413, December 2007); 
Criminal Victimization, 2007 (NCJ 224390, December 2008); 
Criminal Victimization, 2008 (NCJ 227777, September 2009); 
Criminal Victimization, 2009 (NCJ 231327, October 2010); Criminal 
Victimization, 2010 (NCJ 235508, September 2011); Criminal 
Victimization, 2011 (NCJ 239437, October 2012); Criminal 
Victimization, 2012 (NCJ 243389, October 2013); and Criminal 
Victimization, 2013 (NCJ 247648, September 2014) are available on 
the BJS website.

*************************************************************
The Bureau of Justice Statistics of the U.S. Department of 
Justice is the principal federal agency responsible for measuring 
crime, criminal victimization, criminal offenders, victims of 
crime, correlates of crime, and the operation of criminal and 
civil justice systems at the federal, state, tribal, and local 
levels. BJS collects, analyzes, and disseminates reliable and 
valid statistics on crime and justice systems in the United 
States, supports improvements to state and local criminal justice 
information systems, and participates with national and 
international organizations to develop and recommend national 
standards for justice statistics. William J. Sabol is director.

This report was written by Jennifer L. Truman and Lynn Langton. 
Erika Harrell verified the report.

Jill Thomas and Morgan Young edited the report, and Barbara Quinn 
produced the report.

August 2015, NCJ 248973
*************************************************************

*************************************************
Office of Justice Programs
Innovation * Partnerships * Safer Neighborhoods
www.ojp.usdoj.gov
*************************************************

***************************
8/10/2015 10:00am JER
***************************

