U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Programs
Bureau of Justice Statistics

********************************************************
This file is text only without graphics and many of the
tables. A Zip archive of the tables in this report in
spreadsheet format (.csv) and the full report including
tables and graphics in .pdf format are available on BJS
website at: http://www.bjs.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbdetail&iid=5436
*********************************************************

Special Report

Drug Offenders in Federal Prison: Estimates of Characteristics 
Based on Linked Data

Sam Taxy, Julie Samuels, and William Adams, Urban Institute

Publicly available BOP datasets do not include information about 
prisoners’ criminal history, offense details, and sentencing 
decisions, making it difficult to assess the criminal background 
of the offenders and the nature of their offenses. This report 
uses a new dataset that links the BOP population at fiscal 
yearend 2012 (i.e., stock population), with sentencing 
information from the U.S. Sentencing Commission (USSC) to 
describe the federal prison population in greater detail. The 
dataset includes the 94,678 sentenced offenders in federal prison 
whose most serious offense was drug-related, who were serving 
time on a new U.S. district court commitment, and who had valid 
links to USSC data. Of these, almost all were drug trafficking 
offenders, while the remainder were sentenced for other drug 
offenses, primarily possession. 

The 94,678 drug offenders drug offenders included in the dataset 
are referred to as drug offenders throughout this report. The 
Methodology and the Dataset composition and definition of drug 
offender textbox provide more information about the linking 
methodology, file composition, exclusionary criteria, and link 
rates. The counts and percentages based on the BOP variables 
presented in this report may differ slightly from other published 
Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS) or BOP reports because only an 
analysis of linked observations is reported here. 

This report examines drug offenders in terms of their 
demographics, basic offense characteristics, and sentence 
imposed. Although the USSC dataset contains information related 
to both offense characteristics (e.g., quantity of drugs) and the 
justice system response (e.g., whether an offender was convicted 
of an offense carrying a mandatory minimum penalty and whether 
that penalty was applied at sentencing), the focus here is on the 
offenders and basic offense characteristics. The data were 
disaggregated by the primary type of drug involved (drug type is 
a variable only available in the USSC datasets). Other BOP and 
USSC variables of interest—demographics, criminal history, weapon 
involvement in the instant offense (the most recent offense for 
which the individual was sentenced and incarcerated), and 
sentence length—were analyzed by drug type.

*************************************************
************
HIGHLIGHTS
************

* This study is based on 94,678 offenders in federal prison at 
fiscal yearend 2012 who were sentenced on a new U.S. district 
court commitment and whose most serious offense (as classified by 
the Federal Bureau of Prisons) was a drug offense.

* Almost all (99.5%) drug offenders in federal prison were 
serving sentences for drug trafficking.

* Cocaine (powder or crack) was the primary drug type for more 
than half (54%) of drug offenders in federal prison. 

* Race of drug offenders varied greatly by drug type. Blacks were 
88% of crack cocaine offenders, Hispanics or Latinos were 54% of 
powder cocaine offenders, and whites were 48% of methamphetamine 
offenders.

* More than a third (35%) of drug offenders in federal prison at 
sentencing, had either no or minimal criminal history— lowest 
criminal history category. 

* Nearly a quarter (24%) of drug offenders in federal prison used 
a weapon in their most recent offense.

* The average prison sentence for federal drug offenders was more 
than 11 years. 

* Across all drug types, crack cocaine offenders were most likely 
to have extensive criminal histories (40%), used a weapon (32%), 
and received longer prison terms (170 months).
*************************************************

The number of federally sentenced prisoners in the Federal Bureau 
of Prisons (BOP) increased 84% between fiscal year (FY) 1998 and 
2012, and the number of drug offenders in federal prison grew 63% 
during this time*** Footnote 1 See Federal Criminal Case 
Processing Statistics on the BJS website at www.bjs.gov/fjsrc 
***. At fiscal yearend 2012, offenders whose most serious offense 
(as defined by the BOP) was a drug offense accounted for about 
half (52%) of the federally sentenced prison population (table 
1). Previous analyses focusing on the growth of the prison 
population from FY 1998 to FY 2010 have shown that 42% of the 
growth in the federally sentenced population was due to an 
increase in the number of drug offenders, and the largest 
contributor to that growth was length of time served for drug 
offenses*** Footnote 2 Mallik-Kane, K., Parthasarathy, B., & 
Adams, W. (2012). Examining growth in the federal prison 
population, 1998–2010 (NCJ 239785). Washington, DC: Urban 
Institute***. Because drug offenders comprise about half of 
federal prison population and sentence length for this 
subpopulation is the greatest source of federal prison population 
growth, this report examines these offenders in greater detail.

***********************************
Powder and crack cocaine offenders 
made up more than half of all BOP 
drug offenders
***********************************

More than half (54%) of drug offenders in the federal prison 
system had a form of cocaine (powder or crack) as the primary 
drug type (table 2). Methamphetamine offenders (24%) accounted 
for the next largest share, followed by marijuana (12%) and 
heroin (6%) offenders. Offenders convicted of crimes involving 
other drugs (including LSD, some prescription drugs, and MDMA or 
ecstasy) made up 3% of offenders.

***********************************
Three-quarters of BOP drug offenders 
were black or Hispanic
***********************************

About three-quarters of drug offenders in federal prison were 
either non-Hispanic black or African American (39%) or Hispanic 
or Latino (37%); nearly a quarter (22%) were non-Hispanic white 
offenders (table 3). In addition, drug offenders in federal 
prison were overwhelmingly male (92%), about a quarter (24%) were 
noncitizens, and nearly 80% were age 30 or older.

***********************************
Race and citizenship varied greatly 
by drug type
***********************************

The vast majority of crack cocaine offenders (88%) were non-
Hispanic black or African American. By comparison, more than half 
(54%) of powder cocaine offenders were Hispanic or Latino and 13% 
were non-Hispanic white. In addition, more than half (59%) of 
marijuana offenders and almost half (48%) of heroin offenders 
were Hispanic or Latino. A large proportion of methamphetamine 
offenders were non-Hispanic white (48%) or Hispanic or Latino 
(45%).

Although most drug offenders were U.S. citizens, citizenship 
status varied across drug type subgroups. Almost all crack 
cocaine (97%) and other drug (89%) offenders were U.S. citizens. 
Aside from those, citizenship rates ranged from 71% for heroin 
offenders to 65% for marijuana offenders. 

Age and sex varied more subtly across drug types. The percentage 
of male drug offenders by type of drug ranged from 88% of 
methamphetamine to 96% of crack cocaine offenders. The percentage 
of persons age 30 or older ranged from 73% of other drug to 82% 
of powder cocaine offenders.

***********************************
More than a third of federal drug 
offenders had the lowest level of 
criminal history at sentencing
***********************************

More than a third (35%) of federal drug offenders were in the 
lowest USSC criminal history category, Category I, which includes 
offenders with no previous term of imprisonment and others with 
minimal criminal histories. This was the most frequently applied 
category (table 4). Almost 8 in 10 (79%) federal drug offenders 
in Category I had no points assigned at sentencing, meaning they 
had no relevant criminal history as used to compute 
categorization. This accounted for more than 25% of all drug 
offenders in the BOP. In comparison, more than 22% of federal 
drug offenders were in the highest criminal history category 
(Category VI), which indicates the most extensive criminal 
histories.

*************************************************
***************************************
USSC Criminal History Categorization
***************************************

The U.S. Sentencing Commission (USSC) aggregates available 
criminal history information into broader criminal history 
categories to be used at sentencing. This information includes 
whether the offender has been previously sentenced to a term of 
imprisonment, the length of each previous sentence imposed, 
whether the most recent offense was committed soon after a 
release from incarceration, whether the most recent offense was 
committed while under criminal justice supervision (e.g., 
probation), and whether there were any crimes of violence that 
were not previously captured in any of the previous other 
categories. 
*************************************************

Criminal history points are assigned in differing levels for each 
of these categories, and the points are collapsed into six levels 
of criminal history—zero points indicates that there is no 
history in any of the above domains, and higher point totals 
reflect more extensive criminal histories. Criminal history 
category may also be adjusted based on other aggravating 
circumstances, such as being a career offender or a repeat and 
dangerous sex offender against minors. Judges may depart upward 
or downward regarding the criminal history category if the final 
category substantially misrepresents the seriousness of the 
offender’s criminal history.*** Footnote 3 For more information, 
see Office of the General Counsel, U.S. Sentencing Commission, 
Criminal History Primer, Washington, DC: U.S. Sentencing 
Commission. 2014***.

*************************************
Crack cocaine offenders had the most 
extensive criminal histories
***********************************

The extent of criminal history for drug offenders varied by 
primary drug type. Crack cocaine offenders had more extensive 
criminal histories than any other type of drug offenders, and 
more than 40% of crack offenders in federal prison were in the 
highest criminal history category (Category VI), followed by 
heroin offenders (24%). The proportion of offenders in Category I 
ranged from 39% for heroin offenders to 49% for powder cocaine 
offenders. Within each drug type, the majority of offenders in 
Category I had no criminal history points at the time of 
sentencing. Across all drug offenders, powder cocaine (41%) and 
marijuana (36%) offenders were the most likely to have no 
criminal history points applied at sentencing and be in Category 
I. Almost a quarter of heroin offenders (24%) were classified 
under the most serious criminal history category (Category VI), 
the second highest share of any drug type after crack cocaine.

***********************************
About a quarter of federal drug 
offenders were sentenced for 
weapons involvement
***********************************

Nearly 1 in 4 (24%) federal drug offenders in prison at yearend 
2012 who were sentenced since 1998 were sentenced for having a 
weapon involved in the instant offense (table 5).***Footnote 4 
Although USSC datasets go back to 1994, some weapons variables 
are unavailable prior to 1998. To ensure continuity within 
comparisons of weapons, offenders sentenced prior to 1998 were 
excluded***. Of these drug offenders, about a quarter (26%) 
received a mandatory minimum sentence for a separate charge of 
conviction for using a weapon during the commission of the 
offense (pursuant to 18 U.S.C. § 924(c)); and about three-
quarters (73%) had a weapon specific offense characteristic that 
was not a separate charge of conviction but was still included in 
the sentence computation (not shown). A majority of the weapon-
involved offenders received a sentence enhancement, accounting 
for 18% of the total drug offender population. Another 6% of the 
drug offender population were convicted of a 924(c) weapon 
offense.***Footnote 5 All figures reported for weapon involvement 
exclude offenders who have both types of weapon; they made up 
less than 0.5% of drug offenders***.

***********************************
Less than a third of crack cocaine 
offenders had their sentence 
increased due to weapons involvement 
in the offense 
***********************************

Crack cocaine offenders were the most likely to receive a 
mandatory minimum sentence for weapon involvement under 924(c) 
(9%) or to have guidelines adjusted for a weapon-specific offense 
characteristic (23%) totaling to almost a third with weapon 
involvement (32%). Methamphetamine offenders were the next most 
likely to have weapon enhancements—more than 25% had some kind of 
sentencing related to weapons. In comparison, marijuana offenders 
were the least likely to have these weapon enhancements—3% had a 
mandatory minimum sentence under 924(c) for gun involvement and 
12% had a specific offense characteristic.

***********************************
The average prison sentence of drug 
offenders in federal prison was 
11.3 years 
***********************************

The total prison term imposed on federal drug offenders was more 
than 11 years on average. The median prison term was 10 years. 
Almost two-thirds (65%) of offenders were sentenced to a term of 
imprisonment of more than 5 years up to and including 20 years. 
Thirteen percent of federal drug offenders were sentenced to a 
term of imprisonment greater than 20 years, while less than 1% 
were sentenced to a term of 1 year or less (table 6).

***********************************
Marijuana offenders had the 
shortest prison terms 
***********************************

Marijuana offenders had the shortest average term of imprisonment 
of all drug types. The average sentence was more than 7 years (88 
months) and the median was 5 years (60 months). A majority of 
marijuana offenders received a sentence of more than 1 year up to 
and including 5 years in prison. In comparison, crack cocaine 
offenders had the longest average and median prison terms. On 
average, these offenders were sentenced to more than 14 years 
(170 months), while the median sentence was more than 12.5 years 
(151 months). A majority (62%) of crack cocaine offenders were 
sentenced to more than 10 years in prison.

*************
Methodology
*************

These analyses are based on a data file built from the population 
of new U.S. district court commitments in the Federal Bureau of 
Prisons (BOP) at fiscal yearend 2012. These prisoners made up 87% 
of the federal prison population at that time. Pre-sentencing 
admissions, offenders sentenced prior to the Sentencing Reform 
Act of 1984, and others who were not new U.S. district court 
commitments (e.g., supervision violators, D.C. Superior Court 
commitments, or state boarders) were excluded. For more 
information about offenders who were included or excluded for the 
purposes of linking, see Dataset composition and definition of 
drug offender below. For the remaining 188,988 prisoners, 
probabilistic linking methods were used to link each BOP record 
with a U.S. Sentencing Commission (USSC) record corresponding to 
that prisoner’s shared identifying information. USSC files from 
FY 1994 to FY 2012 were used for these purposes.

Linking the BOP and the USSC datasets is useful because the BOP 
does not publicly provide certain data fields that are available 
in the USSC dataset, including criminal history information, 
offense characteristics, and sentencing information (e.g., 
whether an offender was convicted of an offense carrying a 
mandatory minimum penalty and whether that penalty was applied at 
sentencing). For drug offenders, the USSC also provides 
information about up to five drug types involved in the instant 
offense (the most recent offense for which the individual was 
sentenced and incarcerated), along with the weight of each type. 
This report uses the USSC primary drug type data.

Probabilistic matching techniques were applied across personally 
identifiable information such as name, date of birth, and 
sentencing year to link records between the two different data 
sources.***Footnote 6 For more detailed information about the 
linking methodology employed, see Kelly, J. (2012). Federal 
Justice Statistics Program Data Linking System (NCJ 239536). 
Washington, DC: Urban Institute***. Of the 188,988 federally 
sentenced prisoners included in the initial dataset, 97% had 
valid matches in the USSC data (table 7). There are many reasons 
why a person may not be matched to a USSC record. The two primary 
technical reasons are (1) a person is in prison for Class B or C 
misdemeanors not covered by the U.S. Sentencing Guidelines 
***Footnote 7 The U.S. Sentencing Guidelines do not 
apply to Class B and C misdemeanor offenses handled by U.S. 
magistrate judges; however, these offenders may receive short 
prison terms and therefore would be included in the BOP data***. 
and (2) a person was sentenced pursuant to the U.S. Sentencing 
Guidelines but prior to 1994, when the Bureau of Justice 
Statistics (BJS) introduced the Federal Justice Statistics 
Program standard analysis files and dyad link files. 

A Jaro-Winkler score threshold of 0.70 was used by the matching 
algorithm; names that matched below that level were excluded from 
this dataset. A comparison of linked and unlinked records by 
primary offense category shows that two offense types--violent 
offenses and immigration offenses--were over-represented in the 
unlinked population relative to the linked population (table 8). 
This is consistent with possible reasons for exclusion, as 
violent offenders typically receive very long sentences (certain 
violent offenders sentenced to long prison terms prior to 1994 
will be unlinked in this dataset) and a significant share of 
immigration offenders may be Class B and C misdemeanants not 
sentenced in U.S. district court pursuant to the federal 
sentencing guidelines, and therefore would not be included in the 
USSC dataset or in the linked file.

*************************************************
***********************************
Dataset composition and definition 
of drug offender
***********************************

This report focuses on the subset of 94,678 federally sentenced 
prisoners in the Federal Bureau of Prisons (BOP) on a new U.S. 
district court commitment whose most serious instant offense (as 
classified by the BOP) was a drug offense, and who had valid 
links to an observation in the United States Sentencing 
Commission (USSC) database. The universe of offenders analyzed in 
this report was a product of (1) the linking methodology and (2) 
the definition of drug offenders used in the report.

The base dataset used for linking includes only federally 
sentenced offenders in BOP for a new U.S. district court 
commitment. Offenders serving time in prison for a violation of 
probation or supervised release were excluded from the dataset, 
although they were sentenced at an earlier time. Violators are 
different from new commitments, differing in terms of age, race, 
sex, and citizenship (table 9). Many noncitizens are not released 
back to the United States and are therefore not actively 
supervised by federal probation, thus accounting for the lower 
proportion of noncitizens among supervision violator returns to 
prison as compared to new court commitments.
*************************************************

This report uses the BOP’s classification of most serious 
offense, which differs from that of the USSC, to define drug 
offenders in federal prison. In comparison, the USSC uses the 
statutory maximum to determine the most serious offense. As a 
result, this report does not include all persons who have 
committed a federal drug offense and instead focuses on prisoners 
whom BOP classified as drug offenders because the drug offense 
carried the longest sentence imposed. 

To identify drug offenders for this analysis, BOP’s most serious 
offense categorization (which relies on the longest sentence 
imposed) was used. Alternative methods of identifying drug 
offenders in BOP custody could have expanded the definition to 
include secondary charges or to rely on USSC’s categorization of 
most serious offense, which primarily depends on the statutory 
maximum. The USSC criteria would have yielded a slightly 
different population of prisoners considered to be drug offenders 
(table 10).

Another definition of drug offender could be any individual 
serving time for a drug offense, rather than any offender whose 
most serious offense is drug related. This would include other 
offenders who have more serious primary charges, as categorized 
by both the BOP and USSC, for which they were sentenced in 
addition to a secondary or tertiary drug charge. This criterion 
would have yielded 102,012 persons who were serving time for a 
drug offense, although that offense may not have been the most 
serious charge of conviction. Most of the remaining offenders had 
a weapons offense as the most serious offense (table 11).


********************************************************
The Bureau of Justice Statistics of the U.S. Department of 
Justice is the principal federal agency responsible for measuring 
crime, criminal victimization, criminal offenders, victims of 
crime, correlates of crime, and the operation of criminal and 
civil justice systems at the federal, state, tribal, and local 
levels. BJS collects, analyzes, and disseminates reliable and 
valid statistics on crime and justice systems in the United 
States, supports improvements to state and local criminal justice 
information systems, and participates with national and 
international organizations to develop and recommend national 
standards for justice statistics. William J. Sabol is director.

This report was written by Sam Taxy, Julie Samuels, and William 
Adams of Urban Institute. Mark Motivans and Rhonda Keith provided 
statistical verification and review.

Jill Thomas edited the report. Tina Dorsey produced the report.

October 2015, NCJ 248648

********************************************************

*************************************************
Office of Justice Programs
Innovation * Partnerships * Safer Neighborhoods
www.ojp.usdoj.gov
*************************************************

**********************************************
10/22/2015 9:25pm JER 
**********************************************


