U.S. Department of Justice                                      
Office of Justice Programs
Bureau of Justice Statistics

Executive Summary

Felony Defendants in Large Urban Counties, 1994

January 1998, NCJ-167234

This report is one in a series.  
More recent editions may be available.  
To view a list of all in the series go to 
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/pubalp2.htm#fdluc

By Brian A. Reaves
BJS Statistician

As a part of its State Court Processing Statistics program, the
Bureau of Justice Statistics tracked a sample of felony cases
filed during May 1994 in the Nation's 75 largest counties. 
Compared to a similar study of cases filed in May 1992, the 1994
study found a slightly higher proportion of drug defendants,
while the proportion of property defendants was down slightly. 

Defendants in 1992 and 1994 were similar in terms of demographic
characteristics, criminal history, and pretrial misconduct
rates.  Court processing of cases was also similar in terms of
pretrial detention rates, adjudication outcome, and sentencing.

------------------------
Arrest charges
------------------------

An estimated 53,099 felony cases were filed in the State courts
of the Nation's 75 largest counties during May 1994.  A fourth
of the defendants in these cases were charged with a violent
offense, usually assault (12%) or robbery (8%).  A small
percentage of defendants were charged with murder (1%) or rape
(1%).  

About 2 in 3 defendants were charged with either a drug (35%) or
property (31%) offense.  Two-fifths of drug defendants, 15% of
defendants overall, were charged with drug trafficking.  A
majority of property defendants were charged with theft (11% of
all defendants) or burglary (9%).  Nine percent of all
defendants were charged with a public-order offense.  Often
these charges were weapons-related (4% of all defendants) or
driving-related (2%).

-----------------------------------
Demographic characteristics
-----------------------------------

Eighty-five percent of defendants were male, with the largest
percentages among those charged with rape (97%), a weapons
offense (95%), robbery (93%) or a driving-related offense (93%).
 Women accounted for about a fourth of the defendants charged
with a property offense other than burglary.  

Blacks comprised nearly three-fourths of the defendants charged
with robbery or a weapons offense.  Whites accounted for about
three-fourths of those charged with a driving-related felony.

A majority (57%) of defendants were under age 30.  Twenty-one
percent were under age 21, including about two-fifths of murder
(42%) and robbery (38%) defendants.  Five percent of defendants
were under age 18, including 16% of murder defendants and 15% of
robbery defendants.

---------------------------
Criminal history
---------------------------
At the time of arrest, about 3 in 8 defendants had an active
criminal justice status such as probation (17%), release pending
disposition of a prior case (15%), or parole (8%).  Robbery
defendants (49%) were the most likely to have a criminal justice
status, and rape defendants (17%) the least likely.

About two-thirds of all defendants had been arrested previously,
with 39% having at least five prior arrest charges.  Fifty-six
percent of defendants had a felony arrest record, including 63%
of burglary defendants.

An estimated 38% of defendants had at least one prior conviction
for a felony, including nearly half of burglary defendants. 
Thirteen percent of all defendants had a prior conviction for a
violent felony, including a fifth of murder and robbery
defendants.

----------------------------------------
Pretrial release and detention
----------------------------------------

An estimated 38% of all defendants were detained until the court
disposed of their case, including 7% who were denied bail.  A
majority of defendants  charged with murder (79%), robbery
(57%), or burglary (53%) were detained.  Forty-three percent of
murder defendants were denied bail.  

Fiffty-six percent of the defendants with an active criminal
justice status were detained until case disposition, compared to
30% of those without such a status.  Defendants on parole (76%)
were the most likely to be detained, followed by those on
probation (57%).

Released defendants were most likely to be released on personal
recognizance, which accounted for 41% of all releases.  The next
most common type of pretrial release was surety bond (25%),
followed by conditional release (11%) and deposit bond (9%).

About a third of released defendants committed one or more types
of pretrial misconduct that resulted in the revocation of their
release.  Twenty- four percent failed to appear in court as
scheduled, and 15% were rearrested for a new offense.   

-----------------------------
Adjudication
-----------------------------

About a fourth of all defendants had their case adjudicated
within 1 month of arrest, and about half with-in 3 months.  At
the end of the 1-year study period, 87% of all cases had been
adjudicated.

Nearly three-fourths of the cases adjudicated within 1 year
resulted in a conviction.  Conviction rates were highest for
defendants charged with a driving-related offense (86%) or drug
trafficking (81%) and lowest for defendants charged with assault
(53%).

Sixty-one percent of all defendants were convicted of a felony,
and 11% of a misdemeanor.  Felony conviction rates were highest
for defendants originally charged with drug trafficking (73%), a
driving-related offense (70%), murder (67%), burglary (67%), or
a weapons offense (67%).  Assault defendants (41%) had the
lowest felony conviction rate.

Ninety-two percent of convictions occurring during the 1-year
study period were obtained through a guilty plea.  About 5 in 6
guilty pleas were to a felony.  Murder defendants (32%) were the
most likely to have their case adjudicated by trial.  About 4 in
5 trials resulted in a guilty verdict, including 7 in 8 murder
trials.

----------------------
Sentencing
----------------------

A majority (62%) of convicted defendants were sentenced within 1
day of adjudication.  About two-thirds of all sentences were
either to a State prison (32%) or a local jail (34%). 
Two-thirds of all jail sentences included a probation term. 
Nearly all convicted defendants who did not receive an
incarceration sentence were placed on probation.  

Thirty-six percent of the defendants convicted of a felony were
sentenced to prison, including all of those convicted of murder.
 A large majority of the defendants convicted of robbery (70%)
or rape (69%) also received prison sentences.

A majority of those with multiple prior felony convictions were
sentenced to prison following a felony conviction in the current
case, as were about half of those with a single prior felony
conviction.  About a fourth of those without prior felony
convictions received a prison term.

The mean prison sentence for defendants convicted of a violent
felony was about 9 years, and the median was 6 years. 
Defendants convicted of murder (20 years) or rape (10 years) had
the longest median prison sentences.  About a fifth of convicted
murderers received a life sentence. 

The median prison sentence for defendants convicted of a
nonviolent felony was 3 years, ranging from 4 years for those
convicted of drug trafficking to 12 years for those convicted of
a driving-related offense.


End of file