U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Programs
Bureau of Justice Statistics

-------------------------------------------------------
This file is text only without graphics and many of the
tables. A Zip archive of the tables in this report in
spreadsheet format (.csv) and the full report including
tables and graphics in .pdf format are available on BJS
website at: 
http://www.bjs.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbdetail&iid=4845

This report is one in a series. More recent editions 
may be available. To view a list of all in the series 
go to
http://bjs.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbse&sid=27
-------------------------------------------------------

*******************
Statistical Table
*******************

State Court Processing Statistics


Felony Defendants in Large Urban Counties, 2009 - 
Statistical Tables

Brian A. Reaves, Ph.D., BJS Statistician

Between 1990 and 2009, the average age of persons 
convicted of felonies in the 75 largest counties in the 
United States increased from 28 to 32 years. About 27% 
of convicted felons in 2009 were age 40 or older, 
compared to 10% in 1990 (figure 1).

As the average age of convicted felons increased 
between 1990 and 2009, the severity of the criminal 
histories of these older offenders also increased. In 
2009, about two-thirds (68%) of convicted felons age 40 
or older had at least one prior felony conviction, 
compared to less than half (45%) in 1990 (figure 2). 
Defendants age 40 or older were the only age group with 
an increase in the probability of incarceration for a 
felony conviction between 1990 (71%) and 2009 (77%) 
(not shown in figure). 

Due to the increased percentage of older offenders in 
felony courts and their greater likelihood of 
incarceration, 27% of those sentenced to incarceration 
after a felony conviction in 2009 were age 40 or older, 
compared to 9% in 1990 (figure 3). By 2009, 34% of 
state prison inmates were age 40 or older, compared to 
18% in 1990.

In addition to these age-related trends, from 1990 to 
2009--

* The percentage of defendants charged with a public-
order offense increased from 7% to 13%, while the 
percentage of property defendants dropped from 34% to 
29%. 

* The percentage of female defendants rose from 14% to 
17%.

* The percentage of pretrial releases that included 
financial conditions climbed from 37% to 61%, including 
an increase from 24% to 49% in the use of surety bonds.

The findings in this report are based on data from the 
Bureau of Justice Statistics’ (BJS) State Court 
Processing Statistics (SCPS) program. The SCPS program 
periodically tracks a sample of felony cases filed in 
the nation’s 75 most populous counties. Data are 
collected on arrest charges, demographic 
characteristics, criminal histories, pretrial 
processing, adjudication, and sentencing. This report 
presents findings from the SCPS data collection that 
tracked cases filed in May 2009. In addition to the 
2009 results, selected trends observed since 1990 are 
also presented.

***************************
Section 1: Arrest charges
***************************

* About 56,000 felony cases were filed in the 75 
largest counties during May 2009. Drug defendants (33%) 
represented the largest category of felony defendants, 
followed by those charged with a property offense (29%) 
or a violent offense (25%) (table 1). 

* By specific offense, 18% of defendants were charged 
with nontrafficking drug offenses and 15% with drug 
trafficking. The next most frequent case types were 
assault (12%), burglary (9%), larceny/theft (8%), and 
robbery (7%) (figure 4). 

* The majority (55%) of felony defendants faced at 
least one additional charge. About 40% were charged 
with at least one additional felony, and 15% were 
charged with a misdemeanor in addition to the primary 
felony charge (table 2). 

* The majority of the defendants whose most serious 
arrest charge was rape (65%), murder (60%), burglary 
(56%), drug trafficking (55%), or robbery (54%) were 
charged with one or more additional felonies.

* Between 1990 and 2009, more than 3 in 5 felony 
defendants were charged with either a drug offense or 
property offense, and about 1 in 4 was charged with a 
violent offense (figure 5). 

* The percentage of defendants charged with a property 
offense declined from 34% in 1990 to 29% in 2009. The 
percentage of defendants charged with a public-order 
offense rose from 7% in 1990 to 13% in 2009. 

* The percentage of defendants charged with a violent 
offense in 2009 (25%) approached that observed in 1990 
(27%) after dropping to a low of 23% in 2004 and 2005.

* Drug defendants represented 33% of felony cases in 
both 1990 and 2009, but they accounted for 37% of cases 
between 1996 and 2006.


************************************************
********************************
List of tables and figures – 
Arrest charges
********************************

TABLE 1. Felony defendants in the 75 largest counties, 
by most serious arrest charge, 2009

FIGURE 4. Most frequently charged offenses of felony 
defendants in the 75 largest counties, 2009 

FIGURE 5. Most serious arrest charge category for 
felony defendants in the 75 largest counties, 1990–2009

TABLE 2. Level of second most serious charge for felony 
defendants in the 75 largest counties, by most serious 
arrest charge, 2009
************************************************

*******************************************
Section 2: Demographic characteristics
*******************************************

* In 2009, the overall average age at arrest for felony 
defendants in the 75 largest counties was 32 (table 3). 
This was four years older than the average age of 28 
observed in 1990.

* The average age at arrest for defendants charged with 
robbery in 2009 was 25, the youngest average age for 
any charged offense. Nearly half (46%) of robbery 
defendants were age 20 or younger, compared to 18% of 
defendants overall. Fifteen percent of robbery 
defendants were age 17 or younger, compared to 3% of 
defendants overall.  	

* Defendants charged with a driving-related offense had 
the oldest average age at arrest (37). Thirty-nine 
percent of defendants charged with a driving-related 
offense were age 40 or older, compared to 25% of 
defendants overall. 

* The proportion of defendants age 40 or older has 
increased from about 1 in 10 in 1990 to about 1 in 4 
since 2004. Since 1996, just over 3 in 10 defendants 
have been age 24 or younger, a smaller proportion than 
in 1990 and 1992, when about 4 in 10 defendants were in 
this age category (figure 6).

* An estimated 17% of defendants were female in 2009. 
This was a slight increase compared to 1990, when 
females represented 14% of defendants (table 4). 

* In 2009, the most frequently charged offenses among 
female felony defendants were fraud (37%), forgery 
(34%), and larceny/theft (31%). Female felony 
defendants were least often charged with a weapons-
related offense (4%).

* Nearly half (45%) of all defendants were non-Hispanic 
blacks in 2009. The highest percentages of black 
defendants were among those charged with robbery (62%), 
a weapons offense (61%), or murder (57%). The lowest 
percentages were among those charged with a driving-
related offense (28%) or fraud (32%) (table 5). 

* Nearly a third of all defendants were non-Hispanic 
whites (30%). More than a third of the defendants 
charged with a driving-related offense (39%) or 
larceny/theft (37%) were white. About a quarter (24%) 
of all defendants were Hispanic, including nearly a 
third of defendants charged with a driving-related 
offense (31%), motor vehicle theft (30%), or murder 
(30%).

* Black males accounted for more than half (55%) of 
defendants age 17 or younger. Among defendants age 40 
or older, 37% were black males, 28% were white males, 
and 16% were Hispanic males (figure 7).

*******************************
List of tables and figures – 
Demographic characteristics
*******************************

************************************************
TABLE 3. Age at arrest of felony defendants in the 75 
largest counties, by most serious arrest charge, 2009 

FIGURE 6. Age at arrest of felony defendants in the 75 
largest counties, 1990–2009

TABLE 4. Sex of felony defendants in the 75 largest 
counties, by most serious arrest charge, 2009

TABLE 5. Race and Hispanic or Latino origin of felony 
defendants in the 75 largest counties, by most serious 
arrest charge, 2009

FIGURE 7. Race and Hispanic or Latino origin and sex of 
felony defendants in the 75 largest counties, by age at 
arrest, 2009
************************************************

*******************************
Section 3: Criminal history
*******************************

************************************************

* In 2009, 13% of felony defendants in the 75 largest 
counties were on probation at the time of arrest, down 
from a peak of 18% in 1990. Defendants charged with 
motor vehicle theft (18%) or burglary (17%) were the 
most likely to have been on probation when arrested on 
the current felony charge (table 6).

* About 5% of defendants were on parole at the time of 
arrest in 2009, compared to 8% in years prior to 1996. 
In 2009, an estimated 8% of those charged with a 
weapons offense and 7% of those charged with rape were 
parolees at the time of arrest.

* About 3 in 4 defendants had been arrested at least 
once prior to the arrest on the current felony charge. 
Nearly all of the defendants with an arrest record had 
multiple prior arrest charges. About half (51%) of all 
defendants had five or more prior arrest charges, and 
more than a third (36%) had 10 or more (table 7).

* Defendants whose most serious current arrest charge 
was a driving-related offense (88%) were the most 
likely to have been arrested previously. Those charged 
with fraud (60%) were the least likely to have one or 
more prior arrests.

* Defendants charged with motor vehicle theft (42%), 
drug trafficking (42%), other drug offense (41%), or a 
driving-related offense (41%) were the most likely to 
have 10 or more prior arrest charges. Those charged 
with rape (22%) were the least likely to have a prior 
arrest.

* In 2009, 61% of defendants age 17 or younger had no 
prior arrests, down from a high of 75% in 1994. In 
2009, the majority of defendants age 25 or older had 
five or more prior arrest charges (figure 8).  

* About 3 in 5 defendants had been arrested previously 
on a felony charge. Drug (69%) and public-order (66%) 
defendants were more likely to have a prior felony 
arrest than those charged with a property (59%) or 
violent (55%) offense (table 8).

* Among property defendants, those charged with 
burglary (66%) or motor vehicle theft (66%) were the 
most likely to have been previously arrested for a 
felony. Those charged with fraud (48%) were the least 
likely to have a felony arrest record.  

* An estimated 17% of all defendants had 10 or more 
prior felony arrest charges, including 27% of those 
charged with motor vehicle theft. Rape (10%) and fraud 
(11%) defendants were the least likely to have 10 or 
more prior felony charges.

* Between 1990 and 2009, the percentage of defendants 
with at least one prior arrest increased from 68% to 
75%. The proportion of defendants with multiple prior 
arrests rose from 59% to 68% during this period. The 
percentage of defendants who had 10 or more prior 
arrests increased from an estimated 22% in 1990 to 36% 
in 2009 (figure 9).

* The percentage of defendants with a felony arrest 
record increased from about 55% prior to 1996 to more 
than 60% since 2002. The percentage with multiple prior 
felony arrests rose from 43% to 52% during the same 
period. The percentage with 10 or more prior felony 
arrests nearly doubled during this time, from 9% in 
1990 to 17% in 2009.
 
* About 3 in 5 defendants had at least one prior 
conviction. The percentage of defendants with one or 
more prior convictions was highest among those charged 
with a driving-related offense (76%) and lowest among 
those charged with fraud (43%) (table 9).  

* An estimated 14% of all defendants had 10 or more 
prior convictions, including 17% of those charged with 
larceny/theft, motor vehicle theft, or drug 
trafficking.

* An estimated 43% of defendants had at least one prior 
felony conviction. About half of those charged with a 
drug offense (50%), a weapons offense (49%), or motor 
vehicle theft (48%) had a felony conviction record. 
Fraud defendants (30%) were the least likely to have a 
prior felony conviction (table 10).

* Overall, 30% of defendants had multiple prior felony 
convictions, and 11% had five or more. An estimated 17% 
of defendants charged with motor vehicle theft and 15% 
of drug defendants had at least five prior felony 
convictions.

* For 13% of defendants in 2009, the most serious prior 
conviction was a violent felony. Fraud defendants (5%) 
were the least likely to have a prior conviction for a 
violent felony in 2009 (table 11). 

* An estimated 17% of defendants in 2009 had a prior 
conviction record that consisted of only misdemeanors. 
About a third of defendants charged with a driving-
related offense (33%) were in this category.

* Most defendants age 17 or younger (86%) or ages 18 to 
20 (64%) had no prior convictions of any type. Among 
defendants age 25 or older, about a third had no prior 
convictions, and about half had a felony conviction 
record (figure 10).

* Between 1990 and 2009, the percentage of defendants 
with at least one prior conviction increased from 53% 
to 60%. The percentage of defendants with multiple 
prior convictions rose from 40% to 49% during this 
period (figure 11).

* The percentage of defendants with a felony conviction 
record increased from 36% in 1990 to 43% in 2009. The 
percentage with multiple prior felony convictions rose 
from 21% to 31% during the same period.

************************************************

*******************************
List of tables and figures – 
Criminal history
*******************************

TABLE 6. Felony defendants on probation or parole at 
time of arrest in the 75 largest counties, by most 
serious current arrest charge, 2009 

TABLE 7. Number of prior arrest charges for felony 
defendants in the 75 largest counties, by most serious 
current arrest charge, 2009

FIGURE 8. Number of prior arrest charges for felony 
defendants in the 75 largest counties, by age at 
arrest, 2009

TABLE 8. Number of prior felony arrest charges for 
felony defendants in the 75 largest counties, by most 
serious current arrest charge, 2009 

FIGURE 9. Prior arrest record for felony defendants in 
the 75 largest counties, 1990–2009

TABLE 9. Number of prior convictions for felony 
defendants in the 75 largest counties, by most serious 
current arrest charge, 2009 

TABLE 10. Number of prior felony convictions for felony 
defendants in the 75 largest counties, by most serious 
current arrest charge, 2009 

TABLE 11. Most serious prior conviction for felony 
defendants in the 75 largest counties, by most serious 
current arrest charge, 2009 

FIGURE 10. Most serious prior conviction for felony 
defendants in the 75 largest counties, by age at 
arrest, 2009

FIGURE 11. Prior conviction record for felony 
defendants in the 75 largest counties, 1990–2009
************************************************

******************************************
Section 4: Pretrial release and detention
******************************************

************************************************
* In 2009, 62% of felony defendants in the 75 largest 
counties were released prior to case disposition (table 
12). With the exception of 2004 (57%) and 2006 (58%), 
the percentage of defendants released has been in the 
62% to 64% range in each SCPS study year.

* An estimated 38% of defendants were detained until 
case disposition in 2009. About 1 in 10 detained 
defendants (4% of defendants overall) was denied bail. 
Nearly half (45%) of murder defendants were denied 
bail, compared to 8% or less of defendants charged with 
other offenses.

* Defendants charged with a drug (65%), property (63%), 
or public-order (63%) offense in 2009 were more likely 
to be released prior to case disposition than 
defendants charged with a violent offense (55%). 

* The release rate for defendants charged with a 
violent offense ranged from 18% for murder defendants 
to 63% for assault defendants. Roughly half of robbery 
(44%) and rape (52%) defendants were released prior to 
case disposition.

* Among property defendants, 49% of those charged with 
motor vehicle theft or burglary were released prior to 
case disposition. Considerably higher percentages of 
defendants charged with fraud (80%), forgery (71%), or 
larceny/theft (68%) were released. 

* Defendants without a criminal justice status (68%) 
were much more likely to be released than defendants on 
probation (44%) or parole (31%). Likewise, defendants 
without a prior conviction (75%) were much more likely 
to be released than those with 10 or more prior 
convictions (41%) (table 13).

* About half of released defendants were out of custody 
within 1 day of arrest and three-quarters were released 
within a week. Overall, 89% of releases occurred within 
1 month of arrest; however, 41% of the releases of 
murder defendants occurred within 1 month (table 14).

* About 3 in 5 pretrial releases in 2009 included 
financial conditions. About 4 in 5 financial releases, 
and about half (49%) of all releases, used private 
surety bonds, which was the most common method of 
pretrial release in 2009. Other types of financial 
release included deposit bond (7% of all releases) and 
full cash bond (5% of all releases) (figure 12).

* About 2 in 5 pretrial releases were nonfinancial and 
did not require the posting of any type of financial 
bond. The most common type of nonfinancial release used 
in 2009 was release on recognizance (23% of all 
releases), followed by conditional release (10% of all 
releases) and unsecured bond (5% of all releases).

* About 9 in 10 detained defendants had a bail amount 
set but were unable to meet the financial conditions 
required to secure release. Those with a bail amount 
set under $5,000 (71%) were nearly 3 times as likely to 
secure release as defendants with a bail amount of 
$50,000 or more (27%) (figure 13).

* For nearly half of forgery defendants (46%) and 
larceny/theft defendants (44%) with a set bail, the 
amount was less than $5,000. Nearly all murder 
defendants (95%) and more than half of rape (59%) and 
robbery (52%) defendants with a bail amount had it set 
at $50,000 or more (table 15).

* Overall, detained defendants had a median bail amount 
of $25,000, compared to $6,000 for released defendants. 
Detained murder defendants had the highest median bail 
amount ($1,000,000), followed by detained rape 
defendants ($100,000) (table 16). 

* Between 1990 and 2009, the percentage of pretrial 
releases involving financial conditions rose from 37% 
to 61%. Nearly all of this increase was due to a rise 
in the use of surety bonds, which accounted for nearly 
twice the percentage of releases in 2009 (49%) as in 
1990 (24%) (figure 14). 

* Among defendants who were released prior to case 
disposition, about 3 in 10 (29%) committed some type of 
misconduct while in a release status (table 17). This a 
similar proportion to that recorded in previous SCPS 
studies.

* The percentage of defendants charged with pretrial 
misconduct was highest for drug (32%) and property 
(31%) defendants, and lowest for those released after 
being charged with a violent offense (23%). 

* In 2009, 17% of released defendants missed a 
scheduled court appearance, resulting in a bench 
warrant being issued for their arrest (table 18). This 
was about the same percentage as in 2006, but lower 
than the 24% rate observed prior to 1996 (not shown in 
table). 

* In 2009, failure-to-appear rates were lowest for 
murder (5%) and rape (7%) defendants, and highest for 
those released after being charged with motor vehicle 
theft (28%).

* An estimated 16% of released defendants were 
rearrested for a new offense while in a pretrial 
release status (table 19). This was within the 13% to 
21% range observed across other SCPS study years.

* Rates of rearrest were highest among robbery (24%) 
and burglary (22%) defendants. About half of the 
rearrests in 2009 involved a new felony charge.


************************************************

*******************************
List of tables and figures – 
Pretrial release and detention

*******************************
TABLE 12. Felony defendants released before or detained 
until case disposition in the 75 largest counties, by 
most serious arrest charge, 2009 

TABLE 13. Felony defendants released prior to case 
disposition in the 75 largest counties, by criminal 
history, 2009

TABLE 14. Time from arrest to release for felony 
defendants released before case disposition in the 75 
largest counties, by most serious arrest charge, 2009 

FIGURE 12. Type of pretrial release for felony 
defendants in the 75 largest counties, 2009 

FIGURE 13. Pretrial of release of felony defendants in 
the 75 largest counties, by bail amount, 2009

TABLE 15. Bail amount for felony defendants in the 75 
largest counties, by most serious arrest charge, 2009

TABLE 16. Median and mean bail amounts for felony 
defendants in the 75 largest counties, by pretrial 
release/detention outcome and most serious arrest 
charge, 2009

FIGURE 14. Use of financial conditions for pretrial 
release of felony defendants in the 75 largest 
counties, 1990–2009 

TABLE 17. Released felony defendants committing 
misconduct in the 75 largest counties, by most serious 
arrest charge, 2009

TABLE 18. Released felony defendants who failed to make 
a scheduled court appearance in the 75 largest 
counties, by most serious arrest charge, 2009 

TABLE 19. Released felony defendants rearrested prior 
to case disposition in the 75 largest counties, by most 
serious arrest charge, 2009

************************************************

*************************
Section 5: Adjudication
*************************

* The median time from arrest to adjudication for 
felony defendants in 2009 was 111 days (table 20). This 
was the highest median recorded in any SCPS year and 
was about a month longer than the low of 79 days 
recorded in 1998.

* The median time from arrest to adjudication ranged 
from more than 1 year for murder to less than 3 months 
for motor vehicle theft and drug offenses other than 
trafficking. Overall, 85% were adjudicated within 1 
year; however, a third of murder cases were adjudicated 
within 1 year.

* Overall, the median time from arrest to adjudication 
was shorter for detained defendants (68 days) than for 
those released prior to case disposition (163 days). 
The difference existed for all offenses, ranging from 
40 days for robbery defendants to about 120 days for 
defendants charged with fraud, forgery, motor vehicle 
theft, or drug trafficking (figure 15).

* Among cases that were adjudicated within the 1-year 
study period, 66% resulted in a conviction. Just over 
half (54%) of defendants were convicted of a felony and 
12% were convicted of a misdemeanor. Nearly all 
convictions were the result of a guilty plea rather 
than a trial (table 21). 

* In most cases when a defendant was not convicted, it 
was because the charges against the defendant were 
dismissed. About a quarter of all cases ended in this 
manner. An estimated 9% of cases resulted in a deferred 
adjudication or diversion outcome. 

* Defendants charged with assault (35%) were more than 
3 times as likely to have their case dismissed as those 
charged with a driving-related offense (10%) and about 
twice as likely to have their case dismissed as those 
charged with drug trafficking (18%) or murder (17%). 

* The percentage of convictions was highest for 
defendants charged with a driving-related offense 
(84%), followed by drug trafficking defendants (73%). 
The lowest conviction rate was for those charged with 
assault (56%) (figure 16).

* The probability that a defendant would eventually be 
convicted of the original felony charge was highest for 
those charged with a driving-related offense (64%), 
murder (60%), or drug trafficking (55%). The lowest 
probability was for those charged with rape (35%) and 
assault (33%).

* Felony assaults accounted for 6% of SCPS convictions 
in 2009, compared to about 12% of the cases as 
originally charged (see table 1). Overall, an estimated 
18% of the convictions for cases originally charged as 
felonies were at the misdemeanor level (table 22). 

* Conviction rates were higher for defendants who were 
detained until case disposition (77%) than for those 
who were released (59%). This was true across all 
offense categories (figure 17).

* The percentage of felony defendants convicted in 2009 
(66%) was within the range of the 64% to 68% observed 
in all other SCPS study years, except 1994 (72%). The 
felony conviction rate of 54% recorded in 2009 was in 
the middle of the 50% to 58% range observed in other 
SCPS study years (figure 18).

************************************************

******************************
List of tables and figures – 
Adjudication
******************************

TABLE 20. Time from arrest to adjudication for felony 
defendants in the 75 largest counties, by most serious 
arrest charge, 2009 

FIGURE 15. Median number of days from arrest to 
adjudication in the 75 largest counties, by detention-
release outcome, 2009 

TABLE 21. Adjudication outcome for felony defendants in 
the 75 largest counties, by most serious arrest charge, 
2009 

FIGURE 16. Conviction percents for felony defendants in 
the 75 largest counties, by most serious arrest charge, 
2009 

TABLE 22. Felony defendants in the 75 largest counties, 
by most serious conviction offense, 2009 

FIGURE 17. Adjudication outcome for felony defendants 
in the 75 largest counties, by detention-release 
outcome and most serious arrest charge category, 2009 

FIGURE 18. Conviction rates for felony defendants in 
the 75 largest counties, 1990–2009
************************************************

***********************
Section 6: Sentencing
***********************

* About two-thirds (65%) of convicted defendants in the 
75 largest counties in 2009 received their sentence 
within 1 day of the conviction date. Sentences for 
misdemeanors (83%) were more likely than sentences for 
felonies (60%) to occur within 1 day. Overall, 93% of 
sentences were handed out within 2 months of the 
conviction date (table 23).

* About 75% of the defendants convicted of a felony 
were sentenced to incarceration in a state prison or 
local jail, compared to 56% of those convicted of a 
misdemeanor. About 1 in 4 felony convictions and 1 in 3 
misdemeanor convictions resulted in a probation 
sentence (table 24).

* Convictions for murder (100%), rape (89%), or robbery 
(89%) were the most likely to result in a sentence to 
incarceration. Felony convictions were least likely to 
result in an incarceration sentence when they were for 
forgery (64%) or a nontrafficking drug offense (64%).

* Overall, incarceration sentences were almost evenly 
divided between prison (36%) and jail (37%) in 2009. 
Felony convictions were more likely to result in a 
sentence to prison (42%) than jail (33%). Nearly all 
incarceration sentences for misdemeanor convictions 
were to jail (53%) rather than prison (3%).

* Nearly all (98%) murder convictions resulted in a 
prison sentence, as did 84% of rape convictions. About 
half of the defendants convicted for weapons offenses 
(53%), burglary (53%), or assault (47%) were sentenced 
to prison. 

* The percentage of defendants eventually convicted and 
sentenced to incarceration was highest for those 
originally charged with a driving-related offense 
(65%), murder (55%), motor vehicle theft (55%), or 
robbery (52%). The percentage was lowest for those 
charged with forgery (37%), assault (40%), fraud (42%), 
or larceny/theft (42%) (figure 19).

* The mean length of prison sentences received for 
felony convictions in 2009 was 52 months and the median 
length was 30 months. These averages are about the same 
as in 2004 and 2006, but lower than those recorded in 
years prior to 1998. In 2009, the median prison 
sentence for violent offenses (48 months) was twice as 
long as for nonviolent offenses (24 months) (table 25). 

* Convictions for murder resulted in the longest median 
prison sentence (360 months). About 1 in 5 murderers 
received a life sentence. The next longest median 
sentences were for rape (120 months) and robbery (60 
months). The median prison sentence for an assault,
burglary, or drug trafficking conviction was 36 months. 

* Overall, the mean jail sentence was 5 months and the 
median was 4 months. Four percent of jail sentences 
were for more than 1 year. Convictions for robbery (8%) 
or a weapons offense (8%) were the most likely to 
result in a jail term exceeding 1 year (table 26).

* In 2009, the overall median length for probation 
sentences was 33 months, about the same as in past 
years. The median sentence was longer for felonies (30 
months) than for misdemeanors (12 months). The median 
sentence for property-related felonies (24 months) was 
shorter than for other felony offense categories (36 
months). About 1 in 4 sentences for violent and public-
order offenses exceeded 36 months (table 27).

* About 3 in 10 probation sentences included a fine, 
including 36% of those for drug offenses. Treatment was 
required in nearly 3 in 10 probation sentences, 
including nearly half (45%) of those for drug offenses. 
About 1 in 4 probation sentences required community 
service (23%), and 1 in 5 required restitution. More 
than a third of the probation sentences for property 
offenses required restitution (table 28).

* Among defendants convicted of a violent felony, about 
5 in 10 were sentenced to prison if they had no prior 
felony convictions. About 6 in 10 of those with a 
single prior felony and 7 in 10 of those with multiple 
prior felony convictions received a prison sentence 
(figure 20).

* Among defendants convicted of a nonviolent felony, 
55% of those with multiple prior felony convictions 
received a prison sentence, compared to 40% of those 
with a single prior felony conviction and 23% of those 
with no prior felony convictions.

* From 1990 to 2009, the percentage of felony 
convictions resulting in an incarceration sentence 
ranged from 71% to 77%, and the use of prison sentences 
ranged from 35% to 44%. Prior to 1996 and after 2004, 
more felony convictions resulted in a sentence to 
prison than to jail. In other years, the two types of 
sentences were used with about the same frequency 
(figure 21).

* Between 1990 and 2009, the percentage of felony 
convictions resulting in an incarceration sentence 
remained the same for defendants under age 40. For 
defendants age 40 or older convicted of a felony, the 
percentage sentenced to incarceration increased from 
71% in 1990 to 77% in 2009 (figure 22).


************************************************

*****************************
List of tables and figures – 
Sentencing
*****************************

TABLE 23. Time from conviction to sentencing for 
convicted defendants in the 75 largest counties, by 
most serious conviction offense, 2009 

TABLE 24. Most severe type of sentence received by 
convicted defendants in the 75 largest counties, by 
most serious conviction offense, 2009 

FIGURE 19. Felony defendants convicted and sentenced to 
incarceration in the 75 largest counties, by most 
serious arrest charge 2009

TABLE 25. Length of prison sentence received by 
defendants convicted of a felony in the 75 largest 
counties, by most serious conviction offense, 2009 

TABLE 26. Length of jail sentence received by convicted 
defendants in the 75 largest counties, by most serious 
conviction offense, 2009 

TABLE 27. Length of probation sentence received by 
convicted defendants in the 75 largest counties, by 
most serious conviction offense, 2009 

TABLE 28. Conditions of probation sentence received 
most often by convicted defendants in the 75 largest 
counties, by most serious conviction offense, 2009 

FIGURE 20. Type of sentence received for a felony 
conviction in the 75 largest counties, by prior 
conviction record, 2009

FIGURE 21. Most severe type of sentence received by 
defendants convicted of a felony in the 75 largest 
counties, 1990–2009

FIGURE 22. Defendants convicted of a felony who were 
sentenced to incarceration in the 75 largest counties, 
by age at arrest, 1990, 2000, and 2009
************************************************

************
Methodology
************

Sample design 
______________

The State Court Processing Statistics (SCPS) sample was 
designed and selected by U.S. Census Bureau staff. It 
is a two-stage stratified sample, with 40 of the 
nation’s 75 largest counties selected at stage one and 
a systematic sample of state court felony filings 
(defendants) within each county selected at stage two. 

The 40 counties were divided into four first-stage 
strata based on overall population, arrests, and felony 
filing information. The first stratum was designed to 
include 10 counties selected with certainty because of 
their large number of court filings; however, one of 
these counties (Clark County, Nevada) did not provide 
the requested data and was excluded from the final data 
file and analyses. Hence, the first-stage weight for 
stratum one counties was changed from 1.00 to 1.111. 
The remaining counties were allocated to the three 
noncertainty strata based on the variance of felony 
court filings, population, and arrest data.

SCPS first-stage design
*************************
	           Number of counties
Stratum	     Sample	Universe    Weight
___________________________________________________
One	        9	   10	     1.111
Two	        7	   12        1.714
Three	        9          18	       2.0
Four	       14	   35	       2.5

The second-stage sampling (filings) was designed to 
represent all defendants who had felony cases filed 
with the court during the month of May 2009. The 
participating jurisdictions provided data for every 
felony case filed on selected days during that month. 
Depending on the first-stage stratum in which it had 
been placed, each jurisdiction provided filings data 
for 5, 10, or 20 selected business days in May 2009. 
Data from jurisdictions that were not required to 
provide a full month of filings were weighted to 
represent the full month.

SCPS second-stage design
**************************
Stratum	    Number of days 
            of filings provided	   Weight
______________________________________________
One	           5.0	             4.0
Two	          10.0	             2.0
Three	          10.0	             2.0
Four	          20.0	             1.0

See table 29 for county-by-county sampling information.

Once the sample lists were generated, the data on 
felony cases filed in the selected counties were 
collected from a variety of sources. These included 
court administrative files, pretrial case management 
systems, jail records, prosecutor offices, state 
criminal history record files, and other statistical 
agencies. In some counties, the required information 
was manually transferred from official records to a 
SCPS data collection form. In other counties, an 
electronic download of the requested SCPS data was 
provided by the county.

Special adjustment for Cook County
___________________________________

An issue arose with the data provided by Cook County, 
Illinois, a stratum one county. In 2009, BJS’s data 
collection agent, Regional Justice Information Service 
(REJIS), received a data extract from the Cook County 
Circuit Court. The extract encompassed all felony cases 
that were filed or had an initial hearing in the Cook 
County Circuit Court for five randomly selected 
business days in May 2009. This approach differed from 
prior SCPS years for Cook County, in which the sample 
list covered felony cases filed in Cook County 
municipal courts and then tracked those cases as they 
were either disposed in the municipal courts or bound 
over to the circuit courts. Since the 2009 Cook County 
file contained only those felony cases processed in the 
Circuit Court, it did not include the municipal court 
component that had been covered in previous SCPS 
projects. 

This issue was addressed through a two-step process. 
Previous data obtained for 248 cases disposed in Cook 
County municipal courts in 2006 were added to the 2009 
data. The use of these data was based on the assumption 
that the types of cases filed and disposed in the 
municipal courts had not changed since 2006. This 
assumption was validated by examining municipal court 
dispositions in Cook County from 2000 through 2009. The 
addition of the 248 cases from 2006 brought the number 
of Cook County cases in the 2009 SCPS data file to 
1,229 cases (i.e., 248 municipal or lower court cases 
and 981 circuit or upper court cases).

The new preliminary number of felony cases filed in 
Cook County was then adjusted to take into account 
declines in felony caseloads from 2006 to 2009. In 
2009, 31,106 felony cases were filed in Cook County 
courts, which equates to about 598 felony cases filed 
per week. In 2006, 716 felony cases were filed in Cook 
County in a 1 week period. An adjustment was calculated 
to account for this overall decline in the Cook County 
caseload from 2006 to 2009 (598/716 = .83546). This 
adjustment was applied to the 2006 number of lower 
(248), upper (397), and pending (71) cases to generate 
an estimate of these cases in 2009 (i.e., 207, 332, and 
59, respectively). The cases in the 2009 file were then 
weighted so that their totals would reflect these 2009 
case type estimates. 

Data summary
_____________

The 2009 SCPS collected data for 16,694 defendants 
charged with a felony offense during May 2009 in 39 
large counties. These cases were part of a sample that 
was representative of the estimated 56,083 felony 
defendants whose cases were processed in the nation’s 
75 largest counties during that month. Defendants 
charged with murder were tracked for up to 2 years and 
all other defendants were followed for up to 1 year.

This report is based on data collected from the 
following 39 counties: Arizona (Maricopa, Pima); 
California (Los Angeles, Orange, San Bernardino, 
Ventura); Connecticut (Hartford); Florida (Broward, 
Miami-Dade, Hillsborough; Orange); Hawaii (Honolulu); 
Illinois (Cook); Indiana (Marion); Maryland (Baltimore, 
Montgomery, Prince George’s); Michigan (Oakland, 
Wayne); Missouri (Saint Louis); New Jersey (Essex, 
Middlesex); New York (Bronx, Kings, Nassau, New York, 
Suffolk); North Carolina (Wake); Ohio (Cuyahoga, 
Franklin, Hamilton); Tennessee (Shelby); Texas (Dallas, 
El Paso, Harris, Tarrant); Utah (Salt Lake City); 
Washington (King); and Wisconsin (Milwaukee).

Because the data come from a sample, a sampling error 
and confidence intervals are associated with each 
reported number. Confidence intervals and standard 
errors for several key variables in the SCPS database 
are reported in tables 30 and 31. These confidence 
intervals show where the reported SCPS numbers would 
fall 95% of the time under repeated sampling. For 
example, the confidence interval for the total number 
of felony defendants in the nation’s 75 largest 
counties ranged from 51,723 to 60,081 defendants. In 
other words, if repeated sampling of felony case 
processing in the nation’s 75 largest counties was 
undertaken, there is a 95% confidence that the number 
of felony defendants would fall between 51,723 and 
60,081. 

Offense categories
___________________

Felony offenses were classified into 16 categories for 
this report. They were further classified into the four 
major crime categories of violent, property, drug, and 
public-order. The following lists are a representative 
summary of the crimes in each category; however, these 
lists are not meant to be exhaustive. All offenses, 
except murder, include attempts and conspiracies to 
commit.

Violent offenses
_________________

Murder--Includes homicide, nonnegligent manslaughter, 
and voluntary homicide. Excludes attempted murder 
(classified as felony assault), negligent homicide, 
involuntary homicide, or vehicular manslaughter, which 
are classified as other violent offenses.

Rape--Includes forcible intercourse, sodomy, or 
penetration with a foreign object. Does not include 
statutory rape or nonforcible acts with a minor or 
someone unable to give legal consent, nonviolent sexual 
offenses, or commercialized sex offenses.

Robbery--Includes unlawful taking of anything of value 
by force or threat of force. Includes armed, unarmed, 
and aggravated robbery, carjacking, armed burglary, and 
armed mugging.

Assault--Includes aggravated assault, aggravated 
battery, attempted murder, assault with a deadly 
weapon, felony assault or battery on a law enforcement 
officer, and other felony assaults. This offense 
category does not include extortion, coercion, or 
intimidation.

Other violent offenses--Includes vehicular 
manslaughter, involuntary manslaughter, negligent or 
reckless homicide, nonviolent or nonforcible sexual 
assault, kidnapping, unlawful imprisonment, child or 
spouse abuse, cruelty to a child, reckless 
endangerment, hit-and-run with bodily injury, 
intimidation, and extortion.

Property offenses
___________________

Burglary--Includes any type of entry into a residence, 
industry, or business with or without the use of force 
with the intent to commit a felony or theft. Does not 
include possession of burglary tools, trespassing, or 
unlawful entry for which the intent is not known.

Larceny/theft--Includes grand theft, grand larceny, and 
any other felony theft, including burglary from an 
automobile, theft of rental property, and mail theft. 
This offense category does not include motor vehicle 
theft, receiving or buying stolen property, fraud, 
forgery, or deceit.

Motor vehicle theft--Includes auto theft, receiving and 
transferring an automobile, unauthorized use of a 
vehicle, possession of a stolen vehicle, and larceny or 
taking of an automobile.

Forgery--Includes forging of a driver’s license, 
official seals, notes, money orders, credit or access 
cards or names of such cards or any other documents 
with fraudulent intent, uttering a forged instrument, 
counterfeiting, and forgery.

Fraud--Includes possession and passing of worthless 
checks or money orders, possession of false documents 
or identification, embezzlement, obtaining money by 
false pretenses, credit card fraud, welfare fraud, 
Medicare fraud, insurance claim fraud, fraud, 
swindling, stealing a thing of value by deceit, and 
larceny by check.

Other property offenses--Includes receiving or buying 
stolen property, arson, reckless burning, damage to 
property, criminal mischief, vandalism, criminal 
trespassing, possession of burglary tools, and unlawful 
entry for which the interest is unknown.
Drug offenses

Drug trafficking--Includes trafficking, sales, 
distribution, possession with intent to distribute or 
sell, manufacturing, and smuggling of controlled 
substances. This category does not include possession 
of controlled substances.

Other drug offenses--Includes possession of controlled 
substances, prescription violations, possession of drug 
paraphernalia, and other drug law violations.
Public-order offenses

Weapons offenses--Includes the unlawful sale, 
distribution, manufacture, alteration, transportation, 
possession, or use of a deadly weapon or accessory.


Driving-related offenses--Includes driving under the 
influence of drugs or alcohol, driving with a suspended 
or revoked license, and any other felony in the motor 
vehicle code.

Other public-order offenses--Includes flight/escape, 
parole or probation violations, prison contraband, 
habitual offender, obstruction of justice, rioting, 
libel, slander, treason, perjury, prostituti

Pretrial release
__________________

Released defendant--Includes any defendant who was 
released from custody prior to the disposition of his 
or her case by the court. It also includes defendants 
who were detained for some period of time before being 
released and defendants who were returned to custody 
after being released because of a violation of the 
conditions of pretrial release. The terms “on pretrial 
release” and “released pending disposition” are both 
used in this report to refer to all released 
defendants.

Detained defendant--Includes any defendant who remained 
in custody from the time of arrest until the 
disposition of his or her case by the court. This 
report also refers to detained defendants as “not 
released.”

Failure to appear--Occurs when a court issues a bench 
warrant because the defendant failed to appear as 
scheduled.

Types of financial release
___________________________

Surety bond--A bail bond company signs a promissory 
note to the court for the full bail amount and charges 
the defendant a fee for the service (usually 10% of the 
full bail amount). If the defendant fails to appear, 
the bond company is liable to the court for the full 
bail amount. Frequently the bond company requires 
collateral from the defendant in addition to the fee.

Deposit bond--The defendant deposits a percentage 
(usually 10%) of the full bail amount with the court. 
The deposit is returned after the disposition of the 
case, but the court often retains a small portion for 
administrative costs. If the defendant fails to appear 
in court, he or she is liable to the court for the full 
bail amount.

Full cash bond--The defendant posts the full bail 
amount in cash with the court. If the defendant makes 
all court appearances, the cash is returned. If the 
defendant fails to appear in court, the bond is 
forfeited.

Property bond--Involves an agreement made by the 
defendant as a condition of pretrial release requiring 
that property valued at the full bail amount be posted 
as an assurance of his or her appearance in court. If 
the defendant fails to appear in court, the property is 
forfeited. It is also known as “collateral bond.”
Types of nonfinancial release

Release on recognizance (ROR)--The court releases the 
defendant on a signed agreement that he or she will 
appear in court as required. In this report, the ROR 
category includes citation releases in which arrestees 
are released pending their first court appearance on a 
written order issued by law enforcement or jail 
personnel.

Unsecured bond--The defendant pays no money to the 
court but is liable for the full amount of bail upon 
failure to appear in court.

Conditional release--The defendant is released under 
specified conditions. A pretrial services agency 
usually conducts monitoring or supervision, if ordered 
for a defendant. In some cases, such as those involving 
a third-party custodian or drug monitoring and 
treatment, another agency may be involved in the 
supervision of the defendant. Conditional release 
sometimes includes an unsecured bond.

Other type of release
______________________

Emergency release--Defendants are released in response 
to a court order placing limits on a jail’s population.

**********************************************************
The Bureau of Justice Statistics, located in the Office 
of Justice Programs, U.S. Department of Justice, 
collects, analyzes, and disseminates statistical 
information on crime, criminal offenders, victims of 
crime, and the operation of justice systems at all 
levels of government. William J. Sabol is acting 
director. 

These statistical tables were prepared by Brian A. 
Reaves of BJS. Andrew Tiedt provided verification.
Morgan Young and Irene Cooperman (Lockheed Martin) 
edited the report. Tina Dorsey produced the report.

December 2013, NCJ 243777
*********************************************************

************************************************
Office of Justice Programs
Innovation * Partnerships * Safer Neighborhoods
www.ojp.usdoj.gov
************************************************

***********************
11/22/2013 JER 3:50pm
***********************
