U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Program
Bureau of Justice Statistics


Special Report

Federal Firearm Offenders, 1992-98
With Preliminary Data for 1999  


June 2000, NCJ 180795
Addendum added 6/28/00
revised 7/14/00                                  


By John Scalia
BJS Statistician

------------------------------------------------------------------
This file is text only without graphics and many of the tables. 
A Zip archive of the tables in this report in spreadsheet format 
(.wk1) and the full report including tables and graphics in
.pdf format are available from: 
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/abstract/ffo98.htm
-------------------------------------------------------------------



-------------------------------------------------------------------
The number of defendants charged with a firearm offense
decreased, 1992-97, and increased, 1997-99 

* A reason for the decline in firearm prosecutions was the
Supreme Court's Bailey decision that limited prosecutors'
ability to charge defendants with using a firearm during a
violent or drug offense.

* Following Bailey, the number of defendants receiving a
guideline enhancement for weapon use increased 31%.

* 41% of defendants charged with a firearm offense were
prosecuted in the 20 most populous Federal judicial districts;
these districts accounted for about half of all State or local
arrests for violent and drug offenses.


Imposed sentences for a Federal firearm offense increased from
79 months, on average, to 100 months

* 85% of firearm defendants were charged during 1998 with
unlawful possession.  Seven percent were charged with unlawfully
receiving or transferring a firearm.  

*8% of defendants were convicted of a transfer offense during
1998.  Of these, 47% were prohibited from possessing a firearm;
19% were straw purchasers; 6%, retail dealers; and 28%, others
unlawfully selling firearms.

*Defendants convicted of using a firearm during a crime were
sentenced to serve 92 months, on average, in addition to the 111
months imposed for the predicate offense.

Between 1992 and 1999, an annual average of 6,700  defendants
were charged with a firearm offense in U.S. district courts. 
The Federal criminal code regulates who may lawfully receive or
possess firearms, regulates the manufacture and distribution of
firearms, and penalizes the criminal use of firearms.  A person
may be disqualified from lawfully purchasing or possessing a
firearm if, among other reasons, the person has been convicted
of a felony, is an unlawful user of controlled substances, or is
subject to a domestic violence restraining order. 

While data describing defendants charged were incomplete prior
to 1992, available data suggest that firearm investigations and
prosecutions by U.S. attorneys peaked during 1992.

After 1992 the number of defendants charged with a firearm
offense in U.S. district courts – either alone or with another
offense – decreased.  During 1994, 11% fewer defendants were
charged with a firearm offense than during 1992.  Despite an
increase during 1995, the number of defendants charged continued
to decrease through 1997.  During 1998 and 1999 the number
charged increased to 6,728.

Most defendants (85%) charged with a firearm offense during 1998
were charged with unlawful possession.  Of these defendants, 61%
were also charged with a substantive offense such as drug
trafficking or bank robbery;  39% were charged with only the
firearm offense.  About 40% of those charged with a possession
offense were disqualified from possessing a firearm based on
their status as a prohibited person.

Seven percent of those charged with a firearm offense during
1998 were charged with unlawfully receiving or transferring a
firearm.  Of the 341 defendants convicted of a transfer offense
during 1998, 135 were identified as prohibited persons
attempting to acquire a firearm, and 56 were identified as
"straw purchasers."  Straw purchasers are persons who buy
firearms on behalf of others without disclosing that fact on the
forms required by the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms.  

This report includes trends from fiscal year 1992 through 1999. 
Statistics for 1999 are preliminary, as complete data for 1999
were not provided in time for inclusion; final 1999 data are
expected to include additional firearm prosecutions.  Detailed
analyses are based on fiscal year 1998 data.

Prosecutorial decisions by U.S. attorneys

Declinations

Not all suspects in matters reviewed by U.S. attorneys are
prosecuted in Federal courts.  Between 1990 and 1998 U.S.
attorneys declined to prosecute about 31% of those initially
investigated for a firearm offense (figure 1). 

Suspects whom the U.S. attorneys did not prosecute, however, may
have been prosecuted by State authorities or on other charges. 
During 1998 approximately 30% of those declined for prosecution
were referred to other authorities for prosecution, and 2%
entered a pretrial diversion program (table 1).  For an
additional 35%, the U.S. attorneys determined that either no
crime had been committed (18.1%) or the evidence was too weak to
support a conviction (17.3%). 

Prosecutions by U.S. attorneys

Types of firearm offenses charged

Based on statutes (appendix table 3, page 13), Federal firearm
offenses can be grouped into three broad categories: 

(1) unlawful possession, 
(2) receipt and transfer, and 
(3) regulatory offenses. 

Between 1992 and 1999 approximately 77% of Federal firearm
defendants were charged with unlawfully possessing a firearm; 8%
were charged with unlawfully receiving or transferring a
firearm; and 1% were charged with regulatory offenses associated
with the distribution of firearms (table 2).  In addition, 12%
of defendants were charged with other firearms-related offenses
C primarily State-level offenses adopted pursuant to the
Assimilated Crimes Act (18 U.S.C. Sec. 13) and prosecuted in
Federal courts.

Unlawful possession of firearms	

The Federal criminal code includes more than a dozen statutory
provisions that regulate the lawful possession or use of
firearms (appendix table 3).  A person is prohibited from
purchasing or possessing a firearm if the person – 

* is under indictment for, or has beenconvicted of, a crime
punishable by imprisonment for more than 1 year
* is a fugitive from justice
* is an unlawful user of, or is addicted to, any controlled
substance
* has been adjudicated as a mental efective or has been
committed to a mental institution
* is an illegal alien or has been admitted to the United
States under a nonimmigrant visa
* has been discharged from the U.S. Armed Forces under
dishonorable conditions
* has renounced U.S. citizenship 
* is subject to a court order restraining him or her from
harassing, stalking, or threatening an intimate partner or child 
* has been convicted in any court of a misdemeanor crime of
domestic violence.

-------------------Box on page 3------------------------------------------------
Bailey v. United States:  Supreme Court  standards for charging
a firearm offense in relation to an underlying offense

The decrease in prosecutions for using a firearm in relation to
a violent or drug trafficking offense (18 U.S.C. Sec. 924(c))
primarily resulted from the Supreme Court's decision in Bailey
v. United States (516 U.S. 137, 116 S.Ct. 501).  In December
1995 the Supreme Court ruled that to support a conviction,
prosecutors must establish that the defendant actively used the
firearm during the offense.  The standard set forth required
that the defendant have fired, attempted to fire, brandished,
displayed, or otherwise used the firearm during the underlying
offense.  The court concluded that mere possession of a firearm
during the commission of the offense was not sufficient for
conviction.(*Responding to Bailey, Congress in 1998 amended 18
U.S.C. Sec. 924(c) to apply to defendants possessing, as well as
actively using, a firearm in furtherance of a violent crime or a
drug trafficking offense.  See, P.L. 105-386, 112 Stat. 3469
(1998).)

Because Bailey originated in the U.S. Court of Appeals for the
District of Columbia, the case had little impact on charging
practices in the other 11 judicial circuits until the Supreme
Court issued its decision.  Consequently, the effect of Bailey
throughout the Federal system was immediate.  

During January 1996, 50% fewer defendants were charged with a Sec.
924(c) offense than during November 1995, the month preceding
the decision (figure).  The decreased use of Sec. 924(c) continued
at a generally lower level through the end of the study period
(September 1998).  Between 1995 and 1998 the number annually
charged with a Sec. 924(c) offense decreased from 2,958 to 2,385
(not shown in a table).

The Bailey decision came when U.S. attorneys were prosecuting
more defendants in U.S. district court for violent and drug
offenses than during previous years.

Between 1995 and 1998 the number of defendants charged with a
violent or drug offense in U.S. district courts increased 25% –
from 23,979 to 30,081 (Compendium of Federal Justice Statistics,
BJS report, annual, table 3.1).  Without the limitations imposed
by Bailey, the number of defendants charged with a Sec. 924(c)
offense should have increased rather than have decreased. 
Allowing for a 25% increase in the number of defendants charged
with predicate offenses, an estimated 2,500 more defendants
would have been charged with Sec. 924(c) during the 33 months
following the decision, had the Supreme Court ruled otherwise in
Bailey.  (For the source of the estimate, see page 11,
Methodology.)

Federal sentencing guidelines provide for sentence enhancements
when the defendant used or possessed a weapon during the
commission of the offense.  Application of the guideline
enhancement is not dependent on charging decisions by the
prosecutor and is not limited by the Supreme Court's ruling in
Bailey.  The enhancement applies when a weapon is present unless
it is clearly improbable that the weapon was connected to the
offense (U.S.S.G. Sec. 2D1.1, comment (n.3)).  However, when a
defendant is convicted of a Sec. 924(c) offense, to avoid
imposition of a double penalty, the guideline enhancement is not
applied (U.S.S.G. Sec. 2K2.4, comment (n.2)).

Following Bailey, the number of defendants receiving a guideline
enhancement for weapon use or possession increased.  During
January 1996, 17% more defendants received a guideline
enhancement for weapon use than during November 1995.  Between
1995 and 1998 the number of defendants annually receiving a
guideline enhancement for weapon use increased 31% – from 2,598
to 3,393 (table 8).

Because prosecutors often dismiss the Sec. 924(c) charge in
exchange for a guilty plea, the increased use of the sentencing
guideline enhancement offsets the decreased use of Sec. 924(c)
(table 8).  However, penalties applicable following a Sec. 924(c)
conviction differ substantially from those applicable under the
sentencing guidelines.  (See page 9.)

-------------------------End of box---------------------------------------

Additionally, juveniles – persons under age 18 – are prohibited
from possessing handguns (18 U.S.C. Sec. 922(x)).  Federal firearm
licensees are prohibited from transferring a handgun to a person
younger than 21 or a long gun to a person younger than 18 (18
U.S.C. Sec. 922(b)(1)).

A detailed description of disqualifying characteristics and of
Federal and State procedures relating to firearm sales is
provided in Survey of State Procedures Related to Firearm Sales,
Midyear 1999 (BJS report, NCJ 179022). 

From the inception of the Brady Act on February 29, 1994, to
December 31, 1999, more than 536,000 (2.4%) of the 22 million
applications for firearm purchase or pawn transactions were
rejected because the applicant was prohibited by Federal, State,
or local law from possessing a firearm (Background Checks for
Firearm Transfers, 1999, BJS Bulletin, NCJ 180882, June 2000). 
Nearly three- quarters of the rejections were due to the finding
of a felony conviction or indictment.

Other statutory provisions prohibit the possession of certain
types of firearms, stolen firearms, firearms with obliterated or
altered serial numbers, and possession of firearms in certain
places.  In addition, 26 U.S.C. Sec. 5861(d) prohibits the
possession of certain firearms not registered on the National
Firearms Registration and Transfer Record.  Firearms required to
be registered include machine guns, short-barreled shotguns and
rifles, and silencers.

Trend in firearm prosecutions

In 1991 the Department of Justice initiated Project Triggerlock,
a policy to  use Federal firearm statutes to prosecute violent
offenders in U.S. district courts.  Between 1990 and 1992 the
number of suspects investigated for a firearm offense increased
36% (figure 1).

After a period of increased firearm prosecutions, prosecutions
generally declined through 1997 before increasing again in 1998
and 1999.  More than half the total decrease can be attributed
to fewer prosecutions of State-level firearm offenses in Federal
courts pursuant to the Assimilated Crimes Act (18 U.S.C. Sec. 13). 
The number of defendants charged with a State-level offense fell
from 1,168 to 590.  

An additional 30% of the total decrease can be attributed to
fewer prosecutions of Federal possession offenses.  The number
of defendants charged with a Federal firearm possession offense
decreased from 5,911 (during 1992) to 5,626 (during 1999).

Between 1992 and 1998 the decrease in the prosecution of
possession offenses primarily resulted from decreases in the
charging of two offenses C 

* using a firearm in relation to a violent or drug trafficking
offense (18 U.S.C. Sec. 924(c)), down 23%, from 2,884 to 2,222 

* possession of an unregistered firearm (26 U.S.C. Sec. 5861(d)),
down 62%, from 714 to 271. 

The number of defendants prosecuted for being a felon in
possession a firearm, 1992-99, increased 13% nationally,
compared to a 12% decrease in all firearm offenses.  In 35
judicial districts, U.S. attorneys prosecuted more defendants
for a Sec. 922(g) offense (prohibited person) during 1998 than 1992
(not shown in a table).

Almost half the defendants charged with a possession offense
between 1992 and 1999 were charged with using a firearm during
the commission of a violent or drug trafficking offense (18
U.S.C. Sec. 924(c)).  Of those charged with a possession offense
between 1992 and 1999 –

* 44% were charged with unlawfully possessing a firearm based
on their status as a prohibited person (18 U.S.C. Sec. 922(g))

* 8%, receiving or possessing an unregistered firearm (26
U.S.C. Sec. 5861(d))

* 3%, possessing firearms with altered or obliterated serial
numbers (18 U.S.C. Sec. 922(k) and 26 U.S.C. Sec. 5861(h))

* 3%, possessing stolen firearms (18 U.S.C. Sec. 922(j)) (appendix
table 3).

Federal prosecutors often charge statutes pertaining to the
lawful pos- session of firearms in conjunction with a
substantive offense such as drug trafficking or bank robbery. 
During 1998, 61% of defendants charged with firearm possession
offenses were also charged with another offense:  54% were
charged with drug trafficking; 21%, bank robbery; and 25%, other
offenses including racketeering (9%) (table 3).

For more than two-thirds of defendants charged with both a
substantive offense and a firearm possession offense, the
defendant was charged with 18 U.S.C. Sec. 924(c) C use during a
violent or drug trafficking offense.  A third of those charged
with both a firearm and substantive offense were charged as
prohibited persons unlawfully possessing a firearm pursuant to
18 U.S.C. Sec. 922(g) or (n).

For 39% of defendants charged with a Federal firearm offense,
the firearm possession offense was the only offense charged. 
More than three-quarters of these defendants were charged with
unlawfully possessing a firearm based on their status as a
prohibited person: 71% pursuant to 18 U.S.C. Sec. 922(g) and 8%
pursuant to 18 U.S.C. Sec. 922(n).  Other offenses for which these
defendants were charged included receipt of an unregistered
firearm (10%) pursuant to 26 U.S.C. Sec. 5861(d), possession of
stolen firearms (7%) pursuant to 18 U.S.C. Sec. 922(j), and using a
firearm in relation to a violent or drug trafficking offense
(4%) pursuant to 18 U.S.C. Sec. 924(c).

Unlawful receipt or transfer of firearms

During 1998, 341 defendants were convicted of a firearm receipt
or transfer offense.  Detailed information was collected on 85%
(288) of those con- victed.  (See Methodology.)  Of these 288
defendants, 47% were not permitted to lawfully possess or
receive a firearm because of their status as a prohibited
person; 19% were identified as straw purchasers; 28% involved
other individuals unlawfully receiving or transferring firearms;
and 6% involved retail dealers unlawfully transferring firearms
(table 4).

A "straw purchase" occurs when the actual buyer uses another
person to make the purchase from a licensed dealer.  While
buying a firearm for someone else is not itself illegal, Federal
forms require that this information be disclosed at the time of
the purchase.  (See ATF Form 4473.)  Knowingly making false or
fictitious statements C including false statements relating to
prior felony convictions C on the required application form is
an offense prosecutable under 18 U.S.C. Sec. 922(a)(6).

Other transfer violations include knowingly distributing or
transferring firearms to prohibited persons, distributing
firearms to persons not present in a business establishment,
distributing handguns to persons under the age of 21 and long
guns to persons under the age of 18, and unlawfully shipping
firearms (appendix table 3).

Almost half of the transfer offenses involved nonretail sales C
sales through private transactions.  In about two-thirds of the
cases, the firearm transferred was a handgun.  About 30% of the
cases involved shotguns or rifles, and 13% involved assault
weapons.  (Defendants may have purchased or attempted to
purchase several types of firearms, so that percentages add to
more than 100%.)  On average, each transfer offense involved 24
firearms; however, half the cases involved 4 or fewer.  

Prohibited persons

In 41% of the 135 cases in which the defendant was identified as
a prohibited person, the defendant purchased or attempted to
purchase a firearm from a licensed firearm dealer and in 36%,
from sources other than dealers.  In 24% of these cases the
defendant participated in other unlawful activities.

While half of all transfer cases involving prohibited persons
concerned 3 or fewer firearms, prohibited persons acquired, or
attempted to acquire, an average of 18 firearms each.  Sixty-two
percent of these cases involved handguns; 44%, shotguns or
rifles; and 10%, assault weapons.

For most (84%), the disqualifying characteristic that prevented
lawful possession was a prior felony conviction (not shown in a
table).  In addition C

*10% purchased the firearm with the intent to commit a felony
offense 
*9% had a history of drug abuse 
*4% were illegal aliens
*3% were subject to a domestic restraining order. (Because a
person may be disqualified for multiple reasons, percentages sum
to more than 100%.)

Straw purchasers

In more than two-thirds of the 56 cases where the defendant was
identified as a straw purchaser, the firearm was purchased from
a licensed firearm dealer.  In 62% of the cases, the firearm was
purchased from a retail store; in 15% from a pawnshop; and in 4%
from a gun show.  An additional 18% of the cases involved
private transactions.

While half of the straw purchasers purchased 12 or fewer
firearms, this type of case involved an average of 34 firearms. 
(Available data do not indicate the time frame during which the
purchases were made.)  Seventy-two percent of the cases involved
handguns; 18% involved shotguns or rifles; and 11% involved
assault weapons.      

Persons dealing without a license or transferring a firearm
unlawfully 

Two-thirds of the 81 receipt and transfer offenses involving
individuals other than prohibited persons and straw purchasers
were private sales of firearms.  Of these 81 defendants, 49%
were charged with dealing in firearms without the required
Federal license (18 U.S.C. Sec. 922(a)(1)(A)), and 19% were charged
with unlawfully transferring a firearm (26 U.S.C. Sec. 5861(e))
(not shown in a table).  In 10% of cases, the transaction
underlying the Federal offense occurred at a gun show.  On
average, these cases involved 28 firearms; half involved 6 or
fewer.  While more than two-thirds of the cases concerned the
transfer of handguns, these cases were more likely than those
with prohibited persons or straw purchasers to involve shotguns
or rifles (32%) and assault weapons (22%).

Regulatory offenses

Between 1992 and 1998 an average of 70 defendants were charged
each year with a regulatory offense associated with the sale or
distribution of firearms (table 2).  Regulatory offenses include
transportation by a common carrier; record keeping violations;
and offenses relating to the licensing, taxation, and
registration of firearms (appendix table 3).

Charge bargaining by U.S. attorneys

The Principles of Federal Prosecution state that Federal
prosecutors "should charge . . . the most serious offense that
is consistent with the nature of the defendant's conduct that is
likely to result in a sustainable conviction (U.S. Department of
Justice, U.S. Attorneys Manual, Title 9, Sec. 27.300(A))."  (See
http://www.usdoj.gov/usao/eousa/foia_reading_room/usam) 
According to the Principles, prosecutors are not, absent
mitigating circumstances, to bargain away or drop charges. 

An October 1993 memorandum by Attorney General Janet Reno
clarified the Principles, seemingly to provide prosecutors with
more flexibility to select charges or enter into plea agreements
when the charges selected "fit the specific circumstances of the
case, are consistent with the purposes of the Federal criminal
code, and maximize the impact of Federal resources on crime . .
. [and the] sentencing range (or potential mandatory minimum
charge, if applicable) is proportional to the seriousness of the
defendant's conduct and whether the charge achieves [the
purposes of sentencing set forth by 18 U.S.C. Sec. 3553]." (See
"Memorandum from Attorney General Janet Reno to United States
Attorneys and Department of Justice Litigating Divisions,"
October 12, 1993.)

Prior to the Attorney General's memo- randum, 76% of defendants
who were originally charged with a Sec. 924(c) offense and who were
convicted pleaded guilty to one of the offenses charged (table
5).  Following the Attorney General's memorandum, U.S. attorneys
appeared more likely toaccept guilty pleas to substantive
offenses such as drug trafficking and bank robbery in exchange
for dismissing the Sec. 924(c) counts.  For example, during
1994-95, guilty pleas in cases where the defendant was charged
with Sec. 924(c) increased to 79% of convictions.  The increase
coincided with an increase in the percentage of cases in which
U.S. attorneys dismissed the Sec. 924(c) charge.  During 1992-93
prosecutors dismissed the Sec. 924(c) charge in less than a quarter
of the cases in which the defendant pleaded guilty to a
substantive charge.  During 1994-95 dismissals rose to 37.5% and
50.3% of the cases. 

While Sec. 924(c) counts were dismissed at greater rates from 1996
through 1998, these increases were at least partially
attributable to evidentiary factors resulting from the Supreme
Court's Bailey decision.  For instance, during 1996, the first
year following Bailey, in nearly two-thirds of the cases
involving guilty pleas, the Sec. 924(c) count was dismissed.

Defendants convicted of Federal firearm offenses

During 1998, 91% of defendants convicted of a firearm offense
were sentenced to prison.  The average prison term imposed was
100 months.  Half of those convicted received a prison term of
60 months or more.  Defendants convicted of a possession offense
were sentenced to prison at the highest rate (94%) and received
the longest sentences (105 months), on average.  By contrast,
about 75% of defendants convicted of receipt or transfer and
regulatory offenses were sentenced to prison; the average term
imposed was 62 months.

Between 1992 and 1998 an increasing proportion of defendants
convicted of a firearm offense was sentenced to prison.  During
1992, 85% of those convicted were sentenced to prison compared
to 91% during 1998 (not shown in a table).  Prison sentences
have also increased C increasing from 79 months, on average,
during 1992 to 100 months during 1998 (figure 2).

The increase in prison sentences can be attributed to an
increase in the proportion of defendants receiving sentences of
3 years or more.  Between 1992 and 1998 the number of defendants
sentenced to a prison term of 3 years or more increased from 51%
to 71% of those sentenced to prison (not shown in a table).  The
proportion sentenced to 5 years or more increased from 41% to
53% of those sentenced to prison.

Sentences imposed for firearm transfer offenses more than
doubled during this period from an average of 28.4 months to
61.5 months.  Sentences for possession offenses increased from
84.2 months to 104.5 months.	

Armed career offenders

The Firearms Owners' Protection Act of 1986 increased penalties
for recidivist violent and drug offenders who unlawfully possess
firearms (P.L. No. 99-308, 100 Stat. 449 (1986)).  Pursuant to
18 U.S.C. Sec. 924(e), a person convicted of unlawfully possessing
a firearm based on his or her status as a prohibited person and
who has three prior convictions for violent felonies or serious
drug offenses is subject to a mandatory prison term of at least
15 years.  Between 1992 and 1998, 1,897 defendants were
sentenced in U.S. district courts as armed career offenders
(table 7).  Almost all these defendants were sentenced to a term
of imprisonment; the average prison term imposed was 216 months.

Receipt and transfer offenses

During 1998, 75% of defendants convicted of a receipt or
transfer offense were sentenced to a term of imprisonment.  The
average prison  term imposed for these offenses was 62 months. 
Ninety percent of prohibited persons who unlawfully acquired or
attempted to acquire a firearm were sentenced to prison; the
average prison term imposed was 65 months (not shown in a
table).	

Almost three-quarters of straw purchasers and others unlawfully
receiving or transferring firearms were sentenced to a term of
imprisonment.  For straw purchasers, the average prison term
imposed was 26 months; for other individuals, the average prison
term imposed was 35 months.    

--------------------Box on p8-------------------------------------------
Firearms prosecutions in the 20 most populous districts

The number of defendants charged with Federal firearm offenses
varies substantially across Federal judicial districts. 
Generally U.S. attorneys in the most populous districts
prosecuted the greatest number of defendants in U.S. district
courts.  For example, during 1997 U.S. attorneys in the 20 most
populous judicial districts prosecuted 44% of all defendants
charged with a Federal offense (table above).  Similarly, 41% of
all defendants charged with a Federal firearm offense were
prosecuted in these 20 districts.

Higher crimes rates in heavily populated districts

These larger judicial districts accounted for a disproportionate
amount of violent crime reported to local law enforcement during
1997.  While these 20 districts account for about 49% of the
U.S. population, approximately 58% of all violent crime, or 6.6
violent crimes for every 1,000 residents, occurred in these
districts.   By contrast, the violent crime rate in the other 70
judicial districts included in this analysis was approximately
30% lower C 4.6 violent crimes for every 1,000 residents.

Targeted prosecutions

Project Triggerlock and subsequent district-level initiatives
such as Operation Ceasefire in the District of Massachusetts and
Project Exile in the Eastern District of Virginia have targeted
violent offenders for Federal prosecution.  Consistent with the
goals of those efforts, the number of defendants charged with a
Federal firearm offense correlated with arrests made by local
law enforcement agencies for violent and drug offenses.  In
districts where local law enforcement agencies made more arrests
for violent crime or drug trafficking, U.S. attorneys generally
charged more defendants with a Federal firearm offense.

For example in the 20 most populous judicial districts, local
law enforcement agencies reported making approximately 33,000
arrests on average for violent crimes and drug trafficking
offenses during 1997.  U.S. attorneys in these districts
charged 119 defendants on average with a Federal firearm offense.
By contrast, local agencies in the 70 other judicial districts
reported making approximately 6,400 arrests on average. U.S.
attorneys in these districts charged 49 defendants on average.

---------------------------End of box-------------------------------

Sentence enhancements for using or possessing a firearm

Although the Supreme Court limited the applicability of 18
U.S.C. Sec. 924(c) to offenders actively using a firearm during an
offense, the Federal sentencing guidelines retained enhancements
for simple possession or active use during certain crimes such
as bank robbery and drug trafficking.  Consequently, while
prosecutors could no longer obtain sentence enhancements
pursuant to Sec. 924(c) for simple possession, enhancements could
still be applied under the Federal sentencing guidelines.

Prior to Bailey, approximately 60% of defendants who received an
enhanced sentence for using a weapon, received the enhancement
provided for by the Federal sentencing guidelines; 40% received
the enhancement provided for by 18 U.S.C. Sec. 924(c) (table 8). 
Following Bailey, the proportion receiving the guideline
enhancement increased to 70%.

The enhancements from the Federal sentencing guidelines are not
equivalent to those through Sec. 924(c).  Pursuant to the
sentencing guidelines, defendants may receive a 2-to-7 offense
level enhancement – equivalent to a 25%-120% increase in the
sentence imposed – for using or possessing a weapon.  This
estimation of the potential increase assumes a 12% increase in
the imposed sentence for each additional guideline offense level.

The actual amount of the increase varies according to other
conduct relating to the underlying offense and how the defendant
used the firearm.  Greater enhancements are applicable under the
guidelines if the defendant discharged the firearm than if he or
she brandished or merely possessed it. (See, for example,
U.S.S.G. Sec.Sec. 2D1.1 and 2B3.1.)

For example, a defendant convicted of bank robbery receives a
sentence of 41 to 51 months under the sentencing guidelines if
no weapon was present; a sentence of 57 to 71 months if a weapon
was brandished, displayed, or possessed; and a sentence of 87 to
108 months if he or she discharged a firearm.  By contrast, a
defendant convicted of using a firearm during a drug trafficking
offense would receive the same 2-level enhancement for
brandishing a firearm as for discharging it.

Between 1993 and 1998 the average guidelines enhancement for
weapon use or possession was approximately 16 months (table 8). 
The average sentence imposed for the underlying offense was 103
months (not shown in a table).  The total prison term imposed on
these defendants was 119 months, on average.

By contrast, 18 U.S.C. Sec. 924(c) provides for a sentence of 5
years to be served consecutive to any sentence imposed for the
underlying offense.  Higher enhancements may be applicable if
the defendant has previously been convicted of such an offense
or if the defendant used an assault weapon, short-barreled
shotgun, or a machine gun.(*P.L. 105-386, 112 Stat.  3469 (1998)
amended Sec. 924(c) to provide higher enhancements if the defendant
brandished the firearm (7 years) or if the defendant discharged
the firearm (10 years).)

Between 1993 and 1998 defendants convicted of a Sec. 924(c) offense
had their sentences enhanced by approximately 92 months, on
average (table 8).  The average prison sentence imposed for the
underlying offense was 111 months (not shown in a table).  (This
average excludes sentences to life imprisonment and prison
sentences in excess of 989 months.)  The total prison term
imposed on these defendants was 203 months, on average.


---------------------box on p10----------------------------------------

Firearm use reported by Federal prison inmates

During 1997, 14%, or 12,619, of the Federal prison population
reported that they used, carried, or possessed a firearm while
committing the offense for which they were imprisoned (not shown
in a table).  Most of these inmates (86%) reported using a
handgun.

Of those who possessed a firearm during the offense, 52%
reported that they did not actively use the firearm;  46%
reported that they displayed or brandished the firearm to
intimidate someone (29%), in self-defense (25%), or to "get
away" (12%); and 13% reported that they discharged the firearm.  

The majority of firearms used by Federal prison inmates were not
purchased directly from Federal firearm licensees:  68% of
inmates reported obtaining the firearm either from a source like
a burglary, a drug dealer, a fence, or the black market (33%) or
from a friend or family member (35%).  About a quarter (23%)
reported that they purchased or traded for the firearm directly
from a retail store (15%), pawnshop (4%), flea market (2%), or
gun show (2%).  An additional 9% reported obtaining the firearm
through all other means.

Available data suggest that the majority (83%) of Federal
inmates who reported possessing a firearm may  have been
disqualified from lawfully possessing or purchasing a firearm
for at least one statutory reason:  

* About half indicated that they had a prior sentence to
incarceration; a third were on probation or parole at the time
of their current offense; about half indicated illicit drug use
within a month of the current offense.

* Some inmates reported being treated overnight in a mental
health facility (7%), being dishonorably discharged from the
U.S. Armed Forces (1%), or being a noncitizen (7%).

Firearm use reported by Federal 
prison inmates

Extent of firearm use by Federal
prison inmates, 1997
                                       Percent       95%-
                                       of Federal    confi-
Use of firearm                         inmates us-   dence
during offense                         ing firearm   interval
 
Discharged                               12.8%     +/- 3.8%
Killed victim                             3.0          2.0
Injured victim                            3.5          2.1
Other                                     7.7          3.1
 
Brandished/displayed                     45.8%    +/-  5.7%
To scare someone                         29.3          5.2
To defend self                           24.8          5.0
To "get away"                            11.6          3.7
To injure                                 0.9*         1.1
Other                                     2.1          1.6
 
Did not actively use                     51.2%    +/-  5.7%
 
Number of prison inmates
reporting firearm use                  11,250
 
Source of firearms possessed
by Federal prison inmates, 1997
                           Percent of Federal
                           inmates who had
Characteristic             possessed firearm
 
Theft or burglary                         9.1      +/- 3.3%
Drug dealer                              15.0          4.5
Fence/black market                        8.7          3.2
 
Purchased or traded --                   22.5%     +/- 4.7%
Retail store                             15.0          4.0
Pawnshop                                  4.2          2.3
Flea market                               1.7*         1.5
Gun show                                  1.7*         1.5
 
Family or friend                         35.4%    +/-  5.4%
 
Borrowed or given                         3.4%    +/-  2.1%
 
Other                                     5.9%    +/-  2.7%
 
Number of prison inmates
reporting firearm source               11,604
 
Selected characteristics of Federal
inmates reporting firearm possession
during current offense, 1997
 
Any potentially
disqualifying
characteristic                           82.8%     +/- 4.1%
 
Prior jail/prison sentence               55.4          5.4
On probation/parole                      32.0          5.1
Fugitive/escapee                          0.6*         0.8
 
Illicit drug use within
1 month before offense
or at time of offense                    55.6          5.4
 
Overnight treatment in
mental health facility                    6.8          2.7
Not a U.S. citizen                        6.9          2.0
Dishonorably discharged
from U.S. military                        0.7*         0.9
 
Note: Inmates may have used the firearm
for more than one purpose.  No information
is available on the legality of the transfers.
An inmate may have reported more than
one disqualifying characteristic.
*Based on 10 or fewer sample cases.

Data source: BJS, Survey of Inmates in Federal Correctional
Facilities, 1997
---------------------end of box--------------------------------------

Methodology

Data sources

The primary source of the data for tables in this report is the
BJS Federal Justice Statistics Program (FJSP) database.  The
FJSP is presently constructed from source files provided by the
Executive Office for United States Attorneys (EOUSA), the
Administrative Office of the United States Courts (AOUSC), the
United States Sentencing Commission (USSC), and the Federal
Bureau of Prisons (BOP).  The EOUSA provides data on suspects
investigated by U.S. attorneys for violations of Federal law and
the U.S. attorney's decision to prosecute; the AOUSC provides
data on the statutory offenses charged by the U.S. attorney, the
outcome of the criminal proceed-ing, and the sentence imposed;
the USSC provides detailed data describing the sentence imposed
on convicted defendants; and the BOP provides data on defendants
under its jurisdictions.  Data are reported for the Fed- eral
fiscal years beginning October 1.

Beginning in 1992 both the EOUSA and the AOUSC began collecting
data on multiple offenses:  the U.S. attorneys collect data on
every statutory offense charged, while the courts collect data
on up to five statutory offenses for which the defendant was
charged and adjudicated.  Consequently, because this report
examines charging practices and is not limited to an analysis of
the most serious offense charged, the data series begins with
1992.

Statistics describing defendants processed during 1999 reflect
data obtained from the AOUSC during December 1999.  (Other
agencies providing data were unable to supply 1999 data at the
time of report preparation.)  BJS has observed that information
for fewer than 1,000 defendants is not recorded in the AOUSC
database during the fiscal year reporting period.  BJS uses data
describing subsequent reporting periods to augment and update
the AOUSC fiscal year database.  Because the 1999 statistics
contained in this report are subject to change, these statistics
are identified as preliminary.

When multiple types of firearm offenses were charged, the
offense reported was determined by rank ordering the various
offenses charged.  Possession offenses took precedence over
transfer offenses and transfer offenses took precedence over
regulatory offenses.  In addition to data routinely compiled as
part of the FJSP, data describing defendants convicted of
firearm receipt and transfer violations were specially collected
by BJS staff from presentence investigation reports archived by
the USSC.  Data elements collected include the following: (1)
the number of firearms involved in the offense conduct, (2) the
types of firearms, (3) the type of transaction, (4) the location
of the transaction, (5) whether the purchaser was a "straw
purchaser," and (6) whether the defendant was a prohibited
person and the basis for the disqualification.

Statistics describing the use and source of firearms used by
Federal prison inmates were derived from BJS's 1997 Survey of
Inmates in Federal Correctional Facilities (ICPSR 2598). 
Inmates were interviewed about the current offense and sentence,
criminal history, social background, weapon use, drug use and
treatment, and other issues.  Data were collected from a sample
of 4,041 Federal inmates selected from 135 Federal prisons to be
representative of the 89,072 sentenced inmates held in BOP owned
and operated facilities on June 30, 1997.

The accuracy of estimates derived from the survey depends on
sample and nonsampling error.  While the extent of nonsampling
error in any survey is unknown, estimates of the sampling error
associated with the 1997 survey of inmates can be obtained by
using the formula --

Statistics describing arrests made by local law enforcement
agencies were obtained from the FBI's Uniform Crime Reports data
series for 1992 through 1997 (ICPSR 6316, 6545, 6669, 6850,
2389, 2764). 

Defendants

A defendant, offender, or suspect is a person or organization
against whom specific action has been taken by Federal law
enforcement, U.S. attorneys, or the Federal judiciary. 
Defendants identified in multiple proceedings or cases are
counted multiple times.  A defendant charged with multiple
firearm offenses was counted only once unless the defendant was
charged in separate cases.  For more information on general data
analysis procedures, see Reconciling Federal Criminal Case
Processing Statistics, BJS report, September 1999, NCJ 171680. 

Offense selection

For Federal offenders, the firearm offense, unless otherwise
indicated, was selected from all offenses investigated by U.S.
attorneys, charged by U.S. attorneys in U.S. district courts, or
for which the defendant was convicted. In other BJS reports
describing Federal offenses and offenders, such as the
Compendium of Federal Justice Statistics, the offense selected
was the most serious offense. Seriousness is based on the
applicable statutory penalties.

Time-series models	

Estimates of the impact of Bailey v. United States on the number
of defendants charged with 18 U.S.C. Sec. 924(c) were derived using
ARIMA models.  ARIMA models are built empirically from available
data and test for changes in the underlying process of a time
series due to some intervention such a policy change, new
legislation, or a court decision. (See Richard McCleary and
Richard A.  Hay, Jr.,  Applied Time Series Analysis for the
Social Sciences (1980).)  For other applications of ARIMA
describing the impact of changes in Federal criminal justice
policy on case processing events, see United States Sentencing
Commission, Federal Sentencing Guidelines: A Report on the
Operation of the Guidelines System and Short-erm Impacts on
Disparity in Sentenc-ing, use of Incarceration, and
Prosecutorial Discretion and Plea Bargaining (December 1991).

As part of the time series analysis, data describing the number
of defendants charged with a Sec. 924(c) offense are aggregated
into monthly observations and plotted over time -- both before
and after the relevant policy change.  In the context of ARIMA,
the Bailey decision is an intervention, or "shock," that causes
a change in the number of defendants charged with a Sec. 924(c)
offense.

  Other factors incorporated into the ARIMA model that could
affect the number of defendants charged with a Sec. 924(c) include
the number of defendants charged with violent or drug
trafficking offenses -- offenses that predicate a Sec. 924(c)
charge.  

After declining from a peak of 25,033 defendants charged during
1992 to 21,905 during 1994, the number of defendants charged
with a drug offense increased from 22,929 to 29,472 between 1995
and 1998. The number charged with violent offenses, particularly
robbery, while lower than the 1992 level, remained stable
between 1994 and 1998 (Administrative Office of the U.S. Courts,
Judicial Business of the United States Courts, annual.)

The ARIMA model derived suggests that the Bailey decision had a
statistically significant impact on the number of defendants
charged with a Sec. 924(c) offense (appendix table 1).  The number
of defendants charged with a drug trafficking offense was also a
statistically significant determinant. 

The estimate of the number of defendants that ought to have been
charged with a Sec. 924(c) offense absent the Bailey decision was
derived by applying the parameters estimated from the ARIMA
model (appendix figure 1 and appendix table 1).  The estimate
was derived by excluding the To1Baileyt parameter from the
model.  During the observation period, 16,028 defendants were
actually charged with a Sec. 924(c) offense.  The total number of
defendants that would have been charged with a Sec. 924(c) offense
during this period -- absent Bailey -- was estimated at 18,554, or
2,526 more than the actual number.

Estimating the impact of guideline sentence enhancements

The impact of guideline sentence enhancements for weapon use or
possession (table 8) was estimated using the methodology
originally developed for estimating the impact of amendments to
the Federal sentenc-ing guidelines on the Federal prison
population.  As part of the U.S. Sen- tencing Commission's
prison impact methodology, defendants are theoretically "re-sentenced,"
assuming changes in the application of relevant sections of the
Federal sentencing guidelines.  For instance, in this exercise
actual sentences imposed were compared to sentences that would
have been imposed had the defendant not received the guideline
enhancement for weapons use.  Twelve sections of the Federal
sentencing guideline include enhancements for weapons use: 
U.S.S.G. Sec.Sec. 2A2.2, 2A2.3, 2A2.4, 2B2.4, 2B2.3, 2B3.1, 2B3.2,
2B5.1, 2D1.1, 2D1.11, 2E2.1, 2L1.1.  The weapons enhancement for
Sec. 2B5.1 became effective November 1, 1994; the weapons
enhancement for Sec. 2L1.1 became effective November 1, 1996.

Once a guideline parameter has been adjusted, the defendant is
generally re-sentenced in the new guideline range at the same
relative position as the actual sentence in the actual guideline
range.  Exceptions exist when the defendant was sentenced
outside of the guideline range, when the defendant is moving in
or out of a range that does not prescribe a sentence of
imprisonment, or when the defendant is moving in or out of a
range that includes or prescribes a sentence of life
imprisonment.  For example, in the general re-sentencing model,
if a defendant actually received a sentence at the midpoint of
the guideline sentencing range, he would be re-sentenced to the
midpoint of the new guideline range. 

Data from the Federal Justice Statistics Program are compiled by
the Bureau of Justice Statistics from the source files of
several Federal agencies.  Data can be obtained on CD-ROM from
the Bureau of Justice Statistics Clearinghouse, 1-800-732-3277,
or from the Federal Justice Statistics Resource Center located
on the Internet:  

http://fjsrc.urban.org

The resource center, as well as the report and supporting
documentation, are also accessible through the BJS website: 

 http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/

Data from the FBI's Uniform Crime Report program can be obtained
from the National Archive of Criminal Justice Data at the
University of Michigan.  The National Archive is accessible
through the BJS web site.  Recent editions of the FBI's annual
report Crime in the United States are accessible through the
FBI's website:

 http://www.fbi.gov/ucr.htm
 
 
 End of file
 Revised 7/14/00 ih,pm

























