U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Programs
Bureau of Justice Statistics
-------------------------------------------------------------
Federal Justice Statistics Program
----------------------------------
Federal Justice Statistics, 2005
September  2008,  NCJ 220383
-------------------------------------------------------------
This file is text only without graphics and many of the
tables. A Zip archive of the tables in this report in
spreadsheet format (.csv) and the full report including
tables and graphics in .pdf format are available from:
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/abstract/fjs05.htm
------------------------------------------------------

This report is one in a series. More recent editions may be
available. To view a list of all in the series go to
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/pubalp2.htm#fjs

-------------------------------------------------------------
By Mark Motivans, Ph.D.
BJS Statistician
-------------------------------------------------------------

The U.S. Marshals Service arrested and booked 140,200
suspects in 2005, up from 83,324 in 1995. Material witness,
immigration, and weapons were the fastest growing arrest
offenses during this period. In 2005, immigration (27%) was
the most prevalent arrest offense followed by drug (24%) and
supervision violations (17%). Five federal judicial districts
along the U.S.-Mexico border accounted for 40% of all
suspects arrested and booked by the U.S. Marshals Service in
2005.***Detailed data tables are available in the Federal
Justice Statistics, 2005 - Statistical Tables on the BJS
Website at
<http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/pub/html/fjsst/2005/fjs05st.htm
>***

The federal government reorganized key federal law
enforcement agencies following the passage of the Homeland
Security Act of 2002. Since 2002, the Department of Homeland
Security (DHS) has accounted for a growing share of suspects
referred for federal prosecution compared to other federal
law enforcement agencies. DHS agencies referred 45% of all
suspects in 2004 and 2005, compared to 33% referred by the
U.S. Department of  Justice (DOJ). Referrals by the U.S.
Department of Treasury decreased from 20% in 2001 and 2002 to
2% in 2004 and 2005.     

The likelihood of being prosecuted, convicted, and sentenced
to prison increased from 1995 to 2005. Sixty percent of all
suspects in 2005 were prosecuted, up from 54% in 1995. In
2005, 9 in 10 (90%) defendants charged with a federal
violation were convicted, up from 84% in 1995 and 79% of
defendants convicted were sentenced to prison, up from 67% in
1995. Of the defendants convicted in 2005, 13% were sentenced
to probation, down from 24% in 1995.

The number of persons sentenced to federal prison nearly
doubled from 1995 to 2005. At yearend 2005, 375,600 persons
were under some form of federal supervision--62% in secure
confinement and 38% in the community.

The rate of growth (3.6%) in matters concluded by U.S.
attorneys from 1995 to 2005 was more than three times greater
than the rate of growth in the U.S. resident population
(1.1%).

Suspects in matters concluded by U.S. attorneys in larger
federal judicial districts--districts with an average
population of more than five million U.S. residents--grew at
a faster rate than less populated districts from 1995 to
2005. In 2005, defendants were more likely to be convicted in
large districts than in medium or small-size districts. The
average prison sentence imposed was lower in larger
districts, compared to less populated districts.

The data in this report are from the Federal Justice
Statistics Program (FJSP), which includes source files from
the Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA), the U.S. Marshals
Service (USMS), the Executive Office for the U.S. Attorneys,
and the Administrative Office of the U.S. Courts (AOUSC). The
reporting period is based on the fiscal year, October 1 to
September 30.

Cocaine was the most common drug type involved in arrests by
the DEA in 2005

Suspects arrested for cocaine powder and crack cocaine
accounted for 42% of all suspects (29,886) arrested by the
DEA in 2005 (table 2). Twenty-eight percent of suspects were
arrested for cocaine powder; 14% for crack cocaine. The
remaining 58% of suspects were arrested for methamphetamine
(22%), marijuana (20%), opiates (8%), and other drug-related
offenses (9%). 

Almost a fifth (19%) of all DEA arrests occurred in five
federal judicial districts along the U.S.- Mexico border.
Marijuana accounted for 43% of DEA arrests in the Southwest
border districts, followed by methamphet-amine (22%), cocaine
powder (22%), and crack cocaine (4%). The DOJ Southwest
Border Initiative brings together state and federal law
enforcement agencies, including the DEA, to target
Mexico-based traffickers involved in organized criminal
activity along the Southwest border. 

Most suspects arrested by the DEA for drug violations were
male (84%). More than a quarter (29%) of male suspects were
arrested for cocaine powder, followed by marijuana and
methamphetamine (both 21%).  

Females accounted for 16% of all DEA drug arrests in 2005 and
1 in 5 of all methamphetamine arrests. More than a quarter
(27%) of females arrested by the DEA for drug violations were
arrested for methamphetamine, followed by cocaine powder
(21%) and marijuana (16%). Half of all suspects arrested by
the DEA were age 31 or younger. Crack cocaine suspects--half
were age 28 or younger--were somewhat younger by comparison.

Hispanics constituted 44% of arrestees, followed by white
(27%) and black (26%) suspects. Hispanics made up more than
half of arrests for cocaine powder (56%), opiates (58%), and
marijuana (54%). More than three-quarters (77%) of crack
cocaine arrestees were black, and half of all methamphetamine
suspects were white. In 2005, 27% of suspects arrested by the
DEA were non-U.S. citizens. 

Non-U.S. citizens accounted for 36% of DEA arrests for
marijuana, 33% of DEA arrests for cocaine powder, and 32% of
DEA arrests for opiates. Percents shown in this section are
based on arrests with known suspect characteristics.

Immigration was the most prevalent arrest offense; material
witness, immigration and weapons offenses increased the most
rapidly from 1995 to 2005

In 2005, the U.S. Marshals Service booked 140,200 suspects
for violations of federal law, an increase of 68% (or 56,876
suspects) from 1995. Immigration offenses had the greatest
net increase from 1995 to 2005. In 2005, 27% of federal
bookings were immigration offenses, up from 13% in 1995.
Material witness offenses increased by an annual average of
20% from 1995 to 2005. Weapons offenses were 7% of federal
bookings in 2005, up from 5% in 1995.

Five judicial districts along U.S.-Mexico border accounted
for 40% of all federal arrests in 2005

The 1,954 miles of the U.S.-Mexico border are within the
jurisdiction of five federal judicial districts--Southern and
Western Districts of Texas, Arizona, New Mexico, and the
Southern District of California--and include 22 U.S. counties
contiguous to the U.S. border in four states. The Southwest
border districts held 8% of the U.S. population and accounted
for 40% of all federal arrests in 2005. The Southern District
of Texas (43%), which contains three of the top 40 fastest
growing metropolitan areas in the U.S. (Laredo, McAllen, and
Brownsville), and the Western District of Texas (21%) make up
64% of the length of the U.S.-Mexico border.***See
Undocumented Immigrants in U.S.-Mexico Border Counties: The
Costs of Law Enforcement and Criminal Justice Services (2007)
<http:// www.bordercounties.org>. *** Nearly 1 in 4 (23%) of
all suspects were arrested and booked by the U.S. Marshals in
the Southern and Western Districts of Texas.

Drug and immigration charges constituted more than half of
all matters concluded by U.S. attorneys in 2005 

U.S. attorneys (93) serving in the 94 federal judicial
districts, concluded 143,640 matters in 2005 (table 3). In
2005, more than half of all matters concluded by U.S.
attorneys involved either a drug (28%) or an immigration
(26%) charge. Immigration offenses grew at an average annual
rate of 21% from 1995 to 2005. Property offenses, comprised
mostly of fraud, decreased from 1 in 3 matters in 1995 to
fewer than 1 in 5 in 2005. The basis for investigation (or
lead charge) in nearly half of all matters concluded in 2005
fell under five criminal statutes: Drug--trafficking, attempt
or conspiracy; immigration--illegal entry or reentry; and
unlawful firearms (not shown in table).

The Department of Homeland Security accounted for 45% of all
referrals to U.S. attorneys in 2004 and 2005

The reorganization of key federal law enforcement agencies
followed the enactment of the Homeland Security Act of 2002.
The Act transferred the U.S. Customs Service and the Secret
Service from the U.S. Department of Treasury (Treasury) to
the DHS. Responsibility for the Immigration and
Naturalization Service transferred from the Department of
Justice to DHS and the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms,
and Explosives transferred from the Treasury to the DOJ.

DHS agencies accounted for 45% of all referrals to U.S.
attorneys in the two-year period following the reorganization
of federal law enforcement agencies under the Homeland
Security Act of 2002 (table 4). In 2004 and 2005, law
enforcement agencies within the DOJ referred 33% of suspects,
compared to 56% in 2001 and 2002. Suspects referred to U.S.
attorneys by the Treasury decreased to 2% of total referrals
in 2004 and 2005, down from 20% of all referrals in 2001 and
2002.

Growth in matters concluded by U.S. attorneys from 1995 to
2005 was greater in more populated districts

In 2005, the population of each of the 94 federal judicial
districts varied from a high of 18.3 million persons in the
Central District of California to 81,000 persons in the
District of the Northern Mariana Islands (not shown in
table). 

From 1995 to 2005, the average growth rate (3.6%) of matters
concluded by U.S. attorneys exceeded the average growth rate
(1.1%) of the U.S. resident population overall. As population
growth has the effect of increasing the number of large
districts (population over 5 million) from 1995 to 2005, the
average growth rate uses a fixed district size over this
period. The average growth rate of matters concluded in large
(6.2%) and medium-size (1.9%) districts was greater than the
growth rate of the U.S. resident population served by each
during this period. In small districts, the average growth
rate was similar (less than 1%) for matters concluded and the
resident population. Growth in immigration matters disposed
by magistrate in the Southern District of Texas in 2004 and
2005 accounted in part for the increase in large districts
(not shown in table).

Sixty percent of federal suspects were prosecuted in 2005, up
from 54% of suspects prosecuted in 1995

In 2005, 60% of the 143,640 suspects in matters concluded
were prosecuted by U.S. attorneys (table 6). In 1995, 54% of
suspects were prosecuted by U.S. attorneys.*** See Compendium
of Federal Justice Statistics, 1995 available on the BJS
Website at
<http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/pub/pdf/cfjs95.pdf>.***Approxim
ately 20% of all matters were disposed and 21% were declined
for prosecution. U.S. magistrate judges disposed half of all
immigration matters in 2005. In the five Southwest U.S.
border districts, 5% of matters were declined. The remainder
were either disposed by U.S. magistrate judges (41%) or
prosecuted in federal court (54%). From 1995 to 2005, smaller
districts declined to prosecute a greater percentage of
matters than larger districts (figure 1).
                                             
Drug and weapons suspects were the most likely to be
prosecuted in 2005; regulatory suspects were the least likely
          

Suspects charged with drug (77%) and weapon (70%) offenses
had the highest prosecution rates in 2005, followed by
violent (58%), property (54%), immigration (52%), and
public-order offenses (41%). In 2005, medium-size districts
(66%) prosecuted a greater percentage of suspects than small
(59%) and large (56%) districts (table 6). 

Suspects involved in property or public-order offenses
(including regulatory offenses) were most likely to be
declined for prosecution (both 38%). In 2005, U.S. attorneys
declined to file charges for case-related reasons including
weak evidence (27%), referred or handled in other authority
for prosecution (21%), and criminal intent not established or
not a federal offense (21%). Matters settled through pretrial
diversion, restitution and administrative alternatives
accounted for about 4% of all matters declined for
prosecution in 2005 (not shown in table).

The median time from the receipt of a matter by a U.S.
attorney's office to a decision--prosecute, decline, or 
dismiss--was 28 days in 2005. For matters declined, the time
from receipt of the matter to a decision took longer (median
of 400 days) than both prosecutions (median of 24 days) and
matters disposed by a U.S. magistrate (median of 3 days).
 
Ninety percent of defendants were convicted in 2005, up from
84% in 1995 

Of the 86,680 defendants adjudicated in 2005, 90% were
convicted (table 7). Conviction rates varied by type of
offense. Almost all (96%) defendants in cases concluded with
an immigration violation were convicted, followed by
defendants with weapons and drug violations (both 91%). In
2005, adjudicated defendants were either convicted following
a guilty plea (86%) or by bench or jury trial (4%) (table 8).
About 1 in 10 (9%) adjudicated defendants were dismissed and
less than 1% were acquitted. Weapons violations and violent
offenses had the highest percent of trials (both 8%). Public
order defendants had the highest percent of dismissals (19%).

Defendants adjudicated in the Southwest U.S. border districts
in 2005 had a higher conviction rate (95%) than in non-border
districts (88%). Large districts (over 5 million U.S.
residents) had higher conviction rates than medium (1 to 5
million residents) and small districts (under 1 million
residents). In 2005, the median time from case filing to
disposition was 6.8 months. Dismissals and guilty pleas took
less time to process than trials. Cases concluded by a bench
or jury trial decreased by 18% from 4,809 in 1995 to 3,930 in
2005.

Nearly 8 in 10 convicted felons were sentenced to prison in
2005--up from 7 in 10 in 1995

More than three-quarters (79%) of defendants (78,042)
convicted in 2005 were sentenced to prison, compared to 67%
of convictions in 1995 (table 9). The average prison term
imposed in 2005 was 61 months, down from 63 months in 1995.
Prison sentences in 2005 for drug offenses were 83 months on
average, compared to 96 months for violent offenses and 84
months for weapons offenses.

In 2005, 13% percent of defendants were sentenced to
probation, down from 24% in 1995. A smaller percentage of
defendants were ordered to pay a fine only (3%) in 2005 than
in 1995 (7%).

Felony convictions in federal court increased at a faster
rate than in state court from 1996 to 2004

Felony convictions in federal court increased from 4% of the
nation's felony convictions in 1996 to 6% in 2004 (table 10).
Felony convictions in federal court increased at a faster
rate (25% per year) than felony convictions in state court
(5% per year) from 1996 to 2004.

In 2004, federal courts handled 20% of all state and federal
felony weapons convictions--up from 9% in 1994 (figure 2).
Federal courts sentenced 7% of the nation's convicted felons
to incarceration in 2004, up from 5% in 1996. In 2004, felons
were more likely to receive an incarceration sentence in
federal (85%) than in state (70%) court (not shown in table).
Federal courts (61 months) imposed longer sentences on
average in 2004, compared to state courts (37 months).

During 2005, the U.S. Court of Appeals received 14,644
criminal appeals--a 44% increase from 1995

The number of criminal appeals increased on average 4.1%
annually from 1995 to 2005 (table 11). Appeals filed by
immigration offenders increased on average 25% per year from
1995 to 2005. About 4 in 10 appeals filed in 2005 were for
drug offenses, followed by immigration (17%), weapons (16%),
and violent (5%) offenses. In 1995, there were 26 appeals per
100 convictions, compared to 20 per 100 in 2005.

Between 1995 and 2005, the number of convictions outpaced the
number of appeals in border districts. In 2005, there were 13
appeals per 100 convictions, compared to 16 per 100 in 1995.
Offenders sentenced in the Southwest border districts
accounted for 19% of all appeals in 2005, compared to 10% in
1995. Appeals in large districts grew at a faster average
growth rate from 1995 to 2005 than in medium and small
districts. In each district size, the growth in the number of
defendants convicted during this period was greater than the
number of appeals filed.
 
On September 30, 2005, 375,631 persons were under federal
supervision--62% in secure confinement and 38% in the
community

Of the 375,631 persons under some form of federal supervision
in 2005, 3 in 5 (234,425) were in secure confinement,
including detention pending trial and imprisonment following
imposition of sentence. Eighty percent of persons in secure
confinement were serving a prison term following a
conviction; 20% of persons in secure confinement were
awaiting case disposition (not shown in table).

There were 141,206 persons under supervision in the community
in 2005. Offenders sentenced to probation and sentenced
offenders who had been released from prison to serve the
remainder of their term under post-prison supervision
accounted for 79% of persons under community supervision in
2005; defendants released pending trial accounted for 21%
(not shown in table).

Methodology

This report uses data from the Federal Justice Statistics
Program (FJSP) including source files from the Drug
Enforcement Administration, the U.S. Marshals Service, the
Executive Office for U.S. Attorneys; and the Administrative
Office of the U.S. Courts. The reporting period is based on
the fiscal year, October 1 to September 30. For suspects in
matters concluded, the lead charge is the basis for
investigation. In cases terminated in U.S. district court,
the most serious terminating offense is the offense yielding
the maximum statutory penalty. This report combines the
Districts of Guam and the Northern Mariana Islands as one
U.S. attorney is appointed to serve both districts (for a
total of 93 districts).

District size is based on a district's annual U.S. resident
population for each year displayed in report tables. For
computing the average growth rate (in tables 5 and 11),
district size is based on the average population in that
district from 1995 to 2005. Each of the 93 federal districts
were classified into large (19 districts), medium (58
districts), and small (16 districts) categories for the
purpose of analysis. The average number of authorized federal
judgeships per district from 1995 to 2005 coincides with the
population classification used in this report as follows: 

District  Number of  Average U.S.,   Average
size      districts  resident        number of              
             Population    authorized
                     1995-2005       judgeships, 
                                     1995-2005
---------------------------------------------------
Small         16      666,583            4   
Medium        58    2,434,043            6   
Large         19    7,055,208           14   
---------------------------------------------------
-------------------------------------------------------------

The source for the number of authorized judgeships from
1995-2005 is the Administrative Office of the U.S. Courts,
Federal Court Management Statistics (see: http://
www.uscourts.gov/fcmstat/index.html).

The National Judicial Reporting Program (NJRP) collects data
every two years on felony convictions in a nationally
representative stratified clustered sample of state courts
from 300 counties (see: http://www.icpsr.umich.edu/
NACJD.htm). Population estimates were derived by aggregating
county-level data from the U.S. Census County Estimate File
to the judicial district level. Source data were obtained
from <http://www.uscensus.gov/popest/counties/> (last
accessed on September 1, 2008). Detailed data tables are
available in the Federal Justice Statistics, 2005 -
Statistical Tables on the BJS Website at
<http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/pub/html/fjsst/2005/fjs05st.htm
>.
------------------------------------------------------------

The Bureau of Justice Statistics is the statistical agency of
the U.S. Department of Justice. Jeffrey L. Sedgwick is
director.

BJS Bulletins present the first release of findings from
permanent data collection programs.

Mark Motivans, Ph.D., wrote this report. Matthew R. Durose
verified the report. 

Georgette Walsh edited the report, Tina Dorsey produced the
report, and Jayne Robinson prepared the report for final
printing, under the supervision of Doris J. James.

-------------------------------------------------------------

Data prepared by the Urban Institute under BJS grant number
2005-BJ-CX-K004 were used for this report. Principal staff at
the Urban Institute were Laura Winterfield, William Adams,
Mark Coggeshall, Avi Bhati, Kamala Mallik Kane, and Barbara
Parthasarathy. 

This report was made possible through the cooperation of the
following federal agencies and their staff: The United States
Marshals Service (USMS), the Drug Enforcement Administration
(DEA), the Administrative Office of the United States Courts
(AOUSC), and the Executive Office for U.S. Attorneys (EOUSA).
The staff who provided expert advice about the source records
include: Joe Briggs and Chad Niebauer (USMS); James Tauber
(DEA); Pragati Patrick (AOUSC); and Christopher Jeffries and
Donna Kidd (EOUSA). 

September 2008, NCJ 220383

-------------------------------------------------------------

This report in portable document format and in ASCII and its
related statistical data and tables are available at the BJS
World Wide Web Internet site:
<http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/abstract/fjs05.htm>

-------------------------------------------------------------
Office of Justice Programs
Innovation   Partnerships   Safer Neighborhoods
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov
-------------------------------------------------------------

9/30/2008 /JER   


