U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Programs
Bureau of Justice Statistics

December 2011, NCJ 234184

Federal Justice Statistics, 2009

Mark Motivans, Ph.d., BJS Statistician

---------------------------------------------------
This file is text without graphics and many of the
tables. A Zip archive of the tables in this report in
spreadsheet format (.cvs) and the full report including
tables and graphs in .pdf format are available at:
http://www.bjs.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbdetail&iid=2208

This reports is one in series. More recent editions 
may be available. To view a list of all reports in the 
series go to http://www.bjs.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbse&sid=62
---------------------------------------------------

*************************************************

Highlights

* Arrests made by federal law enforcement comprised 1% of
arrests in the United States. 

* From 2000 to 2006, the rate of arrests made by federal law
enforcement increased at 8 times the rate of arrests by state
and local law enforcement.

* Five judicial districts along the U.S.-Mexico border
accounted for more than half (56%) of all federal arrests in
2009.

* In 2009, immigration was the most prevalent offense at
arrest and investigation.          

* About 2 in 3 (67%) immigrationoffenders were disposed by
U.S. magistrates and processed as petty misdemeanants in
2009.

* Cocaine was the most common drug type involved in arrests
by the Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA) in 2009.

* In 2009, marijuana was the most common drug in DEA matters
referred to U.S. attorneys in five Southwest border
districts.

* Felony convictions increased at a faster rate in federal
court than in state court from 2000 to 2006.The federal share
of U.S. felony convictions was 6% in 2006.

* Drug offenders' cases remained the most prevalent at
adjudication and sentencing, in prison, and under
supervision.

* Public defenders and appointed counsel handled the growth
in federal criminal cases. The number of defendants retaining
private counsel remained stable.

* In 2009, defendants charged with violent (87%), immigration
(95%), or drug trafficking (81%) offenses were more likely
than other defendants to be detained.

*************************************
During 2009, the number of suspects arrested for a federal
offense reached a record level of 183,986 suspects up from
140,200 in 2005. Since 1995, the number of suspects arrested
by federal law enforcement has more than doubled (figure 1). 

Stepped-up immigration enforcement along the U.S.-Mexico
border has had a significant influence on the nature and
outcomes of criminal cases handled in the federal justice
system. Between 2005 and 2009, immigration arrests increased
at an annual average rate of 23%. Immigration offenses (46%)
were the most common of all arrest offenses in 2009, followed
by drug (17%) and supervision (13%) violations. 

Among processing stages, arrest and investigation increased
at a faster rate than charging, conviction, and sentencing

Growth in federal law enforcement (arrest and investigation)
increased at a faster pace than later stages of the federal
justice process (charging, conviction, and sentencing). From
2005 to 2009, arrests increased at an annual average rate of
7.1%, and matters opened by U.S. attorneys (i.e.,
investigations) increased at an annual average rate of 8.3%.
In comparison, the number of suspects charged increased by
2.5% over this period, the number of defendants convicted
increased by 2.8%, and the number of offenders sentenced to
prison increased by 2.5%.

From 2005 to 2009, growth in the enforcement stage was due
largely to cases in which persons were arrested and charged
with illegally entering the United States. In federal courts
along the Southwest border, about two-thirds of arrests for
illegal entry were processed by U.S. magistrates. Generally,
first-time illegal entry defendants who agreed to plead
guilty to a petty misdemeanor charge were sentenced to 30
days or less of confinement, and they were removed from the
United States upon completion of the sentence.

In the federal justice system overall, 9 in 10 defendants
charged with a federal criminal offense were convicted in
2009, and about 8 in 10 of those convicted received an
imprisonment sentence. The average prison sentence imposed in
2009 was 57 months. Violent offenders received the longest
average prison sentences (113 months), followed by offenders
convicted for weapons (87 months) and drug (82 months)
offenses. About 1 in 10 convicted offenders received a
probation sentence.

At fiscal yearend 2009, nearly 400,000 offenders were under
some form of federal correctional supervision: 47% were
confined by the Federal Bureau of Prisons (BOP), 15% were
confined in pre-trial detention, 31% were on post-conviction
supervision in the community, and 7% were under pretrial
supervision in the community. 

Data in this report are from the Federal Justice Statistics
Program (FJSP), which serves as a uniform reference on the
annual activity, workloads, and outcomes associated with the
federal criminal justice system.

In 2009, the U.S. Marshals Service arrested and booked a
record 183,986 suspects for violations of federal law

During 2009, federal law enforcement agencies arrested
183,986 suspects for violations of federal law (table 1). In
2009, 46% of federal arrests were for immigration charges,
compared to 27% of all arrests in 2005. Another 17% of
arrests in 2009 were for drug offenses, 13% were for
supervision violations, and 9% were for property offenses.

Immigration offenses increased the most, with an annual
average increase of 23% from 2005 to 2009. Arrests for the
purpose of securing and safeguarding a material witness
decreased the most (6% average annual decline from 2005 to
2009).

The percentage of federal suspects arrested for drug offenses
declined from 24% of arrests in 2005 to 17% of arrests in
2009. Over the same period, supervision violations decreased
from 17% of arrests in 2005 to 13% in 2009, and weapons
violations declined from 7% of arrests in 2005 to 5% in 2009. 

Federal justice agencies' workloads changed as a result of
the increase in immigration enforcement

Agencies within the Department of Homeland Security (DHS)
have primary immigration enforcement responsibility. DHS
agencies referred 54% of all suspects to U.S. attorneys'
offices in 2009, up from the 35% referred in 2005. In
comparison, agencies with the Department of Justice (DOJ)
referred 30% of suspects in 2009, a decrease from the 43% of
referrals made in 2005.

More than half of all federal arrests occurred within five
judicial districts 

Five federal judicial districts along the U.S.-Mexico border
accounted for 56% of all federal arrests: Southern District
of California, District of Arizona, District of New Mexico,
and the Southern and Western Districts of Texas). In 2009,
these five districts accounted for 50% of suspects
investigated by U.S. attorneys, 34% of defendants in cases
filed in U.S. district court, 35% of defendants convicted,
and 37% of offenders sentenced to federal prison.

Drug Enforcement Administration  arrests increased 10% from
2008 to 2009

The Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA) arrested 29,896
suspects for drug offenses in 2009, a nearly 10% increase
from 27,235 arrests in 2008. 

Suspects arrested for offenses involving cocaine powder and
crack cocaine (11,361) accounted for 38% of all suspects
arrested by the DEA in 2009 (table 2). Twenty-eight percent
of suspects were arrested for offenses involving cocaine
powder (8,491), and 10% were arrested for crack cocaine
(2,870). Crack cocaine arrests declined by 12% from the 3,254
reported in 2008 (not shown in table). The remaining suspects
were arrested for marijuana (7,294), methamphetamine (4,701),
and for opiates (2,975).

Most suspects arrested by the DEA for drug violations were
male (86%). Three in 10 male suspects were arrested for
cocaine powder, followed by marijuana (25%) and
methamphetamine (15%) offenses. In 2009, females accounted
for 14% of all DEA drug arrests and 20% of all
methamphetamine arrests. About 2 in 10 (22%) females arrested
by the DEA for drug violations were arrested for
methamphetamine, followed by cocaine powder (21%) and
marijuana (20%) offenses.

Half of all suspects arrested by the DEA were age 31 or
younger. Hispanic suspects constituted 46% of arrestees,
followed by white and black suspects (26% each). Hispanic
suspects made up more than half of arrests for cocaine powder
(55%) and marijuana (52%) offenses and nearly half of arrests
involving opiates (49%). Three-quarters (75%) of crack
cocaine suspects were black, and less than half of all
methamphetamine suspects were white (41%).

Marijuana was the most common drug in DEA matters referred to
U.S. attorneys in five Southwest border districts in 2009

More than 1 in 5 (21% of 19,353) matters were referred to
U.S. attorneys by the DEA for prosecution in five federal
judicial districts along the U.S.-Mexico border or the
Southwest border. Marijuana (67%) accounted for the largest
percentage of these matters referred for prosecution from the
Southwest border districts, followed by cocaine (19%),
methamphetamine (9%), and other drug offenses (5%) (not shown
in table). 

In 2009, most of the matters concluded by U.S. attorneys
after DEA referral in the five Southwest border districts
were prosecuted by federal prosecutors (84%) or disposed by
U.S. magistrates (9%). The remaining 7% of matters were
declined (not shown in table).

*********************************************

Five judicial districts along U.S.-Mexico border accounted
for more than half of all federal arrests in 2009

Nearly 2,000 miles of the U.S.-Mexico border are within the
jurisdiction of five federal judicial districts: Southern and
Western Districts of Texas, Arizona, New Mexico, and the
Southern District of California (map 1). These five districts
held about 9% of the U.S. population and accounted for 56% of
all federal arrests in 2009. The Southern District of Texas
contains 3 of the top 40 fastest growing metropolitan areas
in the U.S. (Laredo, McAllen, and Brownsville). The Southern
and Western Districts of Texas comprise 64% of the length of
the U.S.-Mexico border.*[FOOTNOTE: See Undocumented
Immigrants in U.S.-Mexico Border Counties: The Costs of Law 
Enforcement and Criminal Justice Services
(2007) http://www.bordercounties.org.]

Federal immigration enforcement has impacted the five
Southwest border districts across each stage of the federal
justice process. Half of suspects in matters concluded by
federal prosecutors in 2009 were referred from these judicial
districts (figure 2). Arrests from the five districts
comprised more than half of all arrests nationwide and a
third or more of all federal defendants prosecuted,
convicted, and sentenced to prison in 2009. In these
districts, enforcement (arrest and investigation) outpaced
prosecution, adjudication, and sentencing. 

Between 1995 and 2009, a greater number of federal suspects
were arrested and booked in the five border districts than in
the remaining 89 non-Southwest border districts. Bookings
increased at an average annual rate of 12.5% from 1995 to
2009 in border districts and 1.9% in non-border districts
(not shown in table). By fiscal year 2007, the five border
districts together surpassed the rest of the United States in
the total number of suspects arrested for a federal offense
(figure 3). The number of arrests continued to increase from
2007 to 2009, while non-border districts remained at the same
level.

The rate at which arrests increased differed across the five
districts. From 2005 to 2009, suspects arrested and booked by
U.S. Marshals in the Southern District of Texas (22%) and the
District of Arizona (21%) increased at the fastest rates
among all districts. These were followed by the Southern
District of California (15%), the District of New Mexico
(14%), and the Western District of Texas (12%).

Increased criminal enforcement of immigration broadened the
type of offender charged 

Operation Streamline, a federal zero-tolerance prosecutorial
initiative, began in the Border Patrol's Del Rio Sector
(located in the Western District of Texas) in December 2005.
First-time offenders apprehended for crossing the border
illegally were charged with a federal criminal offense. In
the past, nonviolent immigration offenders were routed
through federal civil deportation proceedings in which a
removal might be ordered. Others were voluntarily returned
across the border. Under Operation Streamline, offenders
caught making their first illegal entry are charged with a
misdemeanor and face up to 6 months in prison before being
deported. The federal conviction counts toward the more
serious charge of illegal reentry if the offender attempts to
reenter the U.S. illegally (a felony punishable with up to 20
years in prison). The criminal conviction hinders the
offender's future prospects of obtaining legal status in the
United States. Versions of this approach have been expanded
and implemented in the District of Arizona (Tucson and Yuma),
the Southern District of Texas (Laredo, Brownsville, and
McAllen), and the District of New Mexico (Las Cruces). El
Paso in the Western District of Texas also has a
Streamline-type program.

Enforcement targeting illegal immigration increased court
workload

In 2009, about 2 in 3 (67%) immigration offenders were
disposed by U.S. magistrates as petty misdemeanants in the
five Southwest border districts. The remaining immigration
offenders were charged with a more serious felony or with a
Class A or B misdemeanor. From 2002 to 2009, petty
immigration misdemeanors disposed by U.S. magistrates
increased at an annual average of 21%, compared to 13% annual
average growth in immigration offenses filed in U.S. district
courts (figure 4).

The time from receipt of a matter to disposition by a U.S.
magistrate, prosecution in U.S. district court, or
declination of the matter was substantially shorter in the
five Southwest border districts than in non-border districts
(figure 5). About 42% of matters concluded in these five
districts in 2009 were concluded on the same day that the
matter was received, compared to 11% non-border districts.

***************************************************

The Department of Homeland Security accounted for 54% of all
referrals to U.S. attorneys in 2009

The Homeland Security Act of 2002 reorganized key federal law
enforcement agencies. This act transferred the U.S. Customs
Service and the Secret Service from the U.S. Department of
Treasury (Treasury) to the DHS. Responsibility for the
Immigration and Naturalization Service transferred from the
DOJ to DHS, and the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms, and
Explosives transferred from the Treasury to the DOJ.

DHS agencies accounted for 35% of all case referrals to U.S.
attorneys in 2005 (2 years following the reorganization of
federal law enforcement agencies under the Homeland Security
Act of 2002) and 54% of all referrals to U.S. attorneys in
2009 (table 3). Law enforcement agencies within the DOJ
referred 30% of suspects to U.S. attorneys in 2009, compared
to 43% of referrals in 2005 and 58% of referrals in 2000.
Suspects referred to U.S. attorneys by the Treasury decreased
to 1% of the total referrals in 2009, down from 2% of all
referrals in 2005 and 19% of referrals in 2000. Federal and
state task forces declined from 3% of matters in 2000 to 2%
of matters in 2009.

Immigration and drug charges constituted more than half of
all matters concluded by U.S. attorneys in 2009

Ninety-three U.S. attorneys offices serving the 94 federal
judicial districts concluded 193,234 matters in 2009 (table
4). Two out of three matters concluded by U.S. attorneys that
year involved either an immigration (46%) or drug (20%)
charge. The basis for investigation (or the lead charge) in
nearly half of all matters concluded in 2009 fell under 1 of
5 criminal statutes: illegal entry, illegal re-entry, drug
conspiracy, drug trafficking, and unlawful firearms (not
shown in table). Immigration matters referred surpassed drug
offenses in 2007 (figure 6). The number of immigration
matters concluded increased at an average annual rate of 31%
from 2005 to 2009. The share of property offenses, mostly
fraud cases, decreased from 18% of all matters in 2005 to 14%
in 2009. 

The share of drug offenses declined from 28% of matters
concluded in 2005 to 20% in 2009. Drug offenses declined by
an average annual 1.4% from 2005 to 2009. Weapons offenses
declined from 13,689 matters in 2005 to 11,749 in 2009 for an
average annual decline of 3.7% over this period.

Suspects in matters concluded in Southwest border districts
comprised 32% of matters concluded in 2005 and 50% of matters
concluded in 2009. The average annual growth rate from 2005
to 2009 was 25% for Southwest border districts and declined
1% for all other districts. Small districts (less than 1
million residents) declined by an average of 3% from 2005 to
2009, while medium districts (1 to 5 million residents)
increased by 4% and large districts (over 5 million
residents) increased by 12%.

Less than half of federal matters concluded in 2009 were
prosecuted in U.S. district courts

In 2009, 48% of the 193,234 suspects in matters concluded
were prosecuted by U.S. attorneys (table 5).  About 37% of
all matters were disposed by U.S. magistrates, and 15% were
declined for prosecution in 2009. U.S. magistrates disposed
two-thirds of all immigration matters in 2009. In the five
Southwest U.S. border districts, 3% of matters were declined,
while 28% of matters were declined in other districts.
Declinations were greater in small districts (24% of cases),
compared to medium (17%) and large districts (14%).

Drug and weapons suspects were the most likely to be
prosecuted in 2009

Suspects charged with drug (77%) or weapons (69%) offenses
had the highest prosecution rates in 2009, followed by those
charged with violent (58%), property (50%), and public-order
(43%) offenses. Suspects involved in public-order regulatory
offenses were most likely to be declined for prosecution
(50%). In 2009, U.S. attorneys declined to file charges for
the following case-related reasons: weak evidence that did
not support prosecution (27%), the matter was referred to or
handled by another authority for prosecution (21%), criminal
intent was not established, or the offense was not deemed to
be a federal offense (21%). Matters settled through pretrial
diversion and civil or administrative alternatives accounted
for about 4% of all matters declined for prosecution in 2009
(not shown in table). 

The median time from the receipt of a matter by a U.S.
attorney's office to a decision to prosecute, decline, or
dispose by magistrate was 18 days in 2009. The time from
receipt of the matter to a decision took longer for matters
declined (median of 453 days) than for prosecutions (median
of 24 days) or matters disposed by a U.S. magistrate (half
were disposed on the same day).

**************************************************
The use of public defenders and appointed counsel increased
with the growth in the federal criminal caseload from 2002 to
2009 

The Criminal Justice Act (CJA) was enacted in 1964 (Title 18
U.S.C. 3006A) and requires that attorneys be appointed to
represent defendants unable to pay for their own counsel. The
Administrative Office of the U.S. Courts provides for two
types of counsel for federal indigent defendants: federal
public defenders and panels of private attorneys (referred to
as panel-appointed attorneys) who accept appointments to
represent eligible defendants for reimbursement from the
government.

Almost all (96%) of the more than 95,000 defendants in cases
concluded in 2009 had some type of counsel. Public defenders
represented 40% of defendants (up from 22% in 1995),
panel-appointed attorneys represented 36% (up from 32% in
1995), and private attorneys represented 21% of defendants
(down from 37% in 1995). The remaining defendants (4%) waived
representation or were self-represented in cases that were
mostly misdemeanors.

From 1995 to 2009, the use of public defenders increased at
an annual average rate of 7.4%, and the use of CJA-assigned
attorneys increased at an annual average rate of 4.1%. Use of
private attorneys decreased by 0.6%, and defendants waiving
counsel or representing themselves decreased by 2.2% (figure
7).

Growth in immigration cases increased public defender and
panel-appointed attorney caseloads
In 2009, immigration offenses made up the largest share of
cases terminated with a public defender (49%), followed by
drug offenses (18%). Drug offenses accounted for the largest
share of cases terminated with a CJA (44%) or private
attorney (42%) in 2009 (table 6).

In 2009, about 43% of cases terminated with a public defender
were in five federal judicial districts along the U.S.-Mexico
border: Southern California, Arizona, New Mexico, and Western
and Southern Texas. About 35% of cases terminated with a CJA
attorney and about 18% of cases terminated with a private
attorney were in these five Southwest border districts.

Cases handled by public defenders were disposed relatively
quicker with conviction rates similar to those with other
counsel

The median case processing time (from case filing to
disposition) was 8 months for cases terminated with a CJA
attorney, 8 months with private counsel, and 7 months for
cases terminated with a public defender (table 7). After
adjusting for offense type, conviction rates were similar
across all types of counsel in 2009; 94% of cases terminated
with a CJA attorney ended in a conviction, as did cases
terminated with a private attorney and cases terminated with
a public defender. The percentage of terminated cases heard
by a jury in 2009 was slightly less for cases represented by
a public defender (2%) than for cases represented by a
private or CJA attorney (4% each).

About 80% of defendants represented by a CJA attorney or by a
public defender received a prison sentence

Defendants represented by a CJA attorney (80%) or by a public
defender were more likely to receive a prison sentence (79%),
compared to 73% of defendants represented by a private
attorney. Among defendants sentenced to prison in 2009, the
mean prison term was shorter for defendants represented by a
public defender (52 months) than for defendants represented
by CJA attorneys (62 months) or private attorneys (59
months). Although sentence lengths were adjusted for type of
offense, differences in sentence length may have been due to
criminal history, offense severity, and other factors. 
**********************************************
          
Most defendants were detained prior to case disposition

In 2009, more than 3 in 4 defendants (77%) in cases
terminated had been detained by the court prior to case
disposition (table 8). A federal judge or U.S. magistrate
determines whether the defendant will be released or detained
pending case disposition at several stages, including the
defendant's initial court appearance or detention hearing.
The Bail Reform Act of 1984 requires the court to weigh risk
of flight, threat of crime commission, and presumption of
innocence in deciding whether to order detention or release
of a defendant.

Immigration defendants were most likely to be detained prior
to case disposition

The defendants most likely to be detained for some period of
time were those charged with offenses involving immigration
(95%), violent crime (87%), weapons (82%), and drugs (81%).
Immigration defendants comprised 35% of all defendants in
cases terminated in 2009 and 43% of all defendants detained
prior to case disposition. Property and public-order
defendants were less likely than other defendants to be
detained. During 2009, 40% of defendants charged with
property offenses and 48% of defendants charged with public
order offenses were detained.

The likelihood of being detained prior to case disposition
increased with the number of prior convictions in the
defendant's criminal history

About 89% of defendants with five or more prior convictions
were detained, compared to 85% of defendants with two to four
prior convictions and 78% with one prior conviction.
Defendants with no prior convictions were the least likely to
be detained (64%). 

The likelihood of being detained also increased with the
severity of the defendant's criminal history. About 90% of
defendants with a prior violent felony conviction were
detained by the court, compared to defendants with prior
nonviolent felony (87%) or misdemeanor (75%) convictions.
Defendants with one or more prior failures to appear in court
were also more likely to be detained by the court prior to
case disposition.

88% of defendants charged in Southwest border districts were
detained in 2009

About 9 in 10 defendants charged in the five districts
adjacent to the U.S.-Mexico border were detained by federal
courts prior to case disposition. Nearly all defendants in
the district of New Mexico (99%), Southern District of Texas
(97%), and District of Arizona (96%) were detained (map 2).
In comparison, about 7 in 10 defendants in non-Southwest
border courts were detained. Defendants in large districts
were more likely to be detained (80%) than defendants in
medium (73%) or small districts (74%).

91% of all defendants were convicted in 2009; 97% of
immigration defendants were convicted

Of the 95,891 defendants adjudicated in 2009, 91% were
convicted (table 9). Almost all immigration violation
defendants (97%) in 2009 were convicted, as were most
defendants with weapons (92%) and drug (92%) violations. In
2009, most adjudicated defendants were convicted following
either a guilty plea (88%) or by bench or jury trial (3%). In
2009, about 1 in 10 (9%) adjudicated defendants were
dismissed, and less than 1% were acquitted. Violent offenses
(9%) and regulatory offenses (8%) had the highest percentage
of trials. Misdemeanants had the highest percentage of
dismissals (27%).

In 2009, defendants adjudicated in the Southwest U.S. border
districts had a higher conviction rate (96%) than defendants
in districts not located on a border (88%). After adjusting
for offense type differences, conviction rates were similar
between large, medium, and small districts.

In 2009, the median time from case filing to disposition was
6.5 months. Dismissals and guilty pleas took less time to
process than trials.

Ninety-seven percent of convictions in U.S. district court in
2009 were the result of guilty pleas, compared to 96% in 2005
(table 10). The number of defendants pleading guilty
increased by 3% from 2005 to 2009. The number of cases
concluded by a bench or jury trial decreased from 3,930 in
2005 to 3,140 in 2009.

78% of convicted defendants were sentenced to prison in 2009

More than three-quarters (78%) of defendants convicted in
2009 were sentenced to prison, similar to 2005 (79%) (table
11). In 2009, defendants convicted of weapons (92%), violent
crime (94%), and drug (91%) offenses were most likely to
receive a prison sentence. Defendants convicted of regulatory
public order offenses (48%) and other property offenses (50%)
were least likely to receive a prison sentence. Defendants
convicted in one of the five Southwest border districts (84%)
were more likely to receive a prison sentence than defendants
in all other districts (75%). After adjusting for offense
type, the likelihood of a prison sentence in 2009 was greater
for medium (78%) and large (78%) districts than for small
(70%) districts.

The average prison term imposed in 2009 was 57 months, down
from 61 months in 2005

Prison sentences for drug offenses were an average of 82
months in 2009, compared to 113 months for violent offenses
and 87 months for weapons offenses. In 2009, 11% of
defendants were sentenced to probation, down from 13% in
2005. Three percent of defendants were ordered only to pay a
fine in 2009.

The number of offenders sentenced to prison increased from
61,151 in 2005 to 67,499 in 2009, and the average prison term
imposed decreased from 61 months in 2005 to 57 months in
2009.

Between 2005 and 2009, the average prison sentence increased
most for violent offenders (from 96 months to 113 months),
public order offenders (from 50 months to 65 months), and
regulatory offenders (from 31 months to 37 months). During
those years, the average prison sentence decreased for
immigration offenders (from 25 months to 21 months) and
remained about the same for drug offenders (from 83 months to
82 months).

The average prison sentence in Southwest border districts
declined from 35 months in 2005 to 28 months in 2009. All
other 89 federal judicial districts imposed a similar average
prison term between the two time periods (75 months in 2009
and 74 months in 2005).

After adjusting for offense type, defendants sentenced in
2009 to prison in small districts received a sentence that
was slightly less (56 months), on average, than the 57-month
sentence imposed in medium districts and the 58-month
sentence imposed in large districts. 

The decline in average prison terms imposed from 2005 to 2009
were similar among small and medium districts (declining by 4
to 5 months, on average) and somewhat less in large districts
(declining by 2 months, on average). 

In 2009, 11% of federal defendants were sentenced to
probation

In 2009, about 11% of convicted defendants (9,401 out of
86,975) were sentenced to a term of probation only. This is
an annual average decline of 2% from 2005. 

Suspended sentences comprised 8% of sentences imposed in 2009
(6,626 defendants). This percentage was up from the 5% of
sentences imposed in 2005. Suspended sentences increased at
an annual average rate of 18% from 2005 to 2009.

At the end of fiscal year 2009, a total of 123,371 offenders
were under active federal post-conviction supervision

Eighty-two percent of offenders under federal post-conviction
superision received one of two forms of supervision following
release from prison: supervised release (98,465) or parole
(2,158) (table 12). The remainder (22,748) were on probation
supervision, which a judge sentences an offender to serve
instead of a prison sentence.

Among the 123,371 offenders under federal supervision, 81%
were male and 19% were female. Females comprised 36% of
offenders on probation and 3% of offenders on parole
supervision. White offenders comprised the largest share on
supervision (38%), followed by black (36%) and Hispanic (21%)
offenders. Black offenders comprised 38% of offenders on
supervised release, and white offenders made up nearly half
of offenders on probation. The median age was 39 years of age
for offenders on supervised release. 

Relatively few non-U.S. citizen offenders (4%) were under
federal post-conviction supervised release in the community

In 2009, 4% of offenders under federal suspervision were
non-U.S. citizens. Among offenders on probation, 6% were
non-U.S. citizens. Fifteen percent of offenders under federal
supervision in the community (18,595) were in the five
Southwest border districts in 2009. Large districts had a
greater share of offenders on supervised release and
probation. Small districts had a greater share of offenders
on parole than larger districts. 

About a fifth of the growth in the population under federal
community supervision occurred in the Southwest border
districts

Between 2000 and 2009, the number of persons on federal
supervision in the community increased by 23,162 persons, and
21% of this increase was in the five Southwest border
districts (map 3). The Western District of Texas comprised
the largest share of this increase (9.3%), followed by the
Southern District of Texas (6.3%), the Southern District of
California (0.6%), the District of Arizona (3.5%), and the
District of New Mexico (1.6%). Among non-border districts,
the Eastern District of Virginia and the Eastern District of
Missouri each comprised 4% of the increase in offenders on
federal supervision in the community from 2000 to 2009.     

Most federal prisoners in 2009 were imprisoned for a drug
offense

Drug offenses were the most prevalent offense of federal
prison inmates in 2009 (figure 8), although they declined
slightly from 57% of the prison population in 2000 to 53% in
2009. Weapons offenders increased from 8% of the prison
population in 2000 to 15% in 2009. The share of violent
offenders decreased from 10% in 2000 to 7% in 2009.
Immigration offenders comprised 12% of the prison population
in 2009, up slightly from 11% in 2000.
     
Blacks comprised 37% of inmates in 2009, followed by
Hispanics (33%), whites (28%), American Indians (2%) and
Asians (2%) (table 13). The Hispanic share of the prison
population increased from 31% in 2000 to 33% in 2009, and the
share of American Indians in the prison population increased
from 1.6% in 2000 to 1.8% in 2009. The share of U.S. citizens
in custody of the Federal Bureau of Prisons increased from
72% of all inmates in 2000 to 74% of inmates in 2009.

The median age of prisoners was 37 years in 2009, compared to
35 years in 2000

With the exception of offenders in the 18 to 20 year-old
group in the Federal Bureau of Prisons, the average annual
growth rate between 2000 and 2009 increased with the age
group of the prisoner. The average annual growth rate for
prisoners 55 years and older increased by 7% and nearly
doubled in number--from 8,221 in 2000 to 15,323 in 2009 (not
shown in table).

About 393,810 persons were under some form of federal
supervision on September 30, 2009

Of the almost 400,000 offenders under some form of federal
supervision at fiscal yearend 2009, 3 in 5 offenders
(244,480) were in secure confinement (figure 9).  Seventy-six
percent of persons in secure confinement were serving a
prison term following a conviction, and 24% of persons in
secure confinement were awaiting case disposition (not shown
in table). Of the 2 in 5 persons under federal supervision in
the community, most (83%) were under post conviction
supervision, having served a prison sentence (e.g.,
supervised release and parole) or were serving a sentence to
probation. A smaller share (17%) were under supervised
released pending the outcome of their case (pretrial
release).

Federal law enforcement handled a fraction of the nation's
arrests

One out of every 100 arrests was made by federal law
enforcement agencies. Felony convictions in federal court
comprised 6% of the nation's felony convictions in 2000 and
2006 (table 14). Felony convictions in federal court
increased at a greater rate (9% per year) than felony
convictions in state court (7% per year) from 2000 to 2006.
In 2006, federal courts handled 19% of all state and federal
felony weapons convictions, a slight decrease from 20% in
2004. 

Federal courts sentenced 7% of the nation's convicted felons
to incarceration in 2006. In 2006, federal courts convicted
19% of all state and federal weapons felons. This represented
an increase from 9% of weapons felons convicted in federal
courts in 1994 (figure 10).

Felons convicted in federal court (86%) in 2006 were more
likely to receive a prison sentence than felons convicted in
state courts (69%) (not shown in table). On average, felons
received a longer prison sentence from a federal court (65
months) than those convicted in state court (38 months). 

Almost half of appeals terminated in 2009 were related to
drug offense convictions

Almost 14,000 appeals were terminated during 2009.
Forty-seven percent of those terminated were appealing
convictions for drug offenses. The next most common types of
cases with appeals terminated in 2009 were for weapons (15%),
property (13%), immigration (11%), and public order (9%)
offenses (table 15).

The greatest annual increases in appeals terminated from 2000
to 2009 were for weapons and immigration offenses (8%). The
number of appeals terminated declined over this same period
for public order regulatory (down 0.7%) and property (down
0.1%) offenses.

Southwest border districts comprised 15% of appeals
terminated in 2009

The five Southwest border districts made up about 15% of
appeals terminated in 2009, up slightly from 14% in 2000. The
rate of increase in appeals terminated from 2000 to 2009 was
similar (between 3 and 4%) across districts of differing
population size.

Methodology

This report uses data from the Bureau of Justice Statistics'
(BJS) Federal Justice Statistics Program (FJSP), including
source files from the U.S. Marshals Service (federal arrests
and bookings); the Drug Enforcement Administration (drug
arrests); the Executive Office for the U.S. Attorneys
(investigations/prosecutions/declinations); the
Administrative Office of the U.S. Courts (criminal filings
and case disposition, including sentencing); and the Federal
Bureau of Prisons (persons confined in federal prison). The
U.S. Office of Probation and Pretrial Services is a part of
the Administrative Office of the U.S. Courts. That office
provides data on pretrial and federal supervision in the
community, including probation and parole supervision. 

The data received from participating agencies are
standardized by applying unified offense and case disposition
categories across agencies and a common unit of analysis,
where possible. The reporting period is based on the fiscal
year, October 1 to September 30.

For suspects in matters investigated and concluded by U.S.
attorneys, the lead charge is the basis for investigation. In
cases terminated in U.S. district court, the most serious
terminating offense is the offense charge that yields the
maximum statutory penalty. In criminal appeals terminated,
offenses represent the statutory offense charged against the
defendant in the appeal.

District size was derived by aggregating the U.S. Census
Bureau's County Population Estimate 2009 file to the judicial
district level. (See http://www.census.
gov/popest/estimates.html for more information.) Each of the
94 federal districts was classified into large (23 districts
with over 5 million residents), medium (54 districts with
between 1 and 5 million residents), or small (17 districts
with less than 1 million residents) categories, based on the
district's U.S. resident population in 2009. The median
number of authorized judgeships and the median number of
federal prosecutors in 2009 coincides with the district size
classification as shown in table 16.

The average annual growth rate over a period is the sum of
the year-to-year percent change divided by the number of
years in the period.

The estimated number of state and local arrests is reported
on a calendar year basis in the FBI's Crime in the United
States. State felony rates of conviction and imprisonment and
the average prison sentence were computed using data from
BJS's National Judicial Reporting Program (NJRP). The NJRP
collects data every 2 years on felony convictions in a
nationally representative stratified clustered sample of
state courts from 300 counties. (See
http://www.icpsr.umich.edu/NACJD. htm.) NJRP data are
reported on a calendar year basis.

Direct standardization is used to adjust for differences in
offense composition when comparing categorical outcomes by
district population groups (small, medium, and large) and
type of counsel (assigned counsel, private, and public
defender). The adjusted percentages holds offense composition
constant to improve comparability. The formula to compute
offense-adjusted percentages using direct standardization is: 

Where Pi is the offense specific percentage for an outcome
(e.g., prosecution) for offense type i and Wi (or the weight)
is the proportion of the standard population for offense type
i. Six offense types are used for tables 5 and 8 (violent,
property, drug, public order, weapons, and immigration).
Seven offense types are used for tables 7, 9, and 11 (violent
felony, property felony, drug felony, public order felony,
weapons felony, immigration felony, and misdemeanor). Means
for length of prison sentence imposed (tables 7 and 11) are
adjusted using linear regression with offense types entered
as covariates. Medians for length of case processing time by
type of counsel (table 7) are adjusted using quantile
regression with offense types entered as covariates. This
specifies median case processing time by type of counsel
adjusting for offense composition.

Detailed data tables are available in Federal Justice
Statistics, 2009   Statistical Tables, NCJ 233464. Also,
visit the Federal Criminal Case Processing Statistics query
tool. Both are available at www.bjs.gov.          


********************************************

Office of Justice Programs * Innovation * Partnerships *
Safer Neighborhoods * http://www.ojp.gov

The Bureau of Justice Statistics is the statistical agency of
the U.S. Department ofJustice. James P. Lynch is the
director.

This report was written by Mark Motivans. Ron Malega provided
statistical reviewand verification of the report.

Vanessa Curto, Jill Thomas, and Catherine Bird edited the
report, Barbara Quinn produced the report, and Jayne E.
Robinson prepared the report for final printing under the
supervision of Doris J. James.

December 2011, NCJ 234184

The full text of each report is available in PDF and ASCII
formats on the BJS website at www.bjs.gov. Tables are also
available in PDF and CSV formats. Related datasets
are made available on the National Archive of Criminal
Justice Data website at  http://
www.icpsr.umich.edu/icpsrweb/NACJD/index.jsp.

**********************************************

12/15/2011/JER/ 10:39am






