This file is text only without graphics and many of 
the tables. A Zip archive of the tables in this report 
in spreadsheet format (.csv) and the full report 
including tables and graphics in .pdf format are 
available on BJS website 
at: http://www.bjs.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbdetail&iid=5196

This reports is one in series. More recent editions 
may be available. To view a list of all reports in the 
series go to http://www.bjs.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbse&sid=62
------------------------------------------------------

*******************
Statistical Tables
*******************

Federal Justice Statistics, 2011- Statistical Tables

Mark Motivans, Ph.D., BJS Statistician

This report describes criminal case processing in the federal justice 
system, including arrest and booking through sentencing and corrections. 
These statistical tables present the number of suspects arrested and booked 
by the U.S. Marshals Service (USMS), suspects in matters investigated and 
prosecuted by U.S. attorneys, defendants adjudicated and sentenced in U.S. 
district court, and characteristics of federal prisoners and offenders under 
federal supervision. 

Data are from the Bureau of Justice Statistics’ (BJS) Federal Justice 
Statistics Program (FJSP), which collects comprehensive information 
describing suspects and defendants processed in the federal criminal justice 
system and annual data on workload, activities, and outcomes associated with 
federal criminal cases. The data presented in these tables were collected 
from the U.S. Marshals Service, Drug Enforcement Administration, Executive 
Office for U.S. Attorneys, Administrative Office of the U.S. Courts, U.S. 
Sentencing Commission, and the Federal Bureau of Prisons. 

***************************************
Organization of the statistical tables
***************************************

Each section describes a major stage in the processing of criminal suspects 
and defendants:

Section 1 describes federal law enforcement and prosecution. This includes 
arrests made by federal law enforcement agencies for violations of federal 
law, including the characteristics of arrestees. It also describes suspects 
investigated by U.S. attorneys and decisions made by federal prosecutors in 
screening criminal matters and the type of offense for which suspects were 
prosecuted or declined for prosecution. (Data on warrants initiated and 
cleared by the USMS are forthcoming.)

Section 2 describes federal pretrial, adjudication, sentencing, and appeals. 
This includes pretrial release and detention practices of the federal 
judiciary system, including the characteristics of defendants detained or 
released pending trial. It also describes actions taken by the federal 
judiciary in adjudicating defendants in cases filed by the U.S. attorneys 
and the sentences imposed by the federal judiciary on convicted defendants. 
This section includes a description of appeals of criminal convictions and 
sentences imposed in the federal courts, including the original offense 
charged.

Section 3 describes offenders under federal correctional supervision—
probation, parole, and supervised release—including the outcome of the 
supervision (either the offender completed the term of supervision or was 
returned to prison or jail for violating the conditions of supervision). It 
also describes offenders imprisoned in federal prisons, including the 
offense at commitment and demographic characteristics of the offender.

The Methodology section describes how the data were analyzed and the tables 
were developed.

Additional Information about the Data provides a chart of the federal 
agencies that provided the data and lists the data source for each 
statistical table.

The Glossary contains definitions for terms used in the tables. Many terms 
used in the text and tables have specialized meanings, either because they 
refer to federal law or because of reporting procedures by the federal 
agencies supplying the data. Readers are encouraged to check the glossary 
for exact definitions of tabulated data.

****************************************************
Section 1: Federal Law Enforcement and Prosecution
****************************************************

Federal Arrests
******************

Table 1.1. Suspects arrested for federal offenses and booked by U.S. 
Marshals Service, by offense, October 1, 2010–September 30, 2011

Table 1.2. Suspects arrested for federal offenses and booked by U.S. 
Marshals Service, by arresting agency, October 1, 2010–September 30, 2011

Table 1.3. Characteristics of federal arrestees booked by U.S. Marshals 
Service, October 1, 2010–September 30, 2011

Table 1.4. Characteristics of suspects arrested by Drug Enforcement 
Administration agents, by type of drug, October 1, 2010–September 30, 2011

Map 1.1. Suspects arrested for a drug offense, by federal judicial district 
of arrest, October 1, 2010–September 30, 2011

Table 1.5. Warrants cleared and median days from initiation to clearance, by 
warrant type, October 1, 2010–September 30, 2011 

Table 1.6. Median days from warrant initiation to clearance, by warrant 
characteristics, October 1, 2010–September 30, 2011

*****************************************
Federal Investigations and Prosecutions
*****************************************


Table 2.1. Suspects in matters received by U.S. attorneys, by offense, 
October 1, 2010–September 30, 2011

Map 2.1. Suspects in drug matters referred to U.S. attorneys by the Drug 
Enforcement Administration, by federal judicial district, October 1, 2010–
September 30, 2011

Table 2.2. Disposition of suspects in matters concluded, by offense, October 
1, 2010–September 30, 2011

Table 2.3. Reasons U.S. attorneys declined to prosecute suspects in criminal 
matters, October 1, 2010–September 30, 2011

****************************************************
Section 2: Federal Pretrial, Adjudication, Sentencing, and Appeals
****************************************************

Federal Pretrial
******************

Table 3.1 Defendants released at initial hearing or detention hearing, by 
offense, October 1, 2010–September 30, 2011

Table 3.2 Defendants released at any time prior to case disposition, by 
offense, October 1, 2010–Sepember 30, 2011

Map 3.1. Drug defendants with a prior felony conviction at case disposition, 
by federal judicial district, October 1, 2010–September 30, 2011

Table 3.3. Behavior of federal defendants released to the community pending 
trial, by offense, October 1, 2010–September 30, 2011

Federal Case Filings and Adjudication
**************************************

Table 4.1. Defendants in criminal cases commenced, by offense, October 1, 
2010–September 30, 2011

Table 4.2. Disposition of criminal cases terminated, by offense, October 1, 
2010–September 30, 2011

Map 4.1. Adjudicated defendants receiving a bench or trial jury, by federal 
judicial district, October 1, 2010–September 30, 2011

Table 4.3. Criminal cases disposed by U.S. magistrates, October 1, 2010–
September 30, 2011

Table 4.4. Characteristics of convicted offenders, October 1, 2010–September 
30, 2011

Federal Sentencing
*********************


Table 5.1. Offenders sentenced in criminal cases terminated, by offense, 
October 1, 2010–September 30, 2011

Table 5.2. Type and length of federal sentences imposed, by offense, October 
1, 2010–September 30, 2011

Table 5.3. Convicted offenders sentenced to incarceration, by offender 
characteristics, October 1, 2010–September 30, 2011

Table 5.4. Average incarceration sentence lengths, by offense and offender 
characteristics, October 1, 2010–September 30, 2011

Map 5.1. Convicted drug defendants receiving a nonprison sentence, by 
federal judicial district, October 1, 2010–September 30, 2011

Federal Appeals
****************

Table 6.1. Criminal appeals terminated, by type of criminal case and 
offense, October 1, 2010–September 30, 2011 

Table 6.2. Disposition of criminal appeals terminated, by offense, October 
1, 2010–September 30, 2011

Table 6.3. Criminal appeals cases terminated on the merits, by offense, 
October 1, 2010–September 30, 2011

****************************************************
Section 3: Federal Corrections and Supervision
****************************************************

Federal Supervision, Probation, and Parole
********************************************

Table 7.1. Offenders under federal supervision, by offense, September 30, 
2011

Map 7.1. Percent of total drug offenders in the Federal Bureau of Prisons on 
September 30, 2011, by federal judicial district of commitment

Table 7.2. Characteristics of offenders under federal supervision, September 
30, 2011

Table 7.3. Outcomes of offenders terminating probation supervision, by 
offense, October 1, 2010–September 30, 2011

Table 7.4. Outcomes of offenders terminating probation supervision, by 
offender characteristics, October 1, 2010–September 30, 2011

Table 7.5. Outcomes of offenders terminating supervised release, by offense, 
October 1, 2010–September 30, 2011

Table 7.6. Outcomes of offenders terminating supervised release, by offender 
characteristics, October 1, 2010–September 30, 2011

Table 7.7. Outcomes of offenders terminating parole, by offense, October 1, 
2010–September 30, 2011

Table 7.8. Outcomes of offenders terminating parole, by offender 
characteristics, October 1, 2010–September 30, 2011

Federal Imprisonment
*********************

Table 7.9. Admissions and releases of federal prisoners, by offense, October 
1, 2010–September 30, 2011

Table 7.10. Characteristics of offenders in the federal prison population, 
September 30, 2011

Table 7.11. Average time to first release and percent of sentence served, 
for federal prisoners released by standard methods, October 1, 2010–
September 30, 2011

Table 7.12. Characteristics of offenders first released from prison, all 
releases, by offense, October 1, 2010–September 30, 2011

************************************************************
The tables are part of the Federal Justice Statistics series. 
For a list of all in this series, see the publications page. 
Additional information is available in the Federal Justice 
Statistics, 2011–12 bulletin.
************************************************************

Source: Federal Justice Statistics Program.

*************
Methodology
**************

Data sources
**************

The Bureau of Justice Statistics’ (BJS) Federal Justice Statistics Program 
(FJSP) database is the data source for this report. The FJSP is presently 
constructed from source files provided by the U.S. Marshals Service, Drug 
Enforcement Administration, Executive Office for U.S. Attorneys, 
Administrative Office of the U.S. Courts (AOUSC), United States Sentencing 
Commission, and Federal Bureau of Prisons. In addition to providing data 
describing defendants in cases processed by the federal judiciary, the AOUSC 
provides data describing defendants processed by the federal pretrial 
services agencies and the federal probation and supervision service. Federal 
law prohibits the use of these files for any purposes other than research or 
statistics. A description of the source agency data files is provided in the 
table in Additional Information about the Data.

Reporting period
*****************

Wherever possible, matters or cases have been selected according to the 
event which occurred during fiscal year 2010 (October 1, 2009, through 
September 30, 2010). Files, which are organized by their source agencies 
according to fiscal year, nonetheless include some pertinent records in 
later years’ files. Tabulations of suspects in matters concluded during 
fiscal year 2010 have been assembled from source files containing records of 
2010 matters concluded, which were entered into the data system during 
fiscal years 2009 or 2010. 

The availability of particular items of information is affected by the data 
source. Data on prosecutors’ decisions prior to court filing are provided 
for cases investigated by U.S. attorneys, but not for those handled by other 
litigating divisions of the U.S. Department of Justice (DOJ). In comparison, 
cases handled by the DOJ criminal division enter the database once they are 
filed in U.S. district court.

Table construction and interpretation
**************************************

The tables report events that occurred during fiscal year 2010. Generally 
the tables include both individual and organizational defendants. 
Organizational defendants are not included in tables describing defendants 
sentenced to incarceration, and offenders under post-conviction supervision. 
Juvenile offenders who are charged as adults are included in the reported 
statistics.

Unit of analysis
*****************

In federal law enforcement and prosecution (section 1) and federal pretrial, 
adjudication, sentencing, and appeals (section 2), the unit of analysis is a 
combination of a person (or corporation) and a matter or case. If the same 
person is involved in three different criminal cases during the period 
specified in the table, then the person is counted three times in the 
tabulation. A single criminal case involving a corporate defendant and four 
individual defendants is counted five times in the tabulation. In section 3 
on federal corrections and supervision, the unit of analysis is a person 
entering custody or supervision, a person leaving custody or supervision, or 
a person in custody or supervision at yearend. A person who terminated 
probation twice in the indicated period is counted as two terminations of 
probation. For instance, probation might be terminated because of a 
violation, reinstated, and then terminated again for another violation.

Interpretation
****************

The tables are constructed to permit the user to make valid comparisons of 
numbers within each table, and to compare percentage rates across tables. 
The total numbers of subjects in the tables that are based on records linked 
between two files are generally less than the total number of records in 
either source file. Comparisons of absolute numbers across two or more of 
these tables and other data sources are not necessarily valid.

**************************
Offense classifications
**************************

Procedure
************
The offense classification procedure used in this publication is based on 
the system followed by the AOUSC. Specific offenses are combined to form the 
BJS categories shown in this report.

Offense categories for federal arrestees are based on the FBI’s National 
Crime Information Center (NCIC) offense classifications, which are converted 
into U.S. Marshals’ four-digit offense codes, and are aggregated into the 
offense categories shown in the tables. These categories are similar, but 
may not be directly comparable to the BJS offense categories used in other 
tables for 2010. For data from the Executive Office for U.S. Attorneys, 
which include United States Code citations but do not include the AOUSC 
offense classifications, United States Code titles and sections are 
translated into the AOUSC classification system and then aggregated into the 
offense categories used in the tables. 

Distinction between felonies and misdemeanors
***********************************************

Distinctions between felony and misdemeanor offenses are provided where 
possible. Felony offenses are those with a maximum penalty of more than 1 
year in prison. Misdemeanor offenses are those with a maximum penalty of up 
to 1 year. Felonies and misdemeanors are further classified using the 
maximum term of imprisonment authorized. Section 3559, U.S. Code, Title 18, 
classifies offenses according to the following schedule:

Felonies
***********

* Class A felony—life imprisonment, or if the maximum penalty is death.

* Class B felony—25 years or more.

* Class C felony—less than 25 years but more than 10 years.

* Class D felony—less than 10 years but more than 5 years.

* Class E felony—less than 5 years but more than 1 year.

Misdemeanors
**************

* Class A misdemeanor—1 year or less but more than 
6 months.

* Class B misdemeanor—6 months or less but more than 30 days.

* Class C misdemeanor—30 days or less but more than 5 days.

* Infraction--5 days or less, or if no imprisonment is authorized.

Felony and misdemeanor distinctions are provided where the data permit these 
distinctions. Arrest and prosecution tables do not use this distinction 
because many suspects cannot be so classified at the arrest and 
investigation stages in the criminal justice process. This distinction is 
not made for pretrial release or detention because the Pretrial Services 
Agency no longer gathers this information. Adjudication and sentencing 
tables distinguish between felony and misdemeanor offenses, as do 
supervision tables.

Most serious offense selection
*********************************

Where more than one offense is charged or adjudicated, the most serious 
offense (the one that may or did result in the most severe sentence) is used 
to classify offenses. The offense description may change during the criminal 
justice process. Tables indicate whether investigated, charged, or 
adjudicated offenses are used. In the prosecution tables, the most serious 
offense is based on the criminal lead charge as determined by the assistant 
U.S. attorney responsible for the criminal proceeding. In pretrial tables, 
the major charged offense is based on the AOUSC’s offense severity 
classification system, as determined by the pretrial officer responsible for 
the case. To select this offense, the officer ranks offenses according to 
severity based on maximum imprisonment, type of crime, and maximum fines. In 
adjudication tables, the most serious offense charged is the one that has 
the most severe potential sentence. For sentencing tables, conviction 
offenses are based on statutory maximum penalties. In appeals tables, the 
offenses are classified by the offense of conviction. In the supervision 
tables, the most serious offense of conviction is either the one having the 
longest sentence imposed or, if equal sentences were imposed or there was no 
imprisonment, the offense carrying the highest severity code as determined 
by the AOUSC’s offense severity code ranking.
 
Offense categories
********************

For offense categories in all text tables, the following conditions apply:

* Murder includes nonnegligent manslaughter.

* Sexual abuse includes only violent sex offenses.

* Fraud excludes tax fraud.

* Larceny excludes transportation of stolen property.

* Other property felonies excludes fraudulent property offenses and includes 
destruction of property and trespass.

* Tax law violations includes tax fraud.

* Obscene material denotes the mail or transport thereof.

* Wildlife includes offenses previously included in the “Migratory birds” 
category. 

* Environmental includes some offenses previously included in the 
“Agriculture” and “Other Regulatory” categories.

* All other offenses includes felonies with unknown or unclassifiable 
offense type.

* Misdemeanors includes misdemeanors, petty offenses, and unknown offense 
levels.

* Drug possession also includes other drug misdemeanors.

Additional Information about the Data
***************************************

The data presented are compiled from BJS’s Federal Justice Statistics 
Program (FJSP) database. The FJSP database includes data provided by the 
U.S. Marshals Service, Drug Enforcement Administration, Administrative 
Office of the U.S. Courts, Executive Office for the U.S. Attorneys, Federal 
Bureau of Prisons, and U.S. Sentencing Commission. The Administrative Office 
of the U.S. Courts, in addition to providing data describing defendants in 
criminal cases processed by the federal judiciary, provides data describing 
defendants processed by the federal pretrial services agencies and the 
federal probation and supervision service. 

Each agency reports on cases processed during a given year in an annual 
statistical report. These reports are often not comparable across agencies 
due to the varying methods used by the agencies to report case processing 
activities. As reported by an interagency working group headed by BJS, the 
differences in the case processing statistics are attributable, in part, to 
the different needs and missions of the agencies. The working group found 
the following differences in the statistics reported:

* The universe of cases reported during a given period differed, as some 
agencies report on those case processing events that occurred during a 
particular period, whereas others report on those events recorded during a 
particular period.

* Many of the commonly used case processing statistics—suspect or defendant 
processed, offense committed, case disposed, and sentence imposed—are 
defined differently across agencies.

BJS, through its FJSP, has recognized the incomparability of these annual 
statistical reports and has attempted to reconcile many of the differences 
identified by the working group. By combining databases from several years, 
BJS is able to report on those cases that actually occurred during the 
reporting period. Commonly used case processing statistics are made 
comparable across stages by applying uniform definitions to data obtained 
from each agency. Because definitions in the FJSP are consistent with those 
categories in BJS programs describing state defendants convicted, sentenced, 
or imprisoned, the comparison of federal and state case processing 
statistics is facilitated.

This report replaces the Compendium of Federal Justice Statistics, published 
for the years 1984, 1985, 1986, 1988, 1989, 1990, 1992, 1993, 1994, 1995, 
1996, 1997, 1998, 1999, 2000, 2001, 2002, 2003, and 2004, and describes 
defendants processed at each stage of the federal justice system. It 
includes arrests by federal law enforcement agencies, and investigations and 
prosecutions by U.S. attorneys (section 1), federal pretrial release or 
detention, adjudication in the U.S. district courts, sentencing, and the 
appeal of the conviction and/or sentence imposed (section 2), and federal 
supervision, including probation, parole, and imprisonment (section 3). 

This report covers the 12-month fiscal period ending September 30, 2011 (or 
fiscal year 2011). Generally the tables include both individual and 
organizational defendants. Organizational defendants are not included in 
tables showing defendants sentenced to incarceration, or tables describing 
offenders under post-conviction community supervision. Juvenile offenders 
charged as adults are included in the reported statistics. Felony and 
misdemeanor distinctions are provided where possible (see offense 
classifications in Methodology).

Notes to Reader
*****************

These tables were constructed to permit valid comparisons within each table 
and to allow the reader to compare percentages (but not raw totals) across 
tables. It should be understood, however, that the total number of subjects 
or defendants shown in a particular table may not equal the number of 
subjects or defendants involved in a particular stage of processing, since 
some records could not be linked and some data sources did not include 
information on particular data elements classified in a particular table. 
Data notes indicate the exact universe for individual tables.

This report is a statistical presentation of federal criminal justice 
information with limited analyses of trends or explanatory factors 
underlying the statistics. Analyses of federal justice statistics may be 
found in special reports and other publications, some of which are cited in 
these tables. To assess changing patterns in these tables, the reader may 
need to examine in detail subcategories not shown in the tabulations or may 
need some knowledge of legislation or federal agency procedures.

***********
Glossary
***********

A

Acquittal--a jury verdict that a criminal defendant is not guilty, or the 
finding of a judge that the evidence is insufficient to support a 
conviction.

Administrative case closure--terminating or closing a community supervision 
case for administrative reasons, such as an offender’s long-term 
hospitalization, death, deportation, incarceration in an unrelated case, or 
at the administrative discretion of the Chief Probation Officer.

Affirmed--in the practice of the appellate court, it means that the court of 
appeals has concluded that the lower court decision is correct and will 
stand as rendered by the lower court.

Agriculture violation--a violation of federal statutes concerning 
agriculture and conservation. Federal statutes related to agriculture 
include the Agricultural Acts (7 U.S.C., except sections on food stamps 
related to fraud); Insecticide Act; Packers and Stockyards Act, 1921; laws 
concerning plant quarantine and inspection; and laws that protect animals 
used in research. Federal statutes related to conservation include laws 
concerning soil and water conservation and wildlife conservation.

Antitrust violation--a violation related to federal antitrust statutes 
enacted by Congress that protect trade and commerce from unlawful 
restraints, price fixing, monopolies, and discrimination in pricing or in 
furnishing services or facilities. 

Appeal--a legal proceeding by which a case is brought before a higher court 
for the review of a judgment or decision of a lower court.

Appeals, U.S. Court of--intermediate appellate courts in the United States 
federal court system that review the final decisions of the district courts 
within their federal judicial circuits, when challenged. U.S. courts of 
appeal are higher than the U.S. district courts but lower than the U.S. 
Supreme Court. There are 13 U.S. courts of appeal in the federal system, 
representing the 12 judicial circuits and the federal circuit.

Appellant--the party who requests that a judicial decision or decree be 
reviewed by a higher court or by another jurisdiction.

Appellee--the party against whom an appeal is taken and who seeks to 
persuade the appeals court to affirm the district court’s decision.

Arson--willfully or maliciously setting, or attempting to set, fire to any 
property within the special maritime and territorial jurisdiction of the 
United States. See also, explosives.

Assault--the threat, attempt, or intentional infliction of bodily injury. 
Assault also includes certain violations of the Fair Housing Act of 1968.

Assault, aggravated--the threat, attempt, or intentional inflicting of 
bodily injury by means of a deadly or dangerous weapon, with or without 
actual infliction of any injury. Also, an attack without a weapon resulting 
in serious injuries. Serious injury includes broken bones, lost teeth, 
internal injuries, loss of consciousness, and an injury requiring two or 
more days of hospitalization.

Assault, simple—the threat, attempt, or intentional inflicting of minor 
bodily injury without a weapon. Minor injury includes bruises, black eyes, 
cuts, scratches, swelling, and an injury requiring less than two days of 
hospitalization.

B

Bail--the temporary release, prior to trial, of a defendant in exchange for 
security or money promised for the defendant’s due appearance. Also can 
refer to the amount of bond money posted as a financial condition of 
pretrial release.

Booking--a procedure following an arrest in which information about the 
arrest and the suspect are recorded. 

Bribery--offering or promising anything of value with the intent to 
influence a person unlawfully, especially a public official in a position of 
trust. Also includes soliciting or receiving anything of value in 
consideration of aiding a person to obtain employment with the federal 
government. Also, receiving or soliciting any remuneration, directly or 
indirectly, in cash or any kind, in return for purchasing, ordering, 
leasing, or recommending purchasing any good, service, or facility. 

Burglary--unlawful entry and attempted unlawful entry of any property, with 
or without force.

C

Career offender--a defendant who is age 18 or older at the time of the 
instant offense, if the instant offense of conviction is a felony and if he 
or she has at least two prior felony convictions.

Case--a judicial proceeding for the determination of a controversy between 
parties wherein rights are enforced or protected, or wrongs are prevented or 
redressed, or any proceeding judicial in nature. A case is a single charging 
document filed in a court containing one or more charges against one or more 
defendants and constituting the unit of action in court activity following 
the filing. Charges in two or more charging documents are sometimes 
combined, or the charges or defendants in one charging document separated, 
for purposes of adjudication.

Civil rights violation--a violation of civil liberties guaranteed to United 
States citizens by the Constitution and by acts of Congress. These include 
the 13th and 14th amendments to the Constitution and the Civil Rights Acts 
enacted after the Civil War, and more recently in 1957 and 1964.

Collateral bond--an agreement made as a condition of pretrial release that 
requires the defendant to post property valued at the full bail amount as an 
assurance of his or her intention to appear at trial.

Communication violation--a violation covering areas of communication, such 
as the Communications Act of 1934 (including wiretapping and wire 
interception). A communication is considered a deliberate interchange of 
thoughts or opinions between two or more persons.

Community confinement--residence in a community treatment center, halfway 
house, restitution center, mental health facility, alcohol or drug 
rehabilitation center, or other community facility; and participation in 
gainful employment, employment search efforts, community service, vocational 
training, treatment, educational programs, or similar facility-approved 
programs during nonresidential hours. Community confinement may be imposed 
as a condition of probation or supervised release. Under the federal 
sentencing guidelines, community confinement may be a substitute for 
imprisonment on a day-to-day basis for defendants with a guideline maximum 
of less than 16 months of imprisonment. 

Commutation of sentence--a change of legal penalty or punishment to a lesser 
one, such as having a federal criminal sentence reduced by the executive 
clemency of the President of the United States. 

Complaint--a written statement in which the plaintiff details the claims 
against the defendant; or a formal document submitted to the court by a 
prosecutor, law enforcement officer, or other person, alleging that a 
specified person or persons has committed a specified offense or offenses 
and requesting prosecution.

Concurrent sentence--a sentence, such as a prison term, to be served at the 
same time as another sentence rather than one after the other. One 3-year 
sentence and one 5-year sentence, if served concurrently, result in a 
maximum sentence of 5 years. See also, consecutive sentence. 

Conditional release--the release of a prisoner who has not served his or her 
full sentence and whose freedom is contingent upon obeying any combination 
of restrictions deemed necessary to guarantee the defendant’s appearance at 
trial or safeguard the community. 

Consecutive sentence--a sentence for two or more offenses that follow one 
after the other. Two 3-year sentences and one 5-year sentence, if served 
consecutively, result in a maximum sentence of 11 years. See also, 
concurrent sentence.

Conspiracy--an agreement by two or more persons to commit or to affect the 
commission of an unlawful act, or to use unlawful means to accomplish an act 
that is not in itself unlawful; also, any overt act in furtherance of the 
agreement. A person charged with conspiracy is classified under the alleged 
substantive offense.

Continuing criminal enterprise--a felony committed as part of a continuing 
series of violations, which is undertaken by a person, in collaboration with 
five or more other persons. The person occupies a position of organizer, 
supervisor, or any other position of management, and obtains substantial 
income or resources from this position.

Conviction--a judgment of guilt against a criminal defendant. A conviction 
includes pleas of guilty and nolo contendere, and excludes final judgments 
expunged by pardon, reversed, set aside, or otherwise rendered invalid.

Corporate defendant--a business against whom a lawsuit is filed. The 
defendant in a case is an entity, a collection of persons, or a business or 

Corporation--not an individual person. Despite not being persons, 
corporations are recognized by the law to have rights and responsibilities 
like natural persons.

Corporate surety--a person, persons, or entity, who has entered into a bond 
(or an agreement) to give surety for another. As a condition of pretrial 
release, the defendant enters into an agreement that requires a third party, 
such as a bail bondsman, to promise the payment of the full bail amount in 
the event that the defendant fails to appear in court. See also, surety 
bond.

Counterfeiting--falsely making, forging, or altering obligations with a view 
to deceive or defraud, by passing the copy or thing forged as original or 
genuine. Counterfeiting applies to any obligation or security of the United 
States, foreign obligation or security, coin or bar stamped at any mint in 
the United States, money order issued by the United States Postal Service, 
domestic or foreign stamp, or seal of any department or agency of the United 
States. Includes passing, selling, attempting to pass or sell, or bringing 
into the United States any of the above falsely made articles. Also, making, 
selling, or possessing any plates or stones (or any instrument) used for 
printing counterfeit obligations or securities of the United States, foreign 
obligations or securities, government transportation requests, or postal 
stamps; or knowingly and intentionally trafficking in falsified labels 
affixed to phono records, motion pictures, or audio visual works.

Courts--government entity authorized to resolve legal issues. Judicial power 
is vested pursuant to Article III of the Constitution in the following 
federal courts: the U.S. Supreme Court, the U.S. Court of Appeals for the 
District of Columbia, and the U.S. district court for the District of 
Columbia. See also, Appeals, U.S. Court of, and District court, U.S.

Criminal career--the longitudinal sequence of crimes committed by an 
offender. 

Criminal history category--a quantification of the defendant’s prior 
criminal record and the defendant’s propensity to recidivate under the 
federal sentencing guidelines. Guideline criminal history categories range 
from Category I (primarily first-time offenders) to Category VI (career 
offenders).

Customs law violation--a violation regarding taxes, which are payable upon 
goods and merchandise imported or exported. Includes the duties, toll, 
tribute, or tariff payable upon merchandise exported or imported.

D

Dangerous weapon--an instrument capable, under certain circumstances, of 
causing serious injury or death.

Deadly weapon--an instrument specifically designed to cause serious injury 
or death.

Declination--a prosecutor’s decision not to file a case in a matter received 
for investigation. Excluded are immediate declinations where a prosecutor 
spent less than one hour on the case. 

Defendant--the party against whom a lawsuit is filed.

Departure--a sentence imposed that is outside the applicable guideline 
sentencing range. A court may depart when it finds an aggravating or 
mitigating circumstance not adequately taken into consideration by the 
Sentencing Commission in formulating the guidelines that should result in a 
sentence different from that described. See also, substantial assistance.

Deportation or Treaty Transfer--the act of expelling a foreigner from a 
country, usually to the country of origin, due to the commission of a crime 
or prior criminal record.

Deposit bond--an agreement made by a defendant as a condition of pretrial 
release that requires the defendant to post a fraction of the bail before he 
or she is released to the community.

Detainer--a notification sent by a prosecutor, judge, or other official, 
such as a law enforcement officer, advising a prison official that a 
prisoner is wanted to answer for criminal charges. The notification requests 
the prisoner’s continued detention or notification of the prisoner’s 
impending release.

Detention--the legally authorized confinement of a person subject to 
criminal or juvenile court proceedings, until the point of commitment to a 
correctional facility or until release. Only those persons held for two or 
more days are classified as detained.

Dismissal--the decision by a court to terminate adjudication of all 
outstanding charges in a criminal case, or all outstanding charges against a 
given defendant in a criminal case, thus terminating the court action in the 
case and permanently or provisionally terminating court jurisdiction over 
the defendant in relation to those charges. Includes nolle prosequi and 
deferred prosecution.

Disposition--the action by a criminal or juvenile justice agency which 
signifies that a portion of the justice process is complete and jurisdiction 
is terminated or transferred to another agency; or which signifies that a 
decision has been reached on one aspect of a case and a different aspect 
comes under consideration, requiring a different kind of decision.

District court, U.S.--trial courts with general federal jurisdiction over 
cases involving federal laws or offenses and actions between citizens of 
different states.

District of Columbia--the jurisdiction of the U.S. district court for the 
District of Columbia. This jurisdiction includes federal offenses prosecuted 
in U.S. district courts and, except for tables based on data from the 
Federal Bureau of Prisons, excludes violations of the District of Columbia 
Code and cases prosecuted in the District of Columbia Superior Court. 

Drug distribution--delivery (other than by administering or dispensing) of a 
controlled substance. The term “controlled substance” means any drug or 
other substance, or immediate precursor, included in schedule I, II, III, 
IV, or V of part B of subchapter I of Chapter 13 (Drug Abuse, Prevention, 
and Control), Title 21 (Food and Drugs). The term does not include distilled 
spirits, wine, malt beverages, or tobacco, as those terms are defined or 
used in subtitle E of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986.

Drug offense--a violation under federal or state laws prohibiting the 
manufacture, import, export, distribution, or dispensing of a controlled or 
counterfeit substance, or the possession of a controlled or counterfeit 
substance with the intent to manufacture, import, export, distribute, or 
dispense the substance. Drug offenses include using any communication 
facilities that cause or facilitate a felony under Title 21, or furnishing 
fraudulent or false information concerning prescriptions, as well as any 
other unspecified drug-related offense. See also, drug distribution, 
possession, and drug trafficking

Drug trafficking--knowingly and intentionally importing or exporting any 
controlled substance in schedule I, II, III, IV, or V (as defined by 21 
U.S.C. § 812). Drug trafficking includes manufacturing, distributing, 
dispensing, selling, or possessing with the intent to manufacture, 
distribute, or sell a controlled substance or a counterfeit substance. 
Trafficking also includes exporting any controlled substance in schedules I 
through V, and the manufacture or distribution of a controlled substance in 
schedule I or II, for the purposes of unlawful importation. Also includes 
the making or distributing of any punch, die, plate, stone, or any other 
instrument designed to reproduce the label on any drug or container, or 
removing or obliterating the label or symbol of any drug or container. 
Knowingly opening, maintaining, or managing any place for manufacturing, 
distributing, or using any controlled substance is also considered drug 
trafficking. 

Dual and Successive Prosecution Policy (Petite Policy)--prosecutorial 
guidelines used to determine whether to bring federal prosecution, based 
substantially on a defendant’s repetition of the same act or transactions 
involved in a prior state or federal proceeding for a defendant. 

E

Embezzlement--the fraudulent appropriation of property by a person to whom 
such property has been lawfully entrusted. Includes offenses committed by 
bank officers or employees, officers or employees of the United States 
Postal Service, officers of lending, credit, or insurance institutions, and 
any officer or employee of a corporation or association engaged in commerce 
as a common carrier. The fraudulent appropriations of property by court 
officers of the U.S. courts and officers or employees of the United States 
are also included. Stealing from employment and training funds, stealing 
from programs that receive federal funds and Indian tribal organizations, 
and selling, conveying, or disposing of any money, property, records, or 
thing of value to the United States or any department thereof without 
authority are also included in embezzlement. 

Environmental offense--a violation of federal law enacted to protect the 
environment, such as the Clean Air Act and the Clean Water Act. 
Environmental protection laws protect the safety and well-being of 
communities from excessive and unnecessary emissions of environmental 
pollutants.

Escape--departing or attempting to depart from the custody of a correctional 
institution; a judicial, correctional, or law enforcement officer; or a 
hospital where one is committed for drug abuse or drug dependency treatment. 
Knowingly advising, aiding, assisting, or procuring the escape or attempted 
escape of any person from a correctional facility, an officer, or the above-
mentioned hospital, as well as concealing an escapee. Providing or 
attempting to provide to an inmate in prison a prohibited object; or making, 
possessing, obtaining, or attempting to make or obtain a prohibited object. 
Instigating, assisting, attempting to cause, or causing any mutiny or riot 
at any federal penal, detention, or correctional facility, or conveying into 
any of these institutions any dangerous instruments are also included.

Exclusion--the rule of evidence that disallows evidence secured by illegal 
means and in bad faith to be introduced in a criminal trial.

Expiration of sentence--the completion of a prison sentence by standard 
means. See also, releases from prison.

Explosives violation--a violation of federal law involving the importation, 
manufacture, distribution, and storage of explosive material. Includes the 
unlawful receipt, possession or transportation of explosives without a 
license, where prohibited by law, or using explosives during the commission 
of a felony. Also includes violations relating to dealing in stolen 
explosives, using mail or other forms of communication to threaten an 
individual with explosives, and possessing explosive materials at an 
airport. See also, arson. 

F

Failure to appear--willful absence from any court appointment.

Felony--a serious crime that involves a potential punishment of 1 year or 
longer in prison or a crime punishable by death. According to 18 U.S.C. § 
3559, felonies are classified based on the maximum imprisonment term 
authorized by the law describing the offense. The five felony classes—A, B, 
C, D, and E—include life imprisonment or the maximum penalty of death (Class 
A felony), 25 years or more (Class B felony), less than 25 years but more 
than 10 years (Class C felony), less than 10 years but more than 5 years 
(Class D felony), and less than 5 years but more than 1 year (Class E 
felony).

Filing--the initiation of a criminal case in U.S. district court by formal 
submission to the court of a charging document alleging that one or more 
named persons have committed one or more specified offenses.

Financial condition--the monetary condition on which the release of a 
defendant before trial is contingent, including deposit bond, surety bond, 
and collateral bond. See also the specific definitions for these bond types. 

Fine--a monetary penalty imposed as punishment for an offense.

First release--prisoners released from the Federal Bureau of Prisons for the 
first time after their commitment by a U.S. district court. Excludes 
offenders returned to prison after their first release to supervision.

Food and drug violation--a violation of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic 
Act, including regulations for clean and sanitary movement of animals, 
adulteration or misbranding of any food or drug, failure to transmit 
information about prescription drugs, and intent to defraud and distribute 
adulterated material.

Forgery--the creation or alteration of a document, which if validly executed 
would constitute a legally binding transaction, with the intent to defraud; 
also, the creation of an art object with intent to misrepresent the identity 
of the creator. Forgery also includes making, possessing, selling, or 
printing plates or stones for counterfeiting obligations or securities, and 
detaching, altering, or defacing any official device, mark, or certificate.

Fraud--unlawfully depriving a person of his or her property or legal rights 
through intentional misrepresentation of fact or deceit, other than forgery 
or counterfeiting. See also, specific offenses in this glossary for 
citations.

Fraudulent property offense--see property offense, fraudulent.

Fugitive--a person convicted or accused of a crime that hides from law 
enforcement or escapes custody or flees across jurisdictional lines to avoid 
arrest or punishment.

Fugitive investigation--initiated upon receipt of a warrant and typically 
involves persons who have violated their conditions of probation, parole, or 
bond release, as well as escaped prisoners. The U.S. Marshals Service has 
administrative responsibility for all investigations involving federal 
fugitives. 

G

Gambling offense--the unlawful making or receiving or wagering on a game of 
chance or uncertain event, or operating, or promoting or permitting the 
operation of, an unlawful game of chance or wagering establishment. Also, 
the federal offense of transporting, manufacturing, selling, possessing, or 
using any gambling device in the District of Columbia or any possession of 
the United States or within Indian country, or the special maritime and 
territorial jurisdiction of the United States, as defined in 18 U.S.C. § 7. 
Federal gambling offenses include transporting gambling devices within the 
jurisdiction of the United States, except under the authority of the Federal 
Trade Commission or under the authority of a state law that provides an 
exemption from these provisions. Offenses also include transmitting wagering 
information on interstate or foreign commerce, interstate transporting of 
wagering paraphernalia, importing or transporting lottery tickets, or 
mailing lottery tickets or related matter. 

Good-time credit--time credited based on a prisoner’s good behavior while 
imprisoned that is applied toward the prisoner’s early release. Under the 
1984 Sentencing Reform Act, two classes of prisoners are ineligible to 
receive good-time credits: (1) misdemeanants serving a term of imprisonment 
of 1 year or less; and (2) felons serving life sentences. All other federal 
prisoners receive a flat allocation of 54 days per year of sentence served; 
credit for a partial year remaining at the end of the sentence is prorated. 
The annual allotment does not change based on the length of time a federal 
prisoner has already spent in prison.
 
Guideline sentencing range--the range of imprisonment length for a prisoner 
sentenced to a federal institution based on the federal sentencing guideline 
for the particular level of offense committed and the offender’s criminal 
history. The federal sentencing guideline incorporates any minimum terms of 
imprisonment required by statute as well as the statutory maximum term of 
imprisonment, where applicable.

Guilty plea--a plea in response to formal charges, admitting that the 
defendant committed the offenses as charged. A guilty plea also includes 
pleas of nolo contendere.

H

Hispanic--an ethnic category based on classification by the reporting 
agency. Hispanic persons may be of any race.

Home detention--a form of confinement and supervision used as a substitute 
either for imprisonment or as a condition of probation. Except for 
authorized absences, home detention is a measure in which a person is 
confined by authorities to his or her place of residence, and restriction is 
enforced by appropriate means of surveillance by the probation office. Under 
the federal sentencing guidelines, home detention may be a substitute for 
imprisonment on a day-to-day basis for defendants with a guideline maximum 
sentence of less than 16 months of imprisonment.

Homicide--see murder.

I

Immigration offense--a violation involving illegal entry into the United 
States, illegally reentering the United States after deportation, willfully 
failing to deport when so ordered, willfully remaining beyond days allowed 
on conditional permit, or falsely representing oneself to be a United States 
citizen. Immigration offenses include violations relating to provisions for 
special agricultural workers and provisions relating to limitations on 
immigrant status, such as employment. Also includes bringing in or harboring 
any aliens not duly admitted by an immigration officer. 

Incarceration--any sentence of confinement, including prison, jail, or other 
residential placements.

Indeterminate sentence--a prison sentence with a maximum or minimum term 
that is not specifically established at the time of sentencing.

Indictment--a formal charge, issued by a grand jury, stating that there is 
enough evidence to justify a trial for a defendant who allegedly committed a 
crime; indictment is used primarily for felonies.

Information--a formal charge, issued by a government attorney, stating that 
there is enough evidence to justify a trial for a defendant who allegedly 
committed a misdemeanor. Also, the document filed to initiate trial 
proceedings at the second step of a felony case.

Infraction--an offense for which the maximum term of imprisonment is 5 days 
or less, or an offense for which no imprisonment is authorized, according to 
18 U.S.C. § 3559.

Initial appearance or hearing--a criminal defendant’s first appearance 
before a judge or magistrate.

Instant offense--the offense of conviction and all relevant conduct under 
U.S.S.G. § 1B1.3. 

Intermittent sentence--a sentence to periods of confinement interrupted by 
periods of freedom. Under the federal sentencing guidelines, intermittent 
confinement may be a substitute for imprisonment for defendants with a 
guideline maximum of less than 16 months of imprisonment. Each 24 hours of 
intermittent confinement is credited as one day of incarceration.

J

Jail credit—the number of days deducted from an offender’s sentence for time 
spent in custody before a prison sentence was imposed. 

Jurisdictional offenses--offenses considered to be federal crimes because of 
the place in which they occurred, such as on an aircraft, or federal land or 
property. Jurisdictional offenses include certain crimes on Indian 
reservations, or at sea, that cannot be classified in a more specific 
substantive category.

Juvenile--a person subject to juvenile court proceedings because a 
statutorily defined event or condition was alleged to have occurred while 
his or her age was below the statutorily specified age limit of original 
jurisdiction of a juvenile court. Court jurisdiction is determined by age at 
the time of the event, not at the time of judicial proceedings. The age 
limit defining the legal categories “juvenile” and “adult” varies among 
states and also, with respect to specified crimes, within states. The 
generally applicable age limit within a given state is most often the 18th 
birthday. In statutes establishing criminal trial court jurisdiction over 
persons below the standard age for specified crimes (usually violent crimes, 
such as murder or armed robbery) the age limit may be lowered to 16 or even 
less. These variations in age factor are small enough to permit data 
aggregated on the basis of the state definition of juvenile to be comparable 
for many purposes. However, each state should note its age limit in 
statistics for general distribution.

Juvenile delinquency--an act committed by a juvenile for which an adult 
could be prosecuted in a criminal court, but for which a juvenile can be 
adjudicated in a juvenile court or prosecuted in a court having criminal 
jurisdiction, if the juvenile court transfers jurisdiction.

K

Kidnapping--unlawfully seizing any person as defined in 18 U.S.C. § 1201 for 
ransom or reward, except in the case of a minor seized by a parent; includes 
receiving, possessing, or disposing of any money or other property delivered 
as ransom or as a reward in connection with a kidnapping as well as 
conspiring to kidnap any person.

L

Labor law violation--a violation of federal laws governing a broad spectrum 
of activities relating to labor-management relations, such as the Fair Labor 
Standards Act of 1938 and the Taft-Hartley Act. 

Larceny--unlawful taking or attempted taking of property, other than a motor 
vehicle, from the possession of another, by stealth, without force and 
without deceit, with intent to permanently deprive the owner of the 
property; excludes taking that requires unlawful entry or force or is 
accomplished by deception.

Liquor violation--a violation of the Internal Revenue Service laws on 
liquor, as well as violations of liquor laws not cited under these laws. 
Liquor violations include dispensing or unlawfully possessing intoxicants in 
Indian country, transporting intoxicating liquors into any state, territory, 
district, or possession where sale is prohibited, shipping packages 
containing unmarked and unlabeled intoxicants, and shipping liquor by 
collect-on-delivery method (C.O.D.). Violations also include knowingly 
delivering a liquor shipment to someone other than to whom it has been 
consigned, and violating the Federal Alcohol Administration Act. Includes 
violations relating to regulation of the manufacture, sale, distribution, 
transportation, possession, or use of intoxicating liquor. Includes 
maintaining unlawful drinking places, advertising and soliciting orders for 
intoxicating liquor, bootlegging, operating a still, furnishing liquor to a 
minor or intemperate person, using a vehicle for the illegal transportation 
of liquor, drinking on a train or public conveyance, and all attempts to 
commit any of the aforementioned acts. Excludes public drunkenness and 
driving under the influence of alcohol.

M

Magistrates (U.S.), federal--judicial officers appointed by judges of 
federal district courts who have many but not all of the powers of a judge. 
Magistrates are designated to hear a wide variety of motions and other 
pretrial matters in both criminal and civil cases. With consent of the 
parties, magistrates may conduct civil or misdemeanor criminal trials. 
Magistrates may not preside over felony trials or over jury selection in 
felony cases.

Mailing or transportation of obscene materials--a violation of federal law 
relating to knowingly using the mail for mailing obscene or crime-inciting 
matter, as defined in 18 U.S.C. § 1461 and 39 U.S.C. § 3001(e). Also 
includes transporting for sale or distribution, importing, or transporting 
any obscene matter in interstate or foreign commerce. 
Major offense while on conditional release--allegation, arrest, or 
conviction of a crime for which the minimum sentence is incarceration for 
more than 90 days or probation for a period greater than 1 year. 

Mandatory release--the release of an inmate from prison after confinement 
for a period equal to the inmate’s full sentence, minus any statutory good 
time. Federal prisoners exiting prison on mandatory release may still be 
subject to a period of post-release community supervision.

Mandatory sentence--a sentence that includes a minimum term of imprisonment 
that the sentencing court is statutorily required to impose barring the 
government’s motion of substantial assistance. 

Mandatory sentencing enhancement--a form of mandatory sentence in which the 
minimum term of imprisonment is to be imposed consecutive to any other term 
of imprisonment imposed. Mandatory sentencing enhancements include 18 U.S.C. 
§ 924(c), which provides for a 5-year to lifetime enhancement for the use of 
a firearm during the commission of a crime, and 18 U.S.C. § 844(h), which 
provides for a 5-year enhancement for the use of firearms or explosives 
during the commission of a crime. Also included is 18 U.S.C. § 929, which 
provides for a 5-year enhancement for the use of armor-piercing ammunition 
during the commission of a crime.

Material witness--a person with significant information about the subject 
matter of a criminal prosecution necessary to resolve the matter.
Matter—a potential case under review by a U.S. attorney and on which more 
than 1 hour is spent.

Matters concluded--matters in which a U.S. attorney has reached a final 
decision. Specifically includes matters filed as cases, matters declined 
after investigation, matters referred for disposition by U.S. magistrates, 
and matters otherwise terminated without reaching court.

Migratory birds offense--a violation of acts relating to birds that move 
from one place to another in season. Includes taking, killing, or possessing 
migratory birds, or any part, nest, or egg thereof, in violation of federal 
regulations or the transportation laws of the state, territory, or district 
from which the bird was taken. Also included is the misuse or nonuse of a 
migratory-bird hunting and conservation stamp. 

Minor offense while on conditional release--conviction of a crime for which 
the maximum sentence is incarceration for 90 days or less, probation for 1 
year or less, or a fine of $500 or less. 

Misdemeanor--a criminal offense punishable by a jail term not to exceed 1 
year, and any offense specifically defined as a misdemeanor by the 
Administrative Office of the U.S. Courts for the purposes of data 
collection. According to 18 U.S.C. § 3559, misdemeanors are classified in 
three letter grades—A, B, and C—based on the maximum terms of imprisonment. 
Class A denotes an imprisonment term of 1 year or less, but more than 6 
months; Class B denotes an imprisonment term of 6 months or less, but more 
than 30 days; and Class C denotes an imprisonment term of 30 days or less, 
but more than 5 days. Misdemeanor includes offenses previously called minor 
offenses that were reclassified under the Federal Magistrate Act of 1979.

Mistrial--a trial that has been terminated and declared invalid by the court 
because of some circumstance which creates a substantial and uncorrectable 
prejudice to the conduct of a fair trial, or which makes it impossible to 
continue the trial in accordance with prescribed procedures. The termination 
of a trial before its normal conclusion because of a procedural error; 
statements by a witness, judge, or attorney that prejudice a jury; a 
deadlock by a jury without reaching a verdict after lengthy deliberation (or 
a hung jury); or the failure to complete a trial within the time set by the 
court. When a mistrial is declared, the trial must start again with the 
selection of a new jury.

Mixed sentence-—a sentence requiring the convicted offender to serve a term 
of imprisonment, followed by a term of probation. 

Most serious offense--the offense charged that has the greatest potential 
sentence; or the offense with the greatest imposed sentence.

Motor carrier violation--a violation of the federal statutes relating to the 
Motor Carrier Act, which regulates the routes and rates of freight motor 
carriers and passenger motor carriers in interstate commerce. The Interstate 
Commerce Commission administers the Motor Carrier Act.

Motor vehicle theft--unlawful taking, or attempted taking, of a self-
propelled road vehicle owned by another, with the intent to permanently or 
temporarily deprive the owner of possession; excludes vehicle parts.

Murder--the unlawful killing of a human being with malice aforethought that 
was either expressed or implied. This offense covers committing or 
attempting to commit murder (first or second degree) or voluntary 
manslaughter.

Murder (criminal willful homicide)--intentionally causing the death of 
another person without legal justification, or causing the death of another 
while committing or attempting to commit another crime; includes voluntary 
manslaughter.

Murder, negligent (involuntary) manslaughter--causing the death of another 
person without intent to cause death, with reckless or gross negligence, 
including by reckless or grossly negligent operation of a motor vehicle.

Murder, nonnegligent (voluntary) manslaughter--intentionally causing the 
death of another without legal justification or excuse, or causing the death 
of another while committing or attempting to commit another crime.

N

National defense violation--a violation of national defense laws under the 
Military Selective Service Act, the Defense Production Act of 1950, and the 
Economic Stabilization Act of 1970, which includes prices, rents, and wages, 
and the Subversive Activities Control Act. Includes violations relating to 
alien registration and treason, including espionage, sabotage, sedition, and 
the Smith Act of 1940. Also includes violations relating to energy 
facilities, curfew and restricted areas, exportation of war materials, 
trading with an enemy, and illegal use of uniform.

New law--federal defendants convicted and sentenced pursuant to the 
Sentencing Reform Act of 1984. See also, old law.
 

Nolle prosequi--Latin for “we shall no longer prosecute.” The termination of 
adjudication of a criminal charge by the prosecutor’s decision not to pursue 
the case, in some jurisdictions requiring approval of the court. 

Nolo contendere--Latin for “I do not wish to contend.” The statement is a 
defendant’s plea in a criminal case, indicating that he or she will not 
contest the charges, but not admit or deny guilt. A plea of nolo contendere 
has the same effect as a plea of guilty, as far as the criminal sentence is 
concerned, but may not be considered as an admission of guilt for any other 
purpose. Nolo contendere is also referred to as a plea of “no contest.”

Noncitizen--a person who is without United States citizenship, including 
legal aliens--resident aliens, tourists, and refugees/asylees--and illegal 
aliens.

Nonjury trial--a trial in which the judge alone decides factual as well as 
legal questions, and makes the final judgment.

Not convicted--an acquittal or setting free by bench or jury trial, 
mistrial, or dismissal, including nolle prosequi and deferred prosecution.

Not guilty--a defendant’s formal answer in court to the charge or charges 
contained in a complaint, information, or indictment, claiming that he or 
she did not commit the offense or offenses listed. If the defendant refuses 
to plea, the court will enter a plea of not guilty. A verdict of “not 
guilty” in a criminal trial means that a defendant was acquitted of the 
charges against him or her by the court.

O

Offense--a violation of United States criminal law. Where more than one 
offense is charged, the offense with the greatest potential penalty is 
reported.

Offense level--a quantification of the relative seriousness of the offense 
of conviction and any offense-specific aggravating or mitigating factors. 
Guideline offense levels range from level 1 (the least serious offense) to 
level 43 (the most serious offense).

Old law--defendants convicted and sentenced pursuant to laws applicable 
before the Sentencing Reform Act of 1984. See also, new law.

P

Parole--a period of supervision after a prisoner is released from custody 
and before the end of the federal sentence imposed. The U.S. Parole 
Commission is empowered to grant, modify, or revoke the parole of all 
federal offenders. Pursuant to the Sentencing Reform Act of 1984, parole was 
abolished and defendants are required to serve the imposed sentence (less 54 
days per year good-time for sentences greater than 1 year, but not life 
imprisonment), followed by a term of supervised release. Because of the 
number of federal inmates sentenced under pre-Sentencing Reform provisions, 
the number of offenders on parole is declining.

Perjury--a false material declaration under oath in any proceeding before or 
ancillary to any court or grand jury of the United States. Includes 
knowingly or willfully giving false evidence or swearing to false statements 
under oath or by any means procuring or instigating any person to commit 
perjury. This offense also includes any officers or employees of the 
government listed under 13 U.S.C. §§ 21-25 who willfully or knowingly 
furnish, or cause to be furnished, any false information or statements.

Personal recognizance--a pretrial release condition in which the defendant 
promises to appear at trial and no financial conditions are imposed.

Petty offense--a federal misdemeanor punishable by six months or less in 
prison; a Class B misdemeanor, a Class C misdemeanor, or an infraction with 
fines as specified in 18 U.S.C. § 3571. See also, misdemeanor and 
infraction.

Plea-bargain--a defendant in a criminal proceeding agrees to plead guilty to 
a charge in exchange for the prosecution’s cooperation in securing a more 
lenient sentence or some other mitigation.

Pornographic--that which is of, or pertaining to, obscene or licentious 
literature. Material is pornographic or obscene if the average person, 
applying contemporary community standards, would find that the work taken as 
a whole appeals to the prurient interest; if it depicts sexual conduct in a 
patently offensive way; if the work lacks serious literary, artistic, 
political, or scientific value. 

Possession--an offense involving the possession of a controlled substance, 
acquiring a controlled substance by misrepresentation or fraud, attempting 
or conspiring to possess, or simple possession of a controlled substance in 
schedules I through V, as defined by 21 U.S.C. § 812. Includes possession of 
a controlled substance in schedule I or II, or a narcotic drug in schedule 
III or IV onboard a United States vessel or vessels within custom waters of 
the United States, or by any United States citizen on board a vessel. In 
addition, possessing any punch, die, plate, stone, or any other instrument 
designed to reproduce the label upon any drug or container is an offense 
under this category. Distributing a small amount of marijuana for no 
remuneration is treated as simple possession and is included in this offense 
category.

Postal law violation--a violation of federal laws governing a broad spectrum 
of activities pertaining to the United States Postal Service.

Presentence Investigation Report (PSI), federal--a report prepared by a 
court’s probation officer, after a person has been convicted of an offense, 
summarizing for the court the background information needed to determine the 
appropriate sentence. A federal probation officer conducts an investigation 
mandated by law, unless the court finds that there is information in the 
record sufficient to enable the meaningful exercise of sentencing authority 
pursuant to 18 U.S.C. § 3553, and the court explains this finding on the 
record. The PSI is intended to help the sentencing judges and others in the 
criminal justice system to evaluate the offender by providing a 
comprehensive background on the offender, which includes a summary of the 
current offense, prior criminal record, personal and family data, 
evaluation, and sentencing recommendations.

Presentment--historically, a grand jury’s written notice of an offense based 
upon the grand jury’s own knowledge or observation. In current usage, this 
can be a prosecutor’s presentation of alleged facts and charges to a court 
or a grand jury.

Pretrial diversion--an agreement to defer (and possibly drop) prosecution 
conditioned on the defendant’s good behavior and/or participation in 
programs, such as job training, counseling, or education, during a stated 
period.

Pretrial release--a defendant’s release from custody to the community, for 
all or part of the time before trial or during prosecution, upon his or her 
promise to appear in court when required. The defendant may be released on 
personal recognizance, unsecured bond, or under financial conditions. 
Pretrial release includes defendants released within 2 days after arrest and 
defendants released after posting bail or having release conditions changed 
at a subsequent hearing.

Pretrial revocation--the decision to detain a defendant for violating 
conditions of pretrial release or for committing a new crime while in a 
pretrial release status.

Preventive detention--the detention of a defendant awaiting trial for the 
purpose of preventing further misconduct. 

Probation--sentence imposed for commission of a crime whereby the convicted 
criminal offender is released into the community under the supervision of a 
probation officer in lieu of incarceration. An act of clemency available 
only to those found eligible by the court, probation offers a chance for 
reform and rehabilitation for the defendant. For this purpose, the defendant 
must agree to specified standards of conduct; violation of such standards 
subjects the offender’s liberty to revocation.

Procedural termination--a judgment based on the methods and mechanics of the 
legal process, including all the rules and laws governing that process. 
Procedural law is distinguished from substantive law, which involves the 
statutes and legal precedents upon which cases are tried and judgments made. 
See also, administrative case closure and terminated on the merits.

Property offense, fraudulent--a property offense that involves elements of 
deceit or intentional misrepresentation. These offenses specifically include 
embezzlement, fraud (excluding tax fraud), forgery, and counterfeiting.

Property offense, nonfraudulent--a violent offense against property, 
including burglary, larceny, motor vehicle theft, arson, transportation of 
stolen property, and other property offenses, such as the destruction of 
property and trespassing. 

Property offense, other--an offense that involves the destruction of 
property moving in interstate or foreign commerce and in the possession of a 
common or contract carrier. Also includes the malicious destruction of 
government property or injury to United States Postal Service property, such 
as mailboxes or mailbags. Trespassing on timber and government lands is also 
included in this offense category. 

Public-order offense, nonregulatory--an offense concerning weapons; 
immigration; tax law violations (tax fraud); bribery; perjury; national 
defense; escape; racketeering and extortion; gambling; liquor; mailing or 
transporting of obscene materials; traffic; migratory birds; conspiracy, 
aiding and abetting, and jurisdictional offenses; and other public-order 
offenses. 

Public-order offense, other--a violation of laws pertaining to bigamy, 
disorderly conduct on the United States Capitol grounds, civil disorder, and 
travel to incite to riot. Also included in public-order offenses, 
nonregulatory.

Public-order offense, regulatory--a violation of regulatory laws and 
regulations in agriculture, antitrust, labor law, food and drug, motor 
carrier, and other regulatory offenses that are not specifically listed in 
the category public-order offenses, nonregulatory. 

R

Racketeering and extortion--racketeering is demanding, soliciting, or 
receiving anything of value from the owner, proprietor or other person 
having a financial interest in a business, by means of a threat or promise, 
either expressed or implied. Extortion is the obtaining of money or property 
from another without the person’s consent and induced by the wrongful use of 
force or fear. This offense code covers using interstate or foreign commerce 
or any facility in interstate or foreign commerce to aid racketeering 
enterprises, such as arson, bribery, gambling, liquor, narcotics, 
prostitution, and extortionate credit transactions. Also included are 
obtaining property or money from another (with the person’s consent and 
induced by actual or threatened force, violence, blackmail) or committing 
unlawful interference with the person’s employment or business. Racketeering 
and extortion includes transmitting, by interstate commerce or through the 
mail, any threat to injure the property, the person, or the reputation of 
the addressee or of another; or kidnapping any person with intent to extort. 

Release, extraordinary--unusual methods by which a federal prisoner exits 
prison, such as death, commutation, or a transfer to another facility.

Release, standard--the usual way by which a federal prisoner exits prison, 
including full-term sentence expirations, expirations with good time, 
mandatory releases, and releases to parole.

Remand--to send back; the act of an appellate court in returning a case to a 
lower court for further action.

Remove--transfer from federal court (usually to a state court).

Restitution--a court requirement that an alleged or convicted offender pay 
money or provide services to the victim of the crime or provide services to 
the community.

Reversal--the act of a court setting aside the decision of a lower court. A 
reversal is often accompanied by a remand to the lower court for further 
proceedings.

Revocation--termination of a probation, parole, or mandatory release order 
because of a rule violation or a new offense, which forces the offender to 
begin or to continue serving his or her sentence.

Robbery--the unlawful taking or attempted taking of property that is in the 
immediate possession of another, by force or threat of force. Also included 
is assaulting or putting the life of any person in jeopardy by the use of a 
dangerous or deadly weapon while committing or attempting to commit such 
robbery.

Rule 20 transfer—-upon petition by a defendant, a transfer of proceedings to 
the district in which the defendant is arrested, when the defendant is 
arrested, held, or present in a district other than that in which an 
indictment or information is pending against him or her. The defendant may 
state in writing a wish to plead guilty or nolo contendere, to waive trial 
in the district in which the indictment or information is pending, and to 
consent to the disposition of the case in the district in which the 
defendant was arrested. 

Rule 40 transfer—upon petition by the U.S. attorney, commitment to another 
district; the transfer of proceedings of a defendant arrested in a district 
for an alleged offense committed in another district. 

S

Sentence--the punishment ordered by a court for a defendant convicted of a 
crime. For sentences to incarceration, the maximum time the offender may be 
held in custody is reported. See also, split sentence, mixed sentence, 
indeterminate sentence, and mandatory sentence.

Sentencing guidelines (federal)--guidelines established by the U.S. 
Sentencing Commission to be followed by the federal courts in the sentencing 
of those convicted of federal offenses. Established pursuant to the 
Sentencing Reform Act of 1984, the sentencing guidelines prescribe a range 
of sentences for each class of convicted persons, as determined by 
categories of offense behavior and offender characteristics.

Sexual abuse--rape, assault with intent to commit rape, and carnal knowledge 
of a person under age 16 who is not one’s spouse. Also includes sexual abuse 
of a minor and cases of sexual abuse in federal prisons.
 
Sex offense, nonviolent--coercing or enticing an individual (including 
minors) with the intent and purpose of engaging in prostitution, or any 
sexual activity for which any person can be charged with a criminal offense. 
Also includes transporting an individual (including minors), from one place 
to another in interstate or foreign commerce, with the intent and purpose of 
engaging in prostitution, or any sexual activity for which any person can be 
charged with a criminal offense. Includes statutory rape, commercial sex 
offenses, and other nonviolent sex offenses.

Shock incarceration--an intense confinement program, consisting of a highly 
regimented schedule that provides the strict discipline, physical training, 
hard labor, drill, and ceremony characteristic of military basic training. 

Special maritime and territorial jurisdiction--areas of federal jurisdiction 
outside the jurisdiction of any state, including (1) the high seas, Great 
Lakes, and connecting waterways; (2) federal lands; and (3) United States-
owned aircraft in flight over the high seas.

Split sentence--see, mixed sentence.

Stale--a case or matter that is too old to support successful prosecution.

Substantial assistance--a form of cooperation with the government in which 
the defendant provides the government with information, testimony, or other 
assistance relating to the criminal activities of other persons in exchange 
for a sentence reduction. Substantial assistance provides the only mechanism 
for judges to impose a sentence below a mandatory sentence, applicable by 
the law that describes the offense.

Supervised release--under the Sentencing Reform Act of 1984, a form of post-
imprisonment supervision to be imposed by the court as a part of the 
sentence of imprisonment at the time of initial sentencing. Unlike parole, a 
term of supervised release does not replace a portion of the sentence of 
imprisonment, but rather is an order of supervision in addition to any term 
of imprisonment imposed by the court (compare also with probation).

Surety bond--an agreement by the defendant as a condition of release that 
requires a third party (usually a bail bondsman) to promise to pay the full 
bail amount in the event that the defendant fails to appear in court.

Suspect--an adult or juvenile considered by a criminal justice agency to be 
one who may have committed a specific criminal offense, but who has not been 
arrested or charged.

T

Tax law violations--federal tax fraud offenses include violations of laws 
within the Internal Revenue Service Code (26 U.S.C.). Included are income 
tax evasion and fraud, counterfeiting any stamps with intent to defraud the 
collection or payment of tax, willfully failing to collect or pay tax, and 
failure to obey summons to produce any papers concerning taxes. Also 
included are offenses such as failing to furnish receipts for employees of 
tax withheld, failing to furnish information relating to certain trusts, 
annuity, and bond purchase plans, and putting fraudulent or false statements 
on tax returns. Violations of excise and wagering tax laws and not obtaining 
a license for a business that makes a profit from foreign items are also 
included in this offense category.

Technical violation--failure to comply with any of the conditions of 
pretrial release, probation, or parole, excluding alleged new criminal 
activity. Technical violations may result in revocation of an offender’s 
release status. Conditions that may be imposed and then violated include 
remaining within a specified jurisdiction or appearing at specified 
intervals for drug tests.

Terminated on the merits--a judgment made after consideration of the 
substantive, as distinguished from procedural issues in a case. See also, 
procedural termination.

Termination--at the pretrial services stage: execution of sentence, 
acquittal, dismissal, diversion, or fugitive status; in the U.S. district 
court: conviction, acquittal, or dismissal; and at probation or supervised 
release: the removal of a person from supervision either for successful 
completion of the term of supervision or as the result of a revocation. 

Threats against the President--knowingly and willfully depositing in the 
mail, at any post office, or by any letter carrier a letter, paper, writing, 
print, or document containing any threat to take the life of or to inflict 
bodily harm upon the President, Vice President, or any other officer in 
order of succession to the Presidency. Knowingly and willfully making such 
threats to the above-named people is included in this offense.

Time served--the portion of a prisoner’s imposed sentence spent in prison 
(from arrival into jurisdiction of the Federal Bureau of Prisons until 
release from prison) plus any jail time served and credited. For prisoners 
serving concurrent sentences, time served may exceed the longest single 
sentence imposed.

Traffic offense--a violation of statutes relating to the operation, 
maintenance, use, ownership, licensing, and registration of self-propelled 
road vehicles, including driving under the influence, hit and run, and 
violations of law not requiring appearance in court.

Transportation violation--—a violation of the federal statutes relating to 
the Motor Carrier Act, which regulates the routes and rates of freight motor 
carriers and passenger motor carriers in interstate commerce.

Transportation of stolen property--transporting, selling, or receiving 
stolen goods, stolen securities, stolen moneys, stolen cattle, fraudulent 
state tax stamps, or articles used in counterfeiting, if the above articles 
or goods involve or constitute interstate or foreign commerce.
 
Trial conviction—conviction by judge or jury after trial.

True bill—an indictment endorsed by a grand jury as warranting prosecution 
of the accused.

U

United States--the territory occupied by the 50 states and the District of 
Columbia, and the outlying territories of Guam, Puerto Rico, Northern 
Mariana Islands, and the U.S. Virgin Islands. 

U.S. attorney--a lawyer appointed by the President in each judicial district 
to prosecute and defend cases for the federal government. The U.S. attorney 
employs a staff of assistant U.S. attorneys who appear as the government’s 
attorneys in individual cases. 

Unsecured bond--an agreement by the defendant as a condition of pretrial 
release in which the defendant agrees to pay the full bond amount in the 
event of nonappearance at trial, but is not required to post security as a 
condition to release.

V

Violation of pretrial release, probation, or parole--allegation of a new 
crime or a technical violation while on pretrial release, probation, or 
parole.

Violent offenses--threatening, attempting, or using physical force against a 
person. Includes murder, negligent manslaughter, assault, robbery, sexual 
abuse, kidnapping, and threats against the President. See also, specific 
offenses for citations.

W
Warrant--a court order (writ) that directs a law enforcement officer to 
conduct a search or arrest and bring a person before the judge, such as 
persons charged with a crime, escaped federal prisoners, or probation, 
parole, or bond default violators.

Warrant clearance or execution--refers to the closing of a fugitive 
investigation. Warrants can be cleared or executed in many ways, including 
the arrest or surrender of a fugitive, dismissal by the court, and lodging a 
detainer against a fugitive in custody. See also, detainer.

Warrant initiation--refers to the opening of a fugitive investigation upon 
receipt of a warrant.

Weapons violations--violations of any provisions of 18 U.S.C. §§ 922 
(unlawful acts) and 923 (licensing) with regard to the manufacturing, 
importing, possessing, receiving, and licensing of firearms and ammunition. 
Includes manufacturing, selling, possessing, or transporting any switchblade 
knife; or making, receiving, possessing, or transporting a firearm not 
registered in the National Firearms Registration Transfer Record within any 
territory or possession of the United States, within Indian country, or 
within the special maritime and territorial jurisdiction of the United 
States. Also, engaging in importing, manufacturing, or dealing in firearms, 
if not registered with the secretary in the Internal Revenue Service 
District in which the business is conducted or not having paid a special 
occupational tax. In addition, this code covers cases wherein a crime of 
violence or drug trafficking enhanced punishment is handed down when the 
crime was committed with a deadly weapon.

Wildlife offense--a violation of federal law enacted to protect endangered 
or threatened species, as well as migratory birds. The Endangered Species 
Act (16 U.S.C. Conservation) makes it unlawful for any person to take, 
import, sell, or ship endangered or threatened wildlife. Under this code, 
the Migratory Bird Treaty Act protects migratory birds, and the Lacey Act 
prohibits the trade of illegally taken fish and wildlife.

**************************************************************
The Bureau of Justice Statistics of the U.S. Department of Justice is the 
principal federal agency responsible for measuring crime, criminal 
victimization, criminal offenders, victims of crime, correlates of crime, 
and the operation of criminal and civil justice systems at the federal, 
state, tribal, and local levels. BJS collects, analyzes, and disseminates 
reliable and valid statistics on crime and justice systems in the United 
States, supports improvements to state and local criminal justice 
information systems, and participates with national and international 
organizations to develop and recommend national standards for justice 
statistics. William J. Sabol is acting director.

These statistical tables were prepared by the Urban Institute under the 
supervision of Mark Motivans of BJS. The tables were prepared under BJS 
grant number 2010-BJ-CX-K079.  Principal staff at the Urban Institute were 
William Adams, Julie Samuels, Barbara Parthasarathy, Kamala Mallik Kane, 
KeDeuk Kim, Jessica Kelly, and Sybil Mendonca. Mark Motivans provided 
verification.

Irene Cooperman and Jill Thomas edited the report. Barbara Quinn produced 
the report.

January 2015, NCJ 248469


************************************************
Office of Justice Programs
Innovation * Partnerships * Safer Neighborhoods
www.ojp.usdoj.gov
************************************************

********************
1/5/15 JER 3:15pm
********************

