U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Programs
Bureau of Justice Statistics Bulletin

March 2000, NCJ 177607

Federal Law Enforcement
Officers, 1998


-------------------------------------------------------------------
Note to readers of the ASCII version:
This file is text only without graphics and many of the tables. 
A Zip archive of the tables in this report in spreadsheet format 
(.wk1) and the full report including tables and graphics in
.pdf format are available from: 
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/abstract/fleo98.htm.

This report is one in a series. More recent editions may be available. 
To view a list of all in the series go to 
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/pubalp2.htm#fleo
-------------------------------------------------------------------

By Brian A. Reaves, Ph.D. 
and Timothy C. Hart
BJS Statisticians
---------------------------------------------------------
Highlights

 * Duty areas for the 83,000 Federal officers nationwide
included criminal investigation/enforcement (42%), police
response/patrol (19%), corrections (18%), noncriminal
investigation/ enforcement (14%), court operations (3%), and
security/protection (3%).

* Three-fifths of Federal officers were employed by the
Immigration and Naturalization Service (16,552),  Bureau of
Prisons (12,587), FBI (11,285), and U.S. Customs Service
(10,359). Twelve other agencies employed at least 500 officers.

* From 1996 to 1998 the INS reported the largest increase in
officers in both number (4,149) and percentage (33%).  More than 
half of this increase occurred within the Border Patrol, which 
employed 7,714 officers in 1998 compared to 5,441 in 1996 (up 42%).

* Seventeen States and the District of Columbia had more than
1,000 full-time Federal officers.  California (11,868) and Texas
(11,059) had the largest number.  New Hampshire (67), Delaware
(93), and Rhode Island (101) had the fewest.

* Nationwide, there were 31 Federal officers per 100,000
residents.  Outside the District of Columbia, which had 1,384
per 100,000, State ratios ranged from 68 per 100,000 in Arizona to 
4 per 100,000 in Iowa.

* Women accounted for 14.2% of Federal officers in 1998, about
the same as in 1996.  Minority representation was 29.4% in 1998,
compared to 28% in 1996.  Hispanic or Latino officers comprised
14.7% of officers in 1998, and African American or black officers, 
11.3%.
---------------------------------------------------------------------

As of June 1998, Federal agencies employed about 83,000
full-time personnel authorized to make arrests and carry
firearms, according to data provided by agencies in response to
a Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS) survey.  Compared with data
reported by agencies for June 1996, employment of such personnel
in 1998 was up about 8,000, or 11%.

As in 1996 the BJS officer count in 1998 included personnel with
Federal arrest authority who were also authorized (but not
necessarily required) to carry firearms in the performance of
their official duties. Federal correctional officers are
included.  All counts include both nonsupervisory and
supervisory personnel.

The totals exclude officers employed by the U.S. Armed Forces
(Army, Navy, Marine Corps, Air Force, and Coast Guard).  They
also exclude Federal officers serving in U.S. Territories or
foreign countries.  Agencies reported employing about 1,300
additional officers in U.S. Territories as of June 1998, but
data on employment in foreign countries were not obtained. 

In addition to overall totals, both the 1996 and 1998 surveys
collected data on the primary job function of Federal officers,
as well as their race, gender, and primary State of employment.

In response to the BJS survey, Federal agencies classified their
personnel with arrest and firearms authority into one of six
categories according to their primary area of duty.  (See page
13 for the category definitions).  The largest number, about
35,000, performed duties related to criminal investigation and
enforcement (42%) (figure 1).

The next largest categories were police response and patrol with
about 16,000 officers (19%), and corrections with about 15,000
(18%).  About 12,000 Federal officers performed duties related
to non- criminal investigation and enforcement (14%).  Smaller
numbers were assigned duties related to court operations (3%),
or security and protection (3%).    

Major employers of Federal officers

Department of Justice agencies

Agencies within the Department of Justice employed 56% of all
Federal officers, and the three largest employers of Federal
officers were within this Department.  These agencies were the
Immigration and Naturalization Service (INS), the Federal Bureau
of Prisons (BOP), and the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI)
(table 1).  

The Border Patrol employed 47% of the 16,552 INS officers with
the authority to make arrests and carry firearms.

These officers interdict undocumented aliens and contraband,
including narcotics.

The 7,714 Border Patrol officers, who included 7,639 agents and
75 pilots,  were all categorized under police response and
patrol.  They accounted for nearly half of the Federal officers
in that category.

The next largest group of INS officers with arrest and firearms
authority were the 4,073 immigration inspectors working at
ports of entry.  These officers were all categorized under the
noncriminal investigation and enforcement category.

The INS also employed 2,283 criminal investigators and
immigration agents responsible for investigating crimes within
its jurisdiction, and 2,482 officers performing corrections-
related duties related to detention and deportation.

BOP correctional officers comprised a large majority of the
Federal officers included in the corrections category.  As of
June 1998, 12,587 such officers maintained the security of BOP
institutions and the 106,000 inmates in custody.  Their daily
duties include supervision of inmates, conducting searches for
contraband, and responding to emergencies and disturbances. 
footnote 1 (The BJS limited its count to 
the full-time BOP correctional officers, who 
perform these duties as their primary function.  
BOP provides nearly 16,000 additional employees 
with arrest and firearms authority so that they can 
respond to emergencies and disturbances as necessary.)

The third largest employer of Federal officers within the
Justice Department was the FBI, which employed 11,285 full-time
personnel with arrest and firearms authority.  Nearly all were
FBI agents, responsible for criminal investigation and
enforcement.  FBI agents have broad investigative
responsibilities covering more than 250 Federal crimes including
bank fraud, embezzlement, kidnaping, and civil rights
violations.  The FBI also has concurrent jurisdiction with the
Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA) over drug offenses under
the Controlled Substances Act. 

The DEA was the fourth largest Justice Department employer of
Federal officers, with 3,305 employees authorized to make
arrests and carry firearms as of June 1998.  DEA agents
investigate major narcotics violators, enforce regulations
governing the manufacture and dispensing of controlled
substances, and perform other functions to prevent or control
drug trafficking. 

The other major employer within the Justice Department, the 
U.S. Marshals Service, employed 2,705 officers with arrest and
firearms authority as of June 1998.  The Marshals Service receives 
all persons arrested by Federal agencies and is responsible for 
their custody and transportation until sentencing.  It also 
transfers sentenced Federal inmates between facilities with BOP 
assistance. 

The Marshals Service also has jurisdiction over Federal fugitive
matters concerning escaped prisoners, probation and parole
violators, persons under DEA warrants, and defendants released
on bond.  The Marshals Service makes more than half of all
arrests of Federal fugitives.

The Marshals Service also manages the Federal Witness
Security and Federal Asset Seizure and Forfeiture Programs
provides security for Federal judicial facilities and personnel,
controls riots on Federal property, and escorts missile convoys.

Department of the Treasury agencies

Agencies with the Department of the Treasury employed about a
fourth of all Federal officers with arrest and firearms
authority.  The U.S. Customs Service, the Internal Revenue
Service (IRS), the U.S. Secret Service, and the Bureau of
Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms (ATF) were the major employers.

As of June 1998, the Customs Service employed 10,539 officers
with arrest and firearms authority.  This included 2,920
criminal investigators and 7,604 inspectors.  Customs Service
officers interdict and seize contraband entering the United
States, process persons (more than 450 million annually) and
items at 301 U.S. ports of entry, and administer certain
navigational laws.  The Customs Service has investigative
responsibilities covering more than 400 laws related to customs,
drugs, export control, and revenue fraud.

The second largest Treasury Department employer was the U.S.
Secret Service which employed 3,587 full-time personnel with the
authority to make arrest and carry firearms.  The total included
2,194 agents with criminal investigation and enforcement duties 
primarily related to counterfeiting, financial crimes, computer 
fraud, and threats against dignitaries.

The remainder of Secret Service officers were in the Uniformed
Division. These officers provide protection for the White House
Complex and other Presidential Offices, the Main Treasury
Building and Annex, the President and Vice President and their
immediate families, and foreign diplomatic missions.

The Internal Revenue Service (IRS) was the third largest
Treasury Department employer of officers with arrest and
firearms authority, with 3,361 such personnel in June 1998. 
About 90% worked in the Criminal Investigation Division, 
and 10% in Internal Security.  IRS agents primarily investigate 
tax fraud.

ATF, the fourth largest law enforcement agency within the
Treasury Department, employed 1,723 officers with arrest and
firearms authority as of June 1998.  ATF is primarily
responsible for investigating the criminal use of firearms and
explosives, and for enforcing Federal laws that tax or regulate
alcohol and tobacco.  

Other agencies with 500 or more officers

The largest employers of Federal officers with arrest and
firearms authority outside of the Justice and Treasury
Departments were the U.S. Postal Inspection Service, the
Administrative Office of the U.S. Courts, and the National Park
Service. 

Sixty-one percent of the 3,490 officers employed by the U.S.
Postal Inspection Service were criminal investigators
responsible for investigating violations of more than 200
Federal statutes related to the Postal Service.  The remainder
were Postal Police officers providing security for Postal
Service facilities, employees, and assets.

As of June 1998, the Federal Corrections and Supervision
Division of the Administrative Office of the U.S. Courts
employed approximately 4,600 probation officers, all of whom
have arrest authority.  In addition, 2,490 of them were granted
firearms authority by the chief judge in their Federal district. 

Officers in these districts met both the criteria for inclusion
in the BJS counts.  All Federal probation officers are
responsible for supervising Federal offenders on probation or
supervised release and for arresting violators.

The National Park Service employed 2,197 full-time personnel
with arrest and firearms authority in June 1998.  This included
1,524 park rangers (about a third of all rangers) commissioned
as law enforcement officers.  Additional rangers serving
seasonally were also commissioned officers but were considered
part-time for the BJS survey.

The Park Service total also includes 673 U.S. Park Police
officers.  Although most Park Police officers are in the
Washington, D.C., area, they are authorized to provide police
services for the entire National Park System.

Other Federal agencies that employed 500 or more full-time
personnel authorized to make arrests and carry firearms included
the following:

The U.S. Capitol Police employed 1,055 officers to provide
police response and patrol (95%) and other services for the U.S.
Capitol grounds and buildings.

The U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service employed 831 personnel with
arrest and firearms authority.  About three-fourths were refuge
officers, with duties related to patrol and enforcement of
Federal wildlife conservation and environmental laws in the
National Wildlife Refuge system.  The remainder were special
agents responsible for investigating violations of numerous
Federal wildlife protection laws and treaties.

The General Services Administration  employed 900 officers in
its Federal Protective Service.  These officers per- form police
response and patrol (77%), security and protection (17%), and
criminal investigation (7%) duties related to Federal buildings
and property, and the employees and visitors using them.

The USDA Forest Service employed 601 officers responsible for
criminal investigation and enforcement duties related to National 
Forest System lands, facilities, and users.  

Agencies employing at least 100 but 
fewer than 500 Federal officers

The 16 Federal agencies with 500 or more officers accounted for
about 77,000, or 93%, of the Federal officers covered by the BJS
survey.  Excluding offices of inspector general, 15  additional
Federal agencies employed at least 100 but fewer than 500
full-time personnel with arrest and firearms authority (table
2). (Footnote 3.  The Central Intelligence Agency's Security 
Protective Service employs officers with arrest and firearms 
authority at its U.S. facilities however, the number of such 
employees is classified information.)

The largest of them was the State Department's Bureau of
Diplomatic Security with 415 officers.  A majority of these 
Diplomatic Security Service officers were categorized under 
security and protection because their primary function is
to protect visiting dignitaries.  The agency's special agents
also investigate passport and visa fraud, and threats against
foreign missions in the U.S., foreign dignitaries, or Federal
employees.

Amtrak employed 318 full-time officers within its Police
Division.  These officers provide police response and patrol
(92%) and investigative (6%) services for a national railroad
system that has 24,000 employees and serves more than 21
million passengers annually.

The United States Mint, a bureau of the Department of the
Treasury, employed  282 officers within its Police Division. 
These officers provide police and patrol services for U.S. Mint
facilities, including safeguarding the Nation's coinage and gold
bullion reserves. 

The Department of Defense employed an estimated 275 officers
within its Defense Protective Service at the Pentagon.  They
provide law enforcement services at a facility where 23,000
persons work, occupying 3.7 million square feet of office space. 

The Interior Department's Bureau of Indian Affairs employed 263
officers in its Office of Law Enforcement Services to provide
law enforcement services in Indian country.  Some tribal
governments also operate their own police departments. 

Within the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA), the Veteran's
Health Administration employed 262 officers with arrest and
firearms authority as of June 1998.  These officers comprised
11% of the 2,393 VA officers with arrest authority nationwide
providing law enforcement services for 173 VA medical centers.
The VA began a pilot project of arming its police officers at
12 facilities in 1996 and plans to expand firearms authority to
the entire force.

The Department of Energy employed 210 personnel with arrest and
firearms authority in its Transportation Safeguards Division. 
These Nuclear Materials Couriers protect nuclear weapons
shipments from the manufacturer to designated locations.

The Tennessee Valley Authority (TVA), the Nation's largest
producer of electricity, employed 206 personnel with arrest and
firearms authority as of June 1998.  TVA Police officers provide
patrol and investigative services for TVA employees and
properties, and the users of TVA recreational facilities.

The Environmental Protection Agency employed 198 special 
agents with arrest and firearms authority within its Criminal
Investigation Division.  These officers investigate violations
of the Nation's environmental laws that pose a significant threat 
to human health and the environment.

The Department of the Interior's Bureau of Land Management 
(BLM) employed 197 officers with arrest and firearm authority. 
Three-fourths of these were BLM rangers providing police
response and patrol services, and a fourth were criminal
investigators.  BLM  manages 264 million acres of surface lands
located primarily in 12 Western States and 300 million acres of
below ground mineral estate located throughout the country.  BLM
lands receive about 60 million recreational visitors annually.

The Bureau of Engraving and Printing (BEP) employed 193 officers
with arrest and firearms authority within its Police Department.
These officers provide police services for BEP facilities
including those where currency, stamps, securities, and other
official U.S. documents are made. 

Within the Commerce Department, the National Oceanic and
Atmospheric Administration's National Marine Fisheries Service
(NMFS) employed 135 officers with arrest and firearms authority.
These special agents in the Office for Law Enforcement enforce
a variety of Federal laws and regulations that protect the
Nation's living marine resources. 

The Food and Drug Administration, located within the Department
of Health and Human Services, employed 123 criminal
investigators with arrest and firearms authority.  These
officers investigate violations of the Federal Food, Drug, and
Cosmetic Act and several other public health laws.

Within the Department of Commerce, the Bureau of Export
Administration employed 107 criminal investigators with arrest
and firearms authority in its Office of Export Enforcement. 
These agents investigate violations of export regulations and
laws.

The Library of Congress employed 100 officers on its police
force.  These officers provide law enforcement services in the
library's various buildings, protecting staff and patrons and
assisting in the protection of the library's property and
collections. 

Offices of inspector general

As of June 1998, 26 of the 61 Federal offices of inspector
general (IG) employed criminal investigators with arrest and
firearms authority (table 3).  Collectively, these offices
employed more than 2,200 such investigators.

Most of these investigators are deputized by the Justice
Department.  Offices of inspector general are responsible for
investigating criminal violations and for preventing and
detecting fraud, waste, and abuse related to Federal programs,
operations, and employees.

The Departments of Defense (339),  Health and Human Services
(272), and Agriculture (246) employed the largest number of
deputized investigators.  Others with 100 or more included the
Social Security Administration (216) and the Departments of
Housing and Urban Development (160), Justice (141), and Labor
(128).

Twenty-eight percent of IG investigators were women, and 19%
were members of an racial or ethnic minority.  African Americans
or blacks (10.2%) comprised the largest minority percentage
followed by Hispanics or Latinos (6.3%).  

Training for Federal officers

A majority of Federal officers receive  their training through
the Federal Law Enforcement Training Center (FLETC), a bureau of
the Treasury Department.  Exceptions include special agents with
the FBI and DEA, who complete basic training at their respective
academies in Quantico, Virginia.

During fiscal year 1970, its first year of operation, FLETC
graduated 848 students.  In its first full year of operations at
its current headquarters location at Glynco, Georgia, FLETC
graduated more than 5,000 students.  By fiscal 1998, this total
had grown to 26,000.  This included about 3,500 State and local
officers, and about 600 personnel from foreign countries. 

Although a large majority of FLETC graduates attend training at
Glynco, the FLETC Artesia Center in New Mexico graduated about
3,500 students in fiscal 1998.  This facility was established in
1990 to provide training for agencies that have concentrations
of personnel in the western United States, such as INS and BOP.

In 1995 a temporary FLETC satellite training campus was
established in Charleston, South Carolina, to train INS and
Border Patrol officers during the current expansion of these
forces.  This facility had about 1,500 graduates during fiscal
1998. 

During fiscal 1998 Federal agencies with 400 or more FLETC
graduates included INS, 7,279; Customs Service, 3,578; BOP,
2,969; Marshals Service, 1,073; IRS, 735; National Park Service,
480; ATF, 474; Federal Protective Service, 430; and the Secret
Service, 423.

The basic training requirements for Federal officers vary by
agency and by position within agencies, and FLETC offers more
than 100 different agency-specific training programs.

Among major employers, classroom training for criminal
investigators ranged from about 8 weeks to 22 weeks.  For patrol
officers, classroom training ranged from 4 weeks to 26 weeks. 
Field training requirements ranged from 2 weeks to 6 months for
patrol officers, and as long as 2 years of on-the-job training
for investigators.

In addition to their extensive training requirements for
officers, 24 Federal law enforcement agencies reported they had
a 4-year college degree requirement for entry-level positions. 
In most cases this requirement applied to criminal investigators.

Gender and race of Federal officers

Data on the gender and race of Federal officers were provided by
nearly all of the agencies included in the BJS survey.  Reported
data covered about 81,000, or 96%, of all Federal officers with
arrest and firearms authority in the States and Territories.

Overall, women accounted for 1 in every 7, or 14.2%, of Federal
officers with arrest and firearms authority (figure 2). 
Twenty-five percent of the officers employed by the IRS were
women, the largest proportion of any agency with 500 or more
officers (table 4).  The next highest percentage was at the U.S.
Customs Service, where 18.6% of the officers were women.

The percentage of female officers at the other major Treasury
Department law enforcement agencies, the ATF (12.2%) and the
Secret Service (8.6%), was lower than the overall average.

Among the major Justice Department agencies, women comprised the
highest percentage of officers at the FBI (15.9%), and lowest at
the DEA (7.9%).  About 12% of the officers at the INS, BOP, and
Marshals Service were women.

Nearly 3 in 10 Federal law enforcement officers were members of 
a racial or ethnic minority.  Hispanic or Latino officers accounted 
for 14.7%, non- Hispanic blacks or African Americans for 11.3%, 
Asians and Pacific Islanders for 2.2%, and American Indians for 1.1%.

Among agencies employing 500 or more officers with arrest and
firearms authority, the largest minority representation was at
the Federal Protective Service (42.3%) and the INS (40.8%). 
Other agencies where minorities comprised more than a fourth
of officers were the BOP (37.4%), U.S. Customs Service (33.7%),
U.S. Postal Inspection Service (32.9%), and U.S. Capitol Police
(32.6%).

The INS (32.0%) and the U.S. Customs Service (22.3%) employed
the highest percentage of Hispanics.  For blacks, the highest
percentages were found at the Federal Protective Service
(30.4%), U.S. Capitol Police (29.8%),  BOP (23.4%), and Postal
Inspection Service (22.5%).  The U.S. Forest Service (7.3%)
employed the highest percentage of American Indians, while the
Customs Service (3.5%) had the most Asians and Pacific
Islanders. 

States where Federal officers 
worked

Fifty-one percent of all Federal officers with arrest authority
were employed in California (11,868), Texas (11,059), the
District of Columbia (7,241), New York (6,988), and Florida
(5,343), (table 5).  These jurisdictions accounted for 53% of
the 51,288 full-time Federal officers who primarily performed
police response and patrol or criminal investigation and
enforcement functions.

Other States with 2,500 or more Federal officers included
Arizona (3,174), Pennsylvania (3,052), and Illinois (2,782). 
Ten additional States had at least 1,000 Federal officers: 
Virginia (2,278), Georgia (2,116), New Jersey (2,109), Georgia 
(2,116), Colorado (1,512), Washington (1,380)  Maryland (1,271), 
Michigan (1,249), Missouri (1,197), Massachusetts (1,126), and 
Ohio (1,026).

New Hampshire (67) had the smallest number of full-time Federal
officers, followed by Delaware (93), and Rhode Island (101). 
Six other States had fewer than 250 Federal officers including
North Dakota (227), Nebraska (214), Idaho (196), South Dakota
(165), Wyoming (162), and Iowa (121).

Overall, Federal agencies employed 31 officers with arrest and
firearms authority per 100,000 residents.  The District of
Columbia, the location of many headquarters, employed the most,
1,384 per 100,000.  States with at least 50 officers per 100,000
residents included Arizona (68), New Mexico (57), Texas (56),
and Alaska (52). 

In addition to the District of Columbia (1,218), 6 States had at
least 25 Federal officers performing patrol and investigative
functions per 100,000 residents.  These included New Mexico
(49), Arizona (44), Alaska (34), Texas (33), Wyoming (31), and
Virginia (26).

There were three States with fewer than 10 Federal officers per
100,000 residents:  Ohio (9), New Hampshire (6), and Iowa (4). 
There were 17 States with fewer than 10 Federal officers
performing patrol and investigative functions per 100,000
residents.  The lowest ratios were found in Kansas (5), Indiana
(5), Wisconsin (5), New  Hampshire (4), and Iowa (4).

The INS employed a majority of its officers in California (28%)
and Texas (28%).  About a sixth were based in Arizona (10%) and
New York (7%).  Nearly 3 in 4 Border patrol agents were based in
Texas (38%) and California (35%).  Another fifth were in the
other Mexican-border States of Arizona (15%) and New Mexico
(6%).  About 4% were in the 11 States bordering Canada.

The U.S. Customs Service based more than a third of its officers
in Texas (20%) and California (17%).  Next highest were Florida
(12%) and New York (11%).  A majority of the Federal officers in
both Texas (60%) and California (55%) worked for either the
Customs Service or the INS.

About 2 in 5 BOP correctional officers were employed in Texas
(11%), Pennsylvania (9%), Florida (8%), California (7%), and
Colorado (6%). 

The District of Columbia (12%), California (12%), and New York
(11%) accounted for more than a third of FBI agents. Other major
States of employment included Texas (8%), Virginia (6%), and
Florida (5%).

Nearly a third of Internal Revenue Service personnel with arrest
and firearms authority were in California (12%), New York (10%),
and Texas (9%).  The next highest percentages were in Florida
(6%) and Illinois (5%).

About 3 in 10 Postal Inspection Service officers were employed
in New York (17%) and California (12%).  The District of
Columbia, Pennsylvania, and Illinois had 7% each.

The DEA based about half its agents in California (16%), Texas
(12%), New York (11%), and Florida (11%).  Illinois and Arizona
accounted for 4% each.

The Administrative Office of the U.S. Courts reported that the
largest number of Federal probation officers with arrest and
firearms authority were employed in Texas (11%) and New York
(11%), followed by Florida (8%).

The U.S. Marshals Service had more than a third of its officers
based in New York (8%), California (8%), Texas (7%), Florida
(7%), and Virginia (6%).  Georgia and Pennsylvania accounted for
4% each. 

About a third of National Park Service (NPS) personnel with
arrest and firearms authority were in the District of Columbia
(23%) and California (11%).  Most of those in the District were
employed by the U.S. Park Police, which had 75% of its 673
officers there.  

The Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, and Firearms based more than a
fourth of its agents in the District of Columbia (10%), Texas
(8%), and California (8%).  Illinois and Florida accounted for
6% each.

The Federal Protective Service had about a fourth of its
officers in the District of Columbia (26%), with another fifth
in New York (11%) and California (10%).

California and Florida each accounted for 6% of U.S. Fish and
Wildlife Service personnel with arrest and firearms authority. 
Alaska and Texas were next with 5% each. 

More than a fifth of U.S. Forest Service officers were based in
California (22%). Another fifth were based in Oregon (9%), Montana 
(6%), and Idaho (6%). 

Trends in employment of Federal 
officers, 1996 versus 1998

Excluding the U.S. Armed Forces, the number of Federal officers
with arrest and firearms authority increased by about 8,000, or
11%, from June 1996 to June 1998.  About half of this increase
was accounted for by the INS, which  went from 12,403 officers
in 1996 to 16,552 officers 1998, an increase of 4,149, or 33.5%
(see box below).

The only other agency to report an increase of more than 1,000
officers was the BOP which added 1,258 officers for an increase
of 11.1%.  The only agency with a larger percentage increase was
the Federal Protective Service (39.9%), from 643 to 900.

After INS and BOP, the FBI (896), and  Customs Service (790) had
the largest increases in number of officers.  Other agencies
with increases of at least 250 officers included the Secret
Service (402), DEA (359), and Federal Protective Service (257).

After the FPS and INS, the largest percentage increases were
reported  by the U.S. Secret Service (12.6%), DEA (12.2%), BOP
(11.1%), FBI (8.9%), and Customs Service (8.1%).

From 1996 to 1998 the IRS experienced the largest decrease in
number of personnel with arrest and firearms authority, dropping
from 3,784 officers to 3,361, a decrease of 423 officers or
11.3%.  ATF dropped 146 officers, or 7.8%, from 1,869 officers
to 1,723.

Small decreases in number of personnel with arrest and firearms
authority were reported by the U.S. Postal Inspection Service
(86 officers, 2.4%),  U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service (38
officers, 4.4%), and U.S. Forest Service (28 officers, 2.9%).-

Growth in the Immigration and Naturalization 
Service, 1993-98 

In June 1998, 1 in 5 nonmilitary Federal officers with arrest
and firearms authority worked for the INS compared to 1 in 7 in
December 1993 (the reference month for the first BJS census of
Federal officers).  During this time, the number of INS officers
increased by about 7,000 - from 9,466 to 16,552.  This 75%
increase far outpaced that of any other Federal agency,
including the BOP which increased its number of correctional
officers by 2,600, or 26%, during the same period. 

From December 1993 to June 1998, the INS Border Patrol nearly
doubled in size, from 3,920 officers to 7,714.  

All of this increase occurred in the Mexican border States where 
the number of Border Patrol officers increased 109%, from 3,460 
to 7,214.

The number of INS criminal investigators (57%), inspectors
(73%), and detention officers (131%) in the States bordering
Mexico all increased during this time as well.  Overall, there
were 11,455 INS officers in these States in mid-1998 compared to
5,802 at yearend 1993, an increase of 97%.

The number of Border Patrol agents and INS inspectors decreased
some- what in the 11 States that border Canada from December
1993 to June 1998; however, there was an increase in the number
of criminal investigators and officers working in detention-related 
positions in these States.  This resulted in a slight  increase in 
the number of INS officers in the Canadian border States C from 2,045 
to 2,192 (7%).

In 1998, 69% of all INS personnel with arrest and firearms
authority were based in the Mexican border States, compared to
61% in 1993.  During the same time the percentage of INS
officers based in the Canadian border States decreased from 22%
to 13%.

Federal law enforcement officers 
killed or assaulted, 1994-98

The Uniform Crime Reports division of the FBI publishes data
annually on law enforcement officers killed or assaulted in the
United States and its territories through the Law Enforcement
Officers Killed and Assaulted (LEOKA) series.  According to
these data, Federal law enforcement officers experienced 3,610
assaults during the 5-year period 1994-98, an average of 722 per
year.  A total of 1,033, or 29%, of these assaults injured the
officer, and 23 resulted in an officer death.

Thirty-three percent of all assaults on Federal officers
involved the use of personal weapons such as hands, fists, or
feet, and 14% involved the use of a firearm.  Other weapons used
included vehicles (10%), blunt objects (2%), knives (2%), and
bombs (1%). 

Weapons used in assaults
on Federal officers, 1994-98
 
Personal weapon        33%
Threat                 18
Firearm                14
Vehicle                10
Blunt object            2
Knife                   2
Bomb                    1
Other                  19

The largest percentage of assaults on Federal officers occurred
while the officer was on patrol or guard duty (36%). 
Twenty-three percent were assaulted while conducting an
investigation or search, and 15% while making an arrest or
serving a summons.

Circumstances of assaults
on Federal officers, 1994-98
 
Patrol/guard duty              36%
Investigation.search           23
Arrest/summons                 15
Office duty                     4
Custody of prisoner             3
Protection duty                 2
Court duty                      2
Other duties                   19

Based on the LEOKA data for 1994-98, the National Park Service
had the highest annual assault rate among agencies employing
1,000 or more officers, 55.5 per 1,000.  Next were ATF (33.0),
DEA (19.9), and the INS (17.2).  The lowest rates were at the
FBI (3.5) and the IRS (2.0)

Although the LEOKA data do not provide information below the
agency level, different divisions with an agency may have
dramatically different assault rates.  For example, it is known
that in 1992 there were 228 assaults on Border Patrol agents.  
Even using 1993 employment levels, This is an assault rate of 
58.1 per 1,000 officers, considerably higher than the overall INS rate.

Assaults on Federal officers in agencies employing 1,000 or more
officers with arrest and firearms authority, 1994-98
 
                                            Average annual number of
                                            assaults, 1994-98
Agency                                      Total   Per 1,000 officers/a
National Park Service                        119           55.5
Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms       62           33.0
Drug Enforcement Administration               59           19.9
Immigration and Naturalization Service       213           17.2
U.S. Secret Service                           39           12.1
U.S. Customs Service                          94           11.2
U.S. Postal Inspection Service                24            6.7
U.S. Marshals Service                         22            8.2
U.S. Capitol Police                            6            5.6
Federal Bureau of Investigation               37            3.5
Internal Revenue Service                       8            2.0
 
a/Rate is calculated using average number of officers employed in June 1996.
Source:  FBI, Uniform Crime Reports, Law Enforcement Officers Killed
and Assaulted, 1994 through 1998.

The LEOKA data also do not include assaults on BOP staff;
however, BJS does periodically collect such data in its Census
of State and Federal Correctional Facilities.  In 1995 there
were 1,124 assaults on Federal prison staff, resulting in 1
death.  Over its 71-year history BOP has experienced an average
of one death of one correctional officer every 3 years.

The only agency with fewer than 1,000 officers for which data
are reported in LEOKA is the Bureau of Indian Affairs, which had
an average of 38 assaults per year against its officers from
1996-98.  This is equivalent to a rate of 113 assaults per 1,000
officers.

Job function definitions

Police response and patrol -- Includes personnel whose duties
are primarily related to preventive patrol, responding to
reports of illegal or disruptive activities, arresting law
violators, traffic control, crowd control, handling of
emergencies, or other traditional law enforcement
responsibilities.

Criminal investigation and enforcement -- Includes personnel
whose duties are primarily related to collection of evidence,
interdiction and seizure of contraband, electronic surveillance,
execution of search warrants, analysis of information, arrest of
suspects, developing cases for prosecution, or other
investigative and enforcement duties pertaining to Federal laws
and/or regulations.

Noncriminal investigation and enforcement -- Includes
investigators, inspectors, and other personnel whose duties
primarily involve employment and personnel security
investigations, internal investigations, civil investigations,
or any other type of investigation not considered to be criminal
in nature.

Security and protection -- Includes guards and other personnel
whose duties are primarily related to providing security for
Federal buildings, courts, records, assets, or other property or
to providing protection for Federal Government officials,
judges, prosecutors, jurors, foreign dignitaries, or other
designated persons.

Court operations -- Includes personnel whose duties are
primarily related to pretrial investigation, probation,
supervised release, arresting probation or supervised release
violators, executing warrants, serving civil process, witness
protection, or other activities related to the Federal court
system.

Corrections -- Includes correctional officers, detention guards,
and other personnel whose duties are primarily related to the
custody, control, supervision, or transportation of pretrial
detainees, prison inmates, or detained illegal aliens.

The Bureau of Justice Statistics 
is the statistical agency of the 
U.S. Department of Justice.  
Jan M. Chaiken, Ph.D., is director.

BJS Bulletins present the first release of findings from
permanent data collection programs.  Some of the descriptive 
information regarding agency functions was compiled from 
agency websites.

Brian A. Reaves and Timothy C. Hart wrote this Bulletin.  
Tom Hester edited it.  Jayne Robinson prepared the report 
for printing.

March 2000, NCJ 177607


End of file
3/7/00 ih
















