U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Programs
Bureau of Justice Statistics

********************************************************
This file is text only without graphics and many of the
tables. A Zip archive of the tables in this report in
spreadsheet format (.csv) and the full report including
tables and graphics in .pdf format are available on BJS
website at: http://www.bjs.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbdetail&iid=6086
*********************************************************

****************
Special Report
****************

*****************************************
Federal Prosecution of Commercial Sexual 
Exploitation of Children Cases, 2004-2013
*****************************************

William Adams and Abigail Flynn, Urban Institute

Between 2004 and 2013, the number of suspects in criminal matters 
referred to U.S. attorneys for commercial sexual exploitation of 
children (CSEC) offenses increased by 54%, from 2,972 to 4,579 
suspects (figure 1). The number of defendants prosecuted in cases 
filed in U.S. district court with a CSEC charge increased by 98% 
during this period, from 1,405 to 2,776 cases. In 2013, CSEC 
offenses made up 3.3% of all suspects prosecuted in U.S. district 
court, up from 1.5% in 2004.

Data in this report come from three federal justice agencies: the 
Executive Office for U.S. Attorneys’ (EOUSA) National LIONS 
(Legal Information Office Network System) database, which details 
the investigation and prosecution of suspects in criminal matters 
received and concluded; the Administrative Office of the U.S. 
Courts’ (AOUSC) Criminal Master File, which describes criminal 
cases filed and terminated in U.S. district court; the 
Administrative Office of the U.S. Courts’ Probation and Pretrial 
Services Automated Case Tracking System (PACTS) database, which 
collects data on defendants interviewed and supervised by 
pretrial services; and the U.S. Sentencing Commission’s 
Monitoring database, which captures data on defendants sentenced 
under the federal sentencing guidelines, including type of 
sentence imposed and length of prison term. 

Federal statutes and sentencing guidelines pertaining to CSEC 
offenses were used to define the universe of cases examined. For 
EOUSA data, the federal statute designated by U.S. Attorneys as 
the “lead charge” was used to define CSEC cases. For AOUSC 
criminal data, federal statutes for all five filing charges were 
examined. If any of the five charges was a CSEC statute, the case 
was defined as a CSEC case. (See Methodology for specific CSEC 
statutes and federal sentencing guidelines.)


**************************************************************
************
HIGHLIGHTS
************

* From 2004 to 2013, a total of 37,105 suspects were investigated 
and referred to U.S. attorneys for commercial sexual exploitation 
of children (CSEC) offenses.

* The FBI was the lead investigative agency in 45% of CSEC 
matters investigated and referred to U.S. attorneys from 2004 to 
2013.

* Nearly all defendants convicted of CSEC offenses from 2004 to 
2013 were sentenced to federal prison (98%). 

* The mean prison sentence imposed on CSEC defendants in 2013 was 
11.6 years.

* Six in 10 suspects in CSEC matters investigated and referred to 
U.S. Attorneys from 2004 to 2013 were prosecuted in U.S. district 
court.

* Most defendants charged for CSEC offenses from 
2004 to 2013 were male (97%), white (82%), U.S. citizens (97%), 
and had no prior felony convictions (79%). 

* CSEC suspects had a median age of 39 years.

* Nearly all (95%) defendants in CSEC cases adjudicated in 
federal court from 2004 to 2013 were convicted, mostly through 
guilty pleas (91%).
**************************************************************

*******************************************
Offenses related to the production of child 
pornography and child sex trafficking grew 
the most (19.5%) from 2004 to 2013 
*******************************************

From 2004 to 2013, a total of 37,105 suspects referred to U.S. 
attorneys had a CSEC lead charge. Suspects referred for the 
possession of child pornography (72%) accounted for the majority 
of all CSEC suspects referred, followed by child sex trafficking 
(18%) and child pornography production (10%) suspects (table 1).

The growth in suspects referred for child sex trafficking and the 
production of child pornography exceeded the growth in suspects 
referred for the possession of child pornography. The number of 
suspects referred for the production of child pornography 
increased 195% from 2004 to 2013 (from 218 to 643 suspects), and 
the number of suspects referred for child sex trafficking grew 
111% (from 488 to 1,031) (figure 2). The number of suspects 
referred for the possession of child pornography increased by 28% 
from 2004 to 2013, with the majority of the growth occurring from 
2004 to 2007. The number of suspects referred for the possession 
of child pornography grew less than 1% between 2007 and 2013 
(from 2,901 to 2,905 suspects) (not shown).

**************************************************************
**********************************
Commercial sexual exploitation 
of children offenses
**********************************

The U.S. Department of Justice’s Office of Juvenile Justice and 
Delinquency Prevention defines the commercial sexual exploitation 
of children (CSEC) offenses as “crimes of a sexual nature 
committed against juvenile victims for financial or other 
economic reasons.”***Footnote 1 
http://www.ojjdp.gov/programs/csec_program.html.*** Federal CSEC 
offenses include child sex trafficking and the production, 
trafficking, distribution, and possession of child pornography. 
They do not include child sex abuse offenses because there are no 
commercial aspects involved in such offenses. 
 
In this report, federal CSEC offenses are classified into three 
subtypes. (See Methodology for the federal statutes used to 
define these subtypes.)

* Child pornography production: includes sexually exploiting a 
minor to produce sexually explicit visual or printed materials; 
selling or buying of children for use in the production of child 
pornography; parent or custodian permitting minor to engage in 
sexually explicit conduct; and production of sexually explicit 
depictions of minors for importing into the United States.

* Child pornography possession: trafficking in materials 
involving the sexual exploitation of a minor through the 
possession, receipt, transport (including by shipping or 
mailing), or distribution of these materials. 

* Child sex trafficking: includes sex trafficking of children; 
transportation of a minor with intent for minor to engage in 
criminal sexual activity; coercion and enticement (transportation 
for prostitution or other criminal sexual activity); travel with 
intent to engage in illicit sexual contact with a minor; and 
engaging in illicit sexual conduct with a minor in a foreign 
country.
**************************************************************

*****************************************
The FBI (45%) was the most common lead 
investigative agency for CSEC matters 
referred for prosecution 
*****************************************

From 2004 to 2013, Department of Justice (DOJ) agencies were the 
lead investigative agency in 46% of all matters with a CSEC lead 
charge referred to U.S. attorneys for prosecution (table 2). The 
FBI served as the lead investigative agency in 45% of all CSEC 
matters referred. Department of Homeland Security (DHS) agencies 
investigated 31% of all CSEC referrals, with Immigration and 
Customs Enforcement investigating 22% of all CSEC referrals. 
State and local authorities referred another 7% of CSEC matters 
to U.S. attorneys, and federal and state task forces were 
responsible for 6%. About 10% of CSEC referrals came from various 
other investigative agencies, including the U.S. Postal Service, 
branches of the military, and other federal government agencies.

DOJ agencies were responsible for investigating a greater share 
of child sex trafficking matters (59%) than matters relating to 
the production (50%) and possession (43%) of child pornography. 
In comparison, DHS agencies investigated 35% of matters related 
to the possession of child pornography, 25% of matters related to 
the production of child pornography, and 19% of matters related 
to child sex trafficking.

*****************************************
Most suspects (60%) in CSEC matters 
concluded were prosecuted in U.S. 
district court
*****************************************

Of the 36,080 suspects in matters with a CSEC lead charge that 
were concluded by U.S. attorneys from 2004 to 2013, 21,569 (60%) 
were prosecuted in U.S. district court, 13,125 (36%) were 
declined for prosecution, and 1,386 (4%) were disposed by U.S. 
magistrates (table 3). The percentage of CSEC suspects prosecuted 
was higher than the share of suspects prosecuted for several 
major offense categories, including suspects for violent (58%), 
property (53%), and public order (42%) offenses. However, the 
percentage of CSEC suspects prosecuted was lower than the 
percentage of suspects prosecuted in drug (76%) and weapon (70%) 
offenses (not shown). 

Among matters concluded, suspects in matters related to the 
production of child pornography had the highest percentage of 
prosecution (65%) from 2004 to 2013, compared to suspects in 
matters related to child sex trafficking and the possession of 
child pornography (59% each). 

The overall prosecution rate for CSEC suspects increased from 53% 
in 2004 to 64% in 2013 (figure 3). During the same period, the 
percentage of suspects prosecuted for the production of child 
pornography increased from 51% to 71%, and the percentage of 
suspects prosecuted for the possession of child pornography 
increased from 52% to 64%. However, these increases did not occur 
at a constant rate. Percentages of suspects prosecuted for child 
pornography production and possession peaked in 2007 and then 
decreased before returning to 2007 levels by 2013. The percentage 
of suspects prosecuted for child sex trafficking decreased 
between 2004 and 2013, from 59% to 57%.

*****************************************
24% of CSEC matters were declined by U.S. 
attorneys due to weak or inadmissible 
evidence 
*****************************************

The most common reasons suspects with a CSEC lead charge were 
declined for prosecution by U.S. attorneys from 2003 to 2013 was 
because of weak or inadmissible evidence (24% of all 
declinations), referral to other authorities for prosecution 
(21%), and lack of criminal intent (20%). The most common reason 
that matters related to both the production of child pornography 
(32%) and child sex trafficking (26%) were declined was the 
referral to other authorities for prosecution. The most common 
reason that matters related to the possession of child 
pornography were declined was weak or inadmissible evidence (25%) 
(table 4).

*****************************************
The mean processing time for CSEC matters 
concluded by U.S. attorneys was more 
than 9 months
*****************************************

The mean processing time was 290 days (or 9 months) from the 
receipt of a matter investigated to disposition of the matter for 
all suspects in matters with a CSEC lead charge from 2004 to 2013 
(not shown). Matters related to the possession of child 
pornography had the longest average processing time (306 days), 
followed by matters related to child sex trafficking (253 days) 
and the production of child pornography (231 days). Matters with 
a CSEC lead charge that were declined for prosecution (474 days) 
had a much longer mean processing time than matters prosecuted 
(177 days) or disposed of by U.S. magistrate (247 days). The mean 
processing time for matters with a CSEC lead charge was higher 
than the mean for all other matters (192 days) and higher than 
all other major offense types except for property offenses (440 
days) (not shown).

The mean processing time for matters with a CSEC lead charge 
decreased by 1% overall from 2004 to 2013, but there were 
differences among CSEC offense types (not shown). Mean processing 
time decreased for both matters related to the production (down 
25%) and possession (down 4%) of child pornography, but increased 
for matters related to child sex trafficking (up 42%).

*****************************************
Most suspects charged with CSEC crimes 
were white, male, unmarried, U.S. citizens, 
and had no prior criminal record
*****************************************

Most suspects arrested for CSEC crimes were male (97%), white 
(82%), U.S. citizens (97%), had no prior felony convictions 
(79%), and were not married (70%) (table 5). More than half (56%) 
had no more than a high school education. CSEC suspects had a 
median age of 39 years. 

Suspects in matters related to the possession of child 
pornography were overwhelmingly male (99%), white (87%), and U.S. 
citizens (98%). They were also older (median age of 41 years) 
than other CSEC suspects, and were more likely to have no prior 
felony convictions (82%). Among suspects in matters related to 
child sex trafficking, 60% were white, 25% were black, 12% were 
Hispanic, 11% were female, and 6% were noncitizens. Suspects in 
matters of child sex trafficking were younger (median age of 34 
years) than other CSEC suspects, and more likely to have a 
criminal history (30% had a prior felony conviction). In 
comparison, 18% of suspects in matters related to the possession 
of child pornography had a prior felony conviction.

*****************************************
More than half (54%) of all CSEC 
defendants received pretrial release 
prior to case disposition
*****************************************

Fifty-four percent of all CSEC defendants received pretrial 
release, compared to 71% of property defendants, 64% of public 
order defendants, 37% of drug defendants, 31% of violent and 
weapon defendants, and 13% of immigration defendants (not shown). 
The percentage of CSEC defendants that received pretrial release 
was higher than the overall percentage (35%) for all federal 
defendants released prior to trial. The pretrial release rate 
varied by CSEC offense types. Sixty-three percent of defendants 
in cases related to the possession of child pornography received 
pretrial release, compared to 19% of defendants in cases related 
to the production of child pornography and 32% of defendants in 
cases related to child sex trafficking (table 6).

*****************************************
Number of CSEC defendants prosecuted 
nearly doubled between 2004 and 2013
*****************************************

The number of defendants in cases filed with any offenses for the 
production or possession of child pornography or child sex 
trafficking increased by 98% from 2004 to 2013.*** Footnote 2 
Data on the number of defendants prosecuted for a CSEC offense 
were based on the number of cases that had a CSEC statute as any 
of five filing offenses at case filing, according to the AOUSC 
criminal data.*** The number of defendants in cases filed with an 
offense for the production of child pornography had the largest 
proportional growth over this period, tripling from 170 to 528 
(up 211%) (figure 4). Prosecutions related to the possession of 
child pornography increased by 91%, from 1,118 defendants in 2004 to 2,140 
defendants in 2013. Prosecutions related to child sex trafficking 
grew by 87% between 2004 and 2013, from 314 to 586 defendants. Of 
the 21,887 defendants in cases filed in U.S. district court with 
a CSEC charge from 2004 to 2013, 80% of defendants were charged 
with possession of child pornography, 20% were for child sex 
trafficking, and 14% were for the production of child pornography 
(table 7). 

Nearly all (97%) of the 20,720 CSEC criminal cases filed in U.S. 
district court from 2004 to 2013 had one defendant. Cases were 
more likely to have multiple defendants when the charge was for 
child sex trafficking (9%) than when the charge was for the 
production (6%) or possession (1%) of child pornography (not 
shown).

*****************************************
91% of adjudication outcomes in CSEC 
cases were convictions resulting from 
guilty pleas
*****************************************

From 2004 to 2013, a total of 19,801 adjudications in federal 
cases had a CSEC charge with 95% of these adjudications resulting 
in a conviction (table 8).***Footnote 3 Data are based on the 
number of cases that had a CSEC statute as any of five offenses 
at case termination, according to the AOUSC criminal data. 
Charges at case termination may not be the same as charges at 
case filing.*** The conviction rate stayed relatively stable each 
year (fluctuating 1% to 2%).This was higher than the overall 
conviction rate (91%) for all federal cases adjudicated during 
the same period.

Ninety-one percent of convictions in cases with CSEC charges 
resulted from guilty pleas. Trials lead to a conviction in 4% of 
all CSEC adjudication outcomes. Trials that did not lead to a 
conviction made up less than 1% of all verdicts, and 5% of cases 
were dismissed. Defendants charged for sex trafficking had a 
higher percentage of case adjudications resulting in conviction 
by trial (9%) than defendants charged for the production (7%) or 
possession (3%) of child pornography.

*****************************************
98% of defendants convicted of CSEC 
offenses were sentenced to prison 
*****************************************

Nearly all (98%) CSEC defendants convicted in U.S. district court 
received a prison sentence (table 9).***Footnote 4 CSEC offense 
determinations were based on the primary sentencing guideline 
applied. (See Methodology for the specific federal sentencing 
guidelines that applied to CSEC offenses.) *** Ninety-seven 
percent received prison-only sentences, and less than 2% received 
sentences of prison terms combined with community confinement. 
Less than 1% received probation or probation with confinement 
conditions. Ninety-nine percent of defendants convicted of 
producing child pornography received a prison-only sentence, 
compared to 97% of defendants convicted of child sex trafficking 
and 94% of defendants convicted of the possession of child 
pornography.

The percentage of convicted CSEC defendants who were sentenced to 
prison (98%) was higher than the percentage of all convicted and 
sentenced federal defendants (86%) who received a prison 
sentence. More specifically, the percentage of convicted CSEC 
defendants who were sentenced to prison was also higher than the 
percentage of defendants sentenced to prison who were convicted 
in all major offense categories, including property (63%), public 
order (64%), violent (91%), weapon (92%), drug (93%), and 
immigration (96%) offenses (not shown).  

*****************************************
The mean prison sentence for CSEC 
defendants increased from 70 to 139 months 
*****************************************

Prison sentences imposed on defendants convicted of CSEC offenses 
were among the longest in the federal justice system. The mean 
prison sentence imposed on convicted CSEC defendants increased 
by 99% from 2004 to 2013, from 70 to 139 months (table 10).  

The mean prison sentence increased for all CSEC offense types 
between 2004 and 2013. The mean prison sentence for defendants 
who were convicted of the production of child pornography 
increased 106%, from 156 to 321 months. The mean prison term 
imposed for defendants who were convicted of the possession of 
child pornography also increased, from 34 to 66 months (up 94%). 
The mean prison sentence for defendants who were convicted of 
child sex trafficking increased from 82 to 133 months (up 62%).

**************************************************************
*****************************************
Federal legislation passed to combat 
commercial sexual exploitation of children 
and to increase penalties 
*****************************************

* Protection of Children from Sexual Predators Act of 1998--
increased penalties for offenses including the transportation of 
minors for illegal sexual activity and created a zero tolerance 
policy for the possession of child pornography

* Trafficking Victims Protection Act of 2000--established human 
trafficking (including sex trafficking of children) as federal 
offenses, and which was subsequently reauthorized in 2003, 2005, 
2008, and 2013.

* Prosecutorial Remedies and Other Tools to end the Exploitation 
of Children Today (PROTECT) Act of 2003--increased penalties for 
persons who travel abroad to engage in sex with a minor, and 
increased penalties for first-time child pornography production 
offenses. 

* Adam Walsh Child Protection and Safety Act (2006)--established 
new mandatory minimum penalties for child sex trafficking 
offenses (15-year minimum prison term if the victim was younger 
than age 14, and 10-year minimum prison term if the victim was 14 
to 17 years old) [18 USC §1591 (b) (1) & (2)].

* PROTECT Our Children Act (2008)--expanded scope of prosecutable 
child pornography offenses, including prohibiting broadcast of 
live images of child abuse and modification of images of 
identifiable minors to produce child pornography. 

* Effective Child Pornography Prosecution Act (2008)--clarified 
and broadened language in existing child pornography statutes to 
aid in the prosecution of child pornography offenses, including 
modifying statutes involving the transportation of child 
pornography to encompass the use of “any means or facility of 
interstate or foreign commerce.”

* William Wilberforce Trafficking Victims Protection 
Reauthorization Act (2008)--required screening of all 
unaccompanied non-U.S. citizen and U.S. national children 
entering the United States for human trafficking. Removed the 
knowledge-of-age requirement for cases of the sex trafficking 
of children.
**************************************************************

**************************************************************
*****************************************
Federal task forces and initiatives 
addressing the commercial sexual 
exploitation of children
*****************************************

* Internet Crimes Against Children Task Force Program (1998-
present)—a national network of task forces formed to combat 
internet crimes against children and sexual exploitation of 
children facilitated by the use of technology, and administered 
by the Department of Justice (DOJ), Office of Juvenile Justice 
and Delinquency Prevention. These task forces facilitate 
cooperation among federal, state, and local law enforcement and 
prosecutors and provide training on investigating and prosecuting 
cases involving internet crimes against children.

* Innocence Lost Initiative (2003-present)—created by the FBI in 
conjunction with the DOJ’s Child Exploitation and Obscenity 
Section and the National Center for Missing and Exploited 
Children to combat domestic sex trafficking of children. These 
task forces and working groups bring together federal, state, and 
local law enforcement to work with U.S. Attorney’s offices to 
identify children involved in domestic sex trafficking and to 
prosecute the persons who exploit them.

* Operation Predator (2003-present)—Immigration and Customs 
Enforcement initiative for the investigation of offenses 
involving child pornography, sex trafficking of children, and 
travel overseas for the purpose of sex with children. This 
initiative uses the National Child Victim Identification System, 
a database of child pornography, to prove images possessed by 
suspects depict real children. 

* Project Safe Childhood (2006-present)—DOJ initiative created to 
address the increase in the technology-facilitated sexual 
exploitation of children. It was launched in 2006 to address the 
increase in technology-facilitated crimes involving the sexual 
exploitation of children. Since it began, the DOJ's Criminal 
Division, the FBI, the Department of Homeland Security's Homeland 
Security Investigations, and the U.S. Postal Inspection Service 
have coordinated national and international operations targeting 
the production, distribution, and possession of child images.
**************************************************************

*****************
Methodology
*****************

The Federal Justice Statistics Program database compiles 
comprehensive information on individuals processed through the 
federal justice system from source data provided by the Executive 
Office for U.S. Attorneys (EOUSA), the Administrative Office of 
the U.S. Courts, (AOUSC), the U.S. Sentencing Commission (USSC), 
the U.S. Marshals Service, and the Federal Bureau of Prisons.
In this report, commercial sexual exploitation of children (CSEC) 
cases were defined according to the following federal statutes 
pertaining to CSEC offenses:

* Child pornography production--18 USC § 2251 and 18 USC §2251A

* Child pornography possession--18 USC § 2252, 18 USC § 2252A, 18 
USC § 2260, and 18 USC § 1466A

* Child sex trafficking--18 USC § 1591, 18 USC § 2422, and 18 USC 
§ 2423

For the statistics on sentencing presented in this report, CSEC 
defendant cases were defined through an examination of the 
highest U.S. Sentencing Guideline, if that primary guideline was 
one of the following:

* Child pornography production--§2G2.1 or §2G2.3

* Child pornography possession--§2G2.2 (or §2G2.4 where Guideline 
amendment year<=2004) and §2G2.6

* Child sex trafficking--§2G1.3 or (§2G1.1 and ADJ-CHI>0, where 
Guideline amendment year<=2003) 

For child pornography materials offenses, a further distinction 
was made between “possession” and “receipt, transport, and 
distribution” by examining the values of the U.S. Sentencing 
Commission (USSC) base offense level variable in these cases. The 
base offense levels range from 1 to 43 and are used as a measure 
of offense severity by the USSC.  For “possession” the base 
offense level was less than or equal to 18 and for “receipt, 
transport, and distribution” the base offense levels with values 
of 20, 21, and 22 were retained in the analysis

For suspects in criminal matters referred to U.S. attorneys, the 
lead charge was the federal statute pertaining to the most 
serious offense investigated, as determined by the assistant U.S. 
attorney responsible for the matter.*** Footnote 5 A matter was a 
potential case under investigation on which at least 1 hour of 
investigation time was spent. *** Data from the EOUSA Legal 
Information Office Network System were used to describe CSEC 
suspects in criminal matters referred to U.S. Attorneys by 
federal investigative agencies. If the lead charge designated was 
a CSEC charge, then the suspect matter was classified as a CSEC 
suspect matter and included in the data.***Footnote 6 For this 
report, CSEC charges include 18 USC § 2251; 18 USC §2251A; 18 USC 
§ 2252; 18 USC § 2252A; 18 USC § 2260; 18 USC § 1466A; 18 USC § 
1591; 18 USC § 2422; and 18 USC § 2423.***

Pretrial data from the AOUSC’s Office of Probation and Pretrial 
Services Automated Case Tracking System were used to describe the 
characteristics of CSEC defendants at their initial hearing and 
CSEC defendants who were released prior to trial. The most 
serious offense charged according to the federal judiciary’s 
hierarchy of offense severity was used to identify CSEC 
defendants at the pretrial stage. If the most serious offense 
corresponded to a CSEC charge, the defendant case record was 
defined as a CSEC case and counted in the data. 

AOUSC criminal data were used to describe CSEC defendants in 
criminal cases filed and adjudicated. The AOUSC criminal master 
file contains the top five filing and terminating charges. These 
five charges were examined to determine whether any of these 
charges was a CSEC charge. If any of the five charges was 
identified as a CSEC charge, the defendant case record was 
defined as a CSEC case and counted in the data. 

USSC data were used to describe CSEC defendants sentenced 
pursuant to the federal sentencing guidelines in U.S. district 
court. The primary guideline applied at sentencing was used to 
identify sentenced CSEC defendants.

For child sex trafficking offenses, it was not possible to subset 
statutes pertaining to only child victims for two reasons:

* the structure of the federal sex trafficking statute (18 USC § 
1591) covers sex trafficking offenses against both child and 
adult victims in the same section and does not allow for 
distinguishing between these two types of victims

* limitations in the manner in which the underlying data from the 
source agencies record statute information that does not permit 
subsetting for child victims only [applies for the sex 
transportation statutes (18 USC § 2422, and 18 USC § 2423)]. 

For these reasons, data for child sex trafficking will represent 
an over count of persons age 17 or younger who were victims of 
this offense.

**************************************************************
The Bureau of Justice Statistics of the U.S. Department of 
Justice is the principal federal agency responsible for measuring 
crime, criminal victimization, criminal offenders, victims of 
crime, correlates of crime, and the operation of criminal and 
civil justice systems at the federal, state, tribal, and local 
levels. BJS collects, analyzes, and disseminates reliable and 
valid statistics on crime and justice systems in the United 
States, supports improvements to state and local criminal justice 
information systems, and participates with national and 
international organizations to develop and recommend national 
standards for justice statistics. Jeri M. Mulrow is acting 
director.

This report was supported by Grant No. 2013-R2-CX-K056 awarded by 
BJS to the Urban Institute. At the Urban Institute, William Adams 
and Abigail Flynn wrote the report and Kamala Malik-Kane verified 
the report. Mark Motivans of BJS collaborated on technical 
details and overall quality in accordance with BJS’s Statistical 
Integrity and Data Quality guidelines.

Monika Potemra and Jill Thomas edited the report. Steve 
Grudziecki produced the report.

October 2017, NCJ 250746
**************************************************************
Office of Justice Programs
Building Solutions • Supporting Communities • Advancing Justice 
www.ojp.usdoj.gov
******************************************************************

*************************
9/19/2017/ JER/ 11:40
*************************
