U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Programs
Bureau of Justice Statistics
Bulletin

Federal Prosecution of Child Sex Exploitation Offenders, 2006

December 2007, NCJ 219412

-----------------------------------------------------------

-----------------------------------------------------------
This file is text only without graphics and many of the
tables. A Zip archive of the tables in this report in 
spreadsheet format (.csv) and the full report including 
tables and graphics in .pdf format are available from:
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/abstract/fpcseo06.htm

-------------------------------------------------------------

-------------------------------------------------------------
Mark Motivans, Ph.D., 
and Tracey Kyckelhahn, 
BJS Statisticians
-------------------------------------------------------------

During 2006, 3,661 suspects were referred to U.S. attorneys
for child sex exploitation offenses. Child pornography
constituted 69% of referrals, followed by sex abuse (16%) and
sex transportation (14%). Almost 6 in 10 child sex crime
suspects were prosecuted in 2006, up from 4 in 10 in 1994.
Nine of 10 defendants were convicted and sentenced to prison,
up from 8 in 10 in 1994. The median prison sentence imposed
increased from 36 months to 63 months over this period. Most
suspects charged with sex exploitation were white, male, U.S.
citizens, and had attended some college.

In this bulletin, Federal child sex exploitation offenses
include child pornography, sex transportation, and sex abuse.
Data from the Executive Office for United States Attorneys,
the Administrative Office of the U.S. Courts, and the U.S.
Sentencing Commission were used to describe Federal
prosecution of child sex exploitation crimes. Congressional
authority to regulate interstate commerce, including the
mail, is the basis for Federal prosecution of child
pornography. Federal jurisdiction over certain child sex
abuse offenses is limited to the military, national parks,
and Native American reservations. (See Methodology for
selected Federal criminal sex exploitation statutes.)
 
Child sex offenses among the fastest growing offenses of the
Federal criminal caseload from 1994 to 2006

Child sex offenses constituted a relatively small share of
the Federal criminal caseload. A total of 2,039 suspects were
prosecuted for Federal sex offenses in 2006, representing
about 2.5% of the 83,148 suspects prosecuted in Federal
courts. Suspects arrested and booked by the U.S. Marshals
Service for a sex offense increased from 431 in 1994 to 2,191
in 2006. This was a 15% annual average  increase, making sex
offenses among the fastest growing crimes handled by the
Federal justice system. 

Child pornography made up 69% of sex offenses referred to
U.S. attorneys in 2006 

The main sex exploitation offense referred to U.S. attorneys
shifted from sex abuse (73%) in 1994 to child pornography
(69%) in 2006. Child pornography matters accounted for 82% of
the growth in sex exploitation matters referred from 1994 to
2006 (table 1). Sex transportation referrals accounted for
17% and sex abuse accounted for 1% of the growth over this
period.

The FBI referred more than half of all sex exploitation
suspects for prosecution in 2006

Several Federal agencies investigate sex exploitation
offenses, primarily the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI)
in the Department of Justice, U.S. Immigration and Customs
Enforcement (ICE) in the Department of Homeland Security, and
the U.S. Postal Inspections Services (USPIS). The FBI
referred about half of all sex exploitation suspects to U.S.
attorneys for prosecution in both 1994 and 2006 (figure 2).
Since Homeland Security was created in March 2003, it has
referred an increasing number of sex exploitation suspects,
referring nearly a third (32% or 1,182) of sex exploitation
suspects in 2006. Immigration and Customs Enforcement
investigated the majority (967) of the referrals made by
Homeland Security.
 
Federal task forces integral in investigating and prosecuting
computer-facilitated crimes against children

In the 1980s the mail was the primary means of distributing
child pornography. The Child Protection Act of 1984 expanded
the U.S. Postal Inspector's role in investigating those who
knowingly sent and received child pornography through the
mail. Over the past two decades, the dramatic increase in
Internet availability provided a relatively anonymous forum
for instantaneous exchange of pornographic images that more
easily circumvented authorities. Federal task forces have
been integral in investigating and prosecuting
computer-facilitated crimes against children.

Federal legislation, programs, and task forces over time have
focused on enhancing penalties for child sex exploitation and
increasing enforcement coordination:

*The FBI's Innocent Images National Initiative, created in
1995, deploys specialized units in each of its 56 field
offices to investigate crimes against children. 

*The National Center for Missing and Exploited Children is a
national resource for law enforcement, including the Cyber
Tipline which receives tips from the public on child sex
exploitation.
 
*Project Safe Childhood, created in 2006, is a Department of
Justice initiative seeking to maximize the Federal response
in prosecuting child sex exploitation. 

*Internet Crimes Against Children (ICAC) Task Forces are
composed of Federal, State, and local law enforcement
agencies. There are 56 ICAC task forces in all 50 states. 

*Operation Predator, conducted by ICE, was created in 2003 by
Homeland Security to target child sex tourism and child
pornography networks. The project is supported by a
clearinghouse of seized images used to assist in the
identification of victims.

2,039 sex exploitation suspects were prosecuted in 2006, up
from 313 in 1994

Overall, 57% (2,039) of sex exploitation suspects in matters
concluded by U.S. attorneys were prosecuted, an increase from
40% (313) prosecuted in 1994 (figure 3). By comparison, 59%
of the 141,130 suspects in all matters concluded by U.S.
attorneys in 2006 were prosecuted. Prosecution rates varied
by offenses charged in 2006: violent (59%), drug (77%),
property (55%), immigration (51%), weapons (69%), and public
order (41%). From 1994 to 2006, drug, weapons, and violent
suspects were prosecuted at greater rates than sex
exploitation suspects.

Suspects were prosecuted at different rates depending on the
sex offense involved. Sex transportation suspects had the
highest prosecution rate (62%), followed by suspects charged
with child pornography (59%) and sex abuse (46%) (table 2).
Across types of sex offenses, about 4% of matters concluded
were disposed by a U.S. magistrate, which are defined by
statute as misdemeanors. 

Thirty-nine percent of all sex exploitation matters were
declined for prosecution by U.S. attorneys in 2006
     
The decision to decline to prosecute a suspect is influenced
by various factors, such as weak or insufficient evidence or
lack of resources. Suspects in 30% of matters concluded in
2006 were declined due to weak or inadmissible evidence
(table 3). A fifth (20%) of matters concluded were declined
due to lack of evidence of criminal intent (no crime
established), and 15% were referred or handled in other
prosecutions. 

More than half of sex abuse declinations were due to weak
evidence. In comparison, weak evidence was stated as the
reason for 24% of declinations for child pornography and 20%
of declinations for sex transportation.
 
Just over half of sex exploitation defendants received
pretrial release prior to case disposition

The court considers the nature and circumstances of the
offense, the defendant's family ties, ties to the community,
past conduct, and other factors in determining release prior
to case disposition. (See The Bail Reform Act of 1984, 18
U.S.C. . 3141.) A third (33%) of all defendants received
release prior to case disposition, compared to 53% for sex
exploitation offenders and 67% for property offenders (figure
4). Of sex exploitation defendants terminating pretrial
release in 2006, 11% received a violation and 7% had their
pretrial release revoked. Sex exploitation defendants had
lower rates of violation and revocation than violent, drug,
weapons, and immigration defendants (figure 5).

Federal sex abuse investigations were greater in judicial
districts with tribal populations

Due to unique jurisdictional issues, sex offenses committed
in Indian Country may be investigated by tribal police, state
or local law enforcement, or Federal law enforcement
agencies, such as the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI)
or the Bureau of Indian Affairs (BIA). Likewise prosecutions
of these cases can occur in the Federal, State, or Tribal
courts. 

The Federal judicial district of South Dakota handled 21% of
sex abuse matters concluded by U.S. attorneys. Arizona
handled 18%; New Mexico, 14%; and Montana, 5% (figure 6).
These 4 Federal judicial districts handled nearly 3 of 5 sex
abuse matters concluded by U.S. attorneys from 2004 to 2006.
 
In 2003, Montana, South Dakota, Arizona, and New Mexico
contained 11% of the 593 Federally recognized tribal entities
and 32% of the total 1.9 million tribal enrollment (table 4).
Thirty-four percent of the enrolled tribal population under
age 16 resided on or near reservations in the four Federal
judicial districts that handled about 60% of sex abuse
matters.

Nearly three-quarters of the sex abuse defendants arraigned
in Federal court in 2006 were American Indian or Alaska
Native (table 5). Of the 249 defendants arraigned in 2006
with a sex abuse offense, about half were from four Federal
judicial districts: New Mexico, Arizona, Montana, and South
Dakota. Ninety percent of defendants arraigned in these four
districts were American Indian/Alaska Native.

Most suspects charged with child pornography were white,
male, and had attended some college

The median age for sex exploitation offenders was 39 years
(table 6). One in five had a prior felony conviction.
Compared to all suspects arraigned in 2006, sex exploitation
offenders were on average older and less likely to have a
prior felony conviction (not shown in table).

Eighty-nine percent of arrestees charged with child
pornography were white, 99% were male, and 58% had attended
some college. The median age at arraignment was 42 years.

Suspects charged with sex abuse tended to be younger,
American Indian or Alaska Native, and less educated. Nearly
three-quarters of Federal sex abuse defendants were American
Indian or Alaska Native. The median age at arraignment was 29
years.

Most suspects charged with sex transportation offenses were
white (70%). Twelve percent of sex transportation suspects
were non-U.S. citizens, and 9% were female. The median age at
arraignment was 36 years. Twenty-six percent of sex
transportation defendants had a prior felony conviction
compared to 20% of pornography defendants and 21% of sex
abuse defendants. 

Over the past decade adjudications for child sex exploitation
offenses nearly quadrupled
 
During 2006, 1,850 defendants were adjudicated for child sex
exploitation offenses, up from 472 in 1996. Child pornography
defendants represented 65% of all sex exploitation defendants
adjudicated in 2006, followed by sex transportation
defendants (20%) and sex abuse (15%) defendants. Ninety-three
percent of sex exploitation defendants were convicted, up
from 87% in 1996. 

From 1996 to 2006 a greater percent of convictions for sex
offenses resulted from pleas than from trials 

In 2006, child pornography defendants were more likely to be
convicted (95%) than sex transportation (92%) and sex abuse
(86%) defendants (table 7). The conviction rate increased for
sex abuse defendants from 81% in 1996 to 86% in 2006 while
the conviction rate decreased slightly for child pornography
defendants (from 97% in 1996 to 95% in 2006). Sex
transportation defendants were convicted at about the same
rate for the two periods (91% in 1996; 92% in 2006). Nine of
ten defendants who were not convicted had their cases
dismissed.

All three types of offenses had a greater percent of
convictions resulting from pleas than from trials between
1996 and 2006. The greatest increase in pleas over this
period was for sex transportation cases. In 2006, 92% of
child pornography defendants were convicted through a plea.
Eighty-six percent of sex transportation defendants and 76%
of sex abuse defendants pled guilty. 

Convicted sex offenders sentenced to prison increased from
81% in 1996 to 96% in 2006

Federal penalties include prison, probation, restitution,
civil and criminal fines and forfeiture, and civil remedies
for personal injuries. From 1996 to 2006 the percent of cases
sentenced to prison increased from 81% to 96%. Over the same
period probation decreased from 18% to 4% of sentences
imposed. 

Child pornography represented the largest increase in persons
receiving a prison sentence--77% were sent to prison in 1996
compared with 97% in 2006. The percent sent to prison for sex
transportation increased from 91% in 1996 to 98% in 2006.
Defendants convicted of sex abuse received prison 83% of the
time in 1996 compared with 86% in 2006.

66% of sex abuse defendants received a sentencing enhancement
because a victim was under age 16

Over half of sex abuse defendants sentenced under U.S.
Sentencing Guidelines had a victim under age 12 (table 8).
Two-thirds (66%) of these defendants received a sentencing
enhancement  because a victim was under age 16. More than a
third (37%) was sentenced for having a victim in their
custody, care, or supervision.

Two in three child pornography defendants were sentenced for
having 10 or more items, such as books, magazines, or films.
Ninety-five percent were sentenced for materials depicting a
minor under age 12, and 97% were sentenced for the use of a
computer in the offense. Nearly 3 of 4 sentenced sex
transportation defendants used a computer interactive service
in the offense; 7% were sentenced for having a victim in
their custody, care, or supervision. 

Recent legislation increased penalties for sex offenses
against children
 
*The Protection of Children from Sexual Predators Act of 1998
increased penalties for offenses against children and for
repeat offenders including pornography, sex transportation,
and abuse.
 
*The Trafficking Victims Protection Act of 2000 added sex
trafficking of children (18 U.S.C. .1591) as a Federal
offense with penalties of up to life in prison.
 
*The Prosecutorial Remedies and Other Tools to end the
Exploitation of Children Today (PROTECT) Act of 2003
increased penalties for first time offenders producing child
pornography, U.S. citizens traveling abroad to engage in sex
with a minor and included a "two strikes" provision requiring
life sentence for offenders with 2 prior serious child sex
offenses. 

*The Adam Walsh Child Protection and Safety Act of 2006
substantially increased mandatory minimum prison terms for
child prostitution, sex abuse, sex trafficking of children
and distribution of child pornography. The act eliminated the
statute of limitations for most child sex offenses.

Median prison term for Federal sex exploitation offenses more
than doubled from 1996 to 2006

In 2006, the median prison sentence imposed was greatest for
sex abuse offenses (70 months) followed by child pornography
(63 months) and sex transportation (60 months). The median
sentenced for sex transportation was 60 months in 2006 and
1996. The median sentence increased from 44 to 70 months for
sex abuse and from 15 to 63 months for child pornography. In
comparison, median prison terms for drug and weapon offenders
remained stable and increased for violent offenses.

Methodology

The Federal Justice Statistics Program (FJSP) database
compiles comprehensive information on individuals processed
through the Federal justice system from source files provided
by the Executive Office for United States Attorneys (EOUSA),
the Administrative Office of the United States Courts
(AOUSC), the United States Sentencing Commission (USSC), and
other agencies.

In this report, sex exploitation offenders were defined
according to selected Federal criminal statutes. (See textbox
on page 8.). For the offenses sex abuse and illegal sex
transportation, data limitations did not permit subsetting
statutes pertaining only to child victims. Statistics on
these categories are overcounted to the extent persons 18
years and older were victims of the offense. For suspects in
matters referred to U.S. attorneys, the "lead charge" is the 
basis for investigation and for which at least 1 hour of
investigation time was spent. As secondary charges are not
available, child sex exploitation is undercounted to the
extent it is present as a secondary charge.  

AOUSC data were used to describe the distribution of sex
exploitation defendants in cases adjudicated and sentenced.
The "most serious terminating offense" designation is the
offense that yields the maximum statutory penalty. The USSC
provided data on sex exploitation defendants sentenced under
the Sentencing Reform Act of 1984. Data do not permit the
identification of sex exploitation suspects/defendants
residing in Indian Country. 

Selected Federal criminal sex exploitation statutes 

*Child Pornography

 *18 U.S.C. .. 2251 & 2251A: Sexual exploitation of
  children and selling or buying of children. 
 *18 U.S.C. .. 2252 & 2252A & 2252B: Production,
  distribution, and possession of child pornography. 
 *18 U.S.C. . 2260: Production of child pornography for     
  importation into the United States.
 
*Sex Abuse 

 *18 U.S.C. . 2241: Aggravated sexual abuse. 
 *18 U.S.C. . 2242: Sexual abuse. 
 *18 U.S.C. . 2243: Sexual abuse of a minor or ward. 
 *18 U.S.C. . 2244: Abusive sexual contact. 

*Transportation for Illegal Sexual Activity

 *18 U.S.C. . 1591: Sex trafficking of children or by      
  force, fraud, or coercion. 
 *18 U.S.C. . 2422: Coercion and enticement. 
 *18 U.S.C. . 2423: Transportation of minors. Includes
  engaging in illicit sexual conduct in foreign countries.

-----------------------------------------------------------

-----------------------------------------------------------
The Bureau of Justice Statistics is the statistical agency of
the U.S. Department of Justice. Jeffrey L. Sedgwick is
director.

BJS Bulletins present the first release of findings from
permanent data collection programs.

This Bulletin was written by Mark Motivans, Ph.D., and Tracey
Kyckelhahn. Tina Dorsey produced and edited the report, under
the supervision of Doris J. James. Jayne E. Robinson prepared
the report for final printing.

December 2007, NCJ 219412

------------------------------------------------------------

-------------------------------------------------------------
This report in portable document format and in ASCII and its
related statistical data and tables are available at the BJS
World Wide Web Internet site:
<http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/abstract/fpcseo06.htm>.

-------------------------------------------------------------

-------------------------------------------------------------
Office of Justice Programs
Innovation   Partnerships   Safer Neighborhoods
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov

------------------------------------------------------------


12/18/2007/JR



