U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Programs
Bureau of Justice Statistics

Crime Data Crime

Firearms Stolen during Household Burglaries 
and Other Property Crimes, 2005–2010

Lynn Langton, BJS Statistician

October 2012, NCJ 239436
-----------------------------------------------------
This file is text only without graphics and many of the
tables. A Zip archive of the tables in this report in
spreadsheet format (.csv) and the full report including
tables and graphics in .pdf format are available on BJS
website at:http://bjs.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbdetail&iid=4534
--------------------------------------------------------

Victimizations involving the theft of firearms declined from 
283,600 in 1994 to 145,300 in 2010 (figure 1). Overall, about 
1.4 million guns, or an annual average of 232,400, were 
stolen during burglaries and other property crimes in the 
six-year period from 2005 through 2010. Of these stolen 
firearms, at least 80% (186,800) had not been recovered at 
the time of the National Crime Victimization Survey (NCVS) 
interview.

The data in this report were drawn from the Bureau of Justice 
Statistics’ (BJS) NCVS, which annually collects information 
on nonfatal victimizations reported and not reported to the 
police against persons age 12 or older from a nationally 
representative sample of U.S. households. The NCVS collects 
data on criminal incidents for which theft or attempted theft 
is either a component of the victimization (i.e., robbery, 
personal larceny, burglary, motor vehicle theft, and other 
property theft) or could occur in connection with the 
victimization (i.e., rape or sexual assault). This report 
examines the theft of firearms in criminal victimizations, 
focusing on the rate, number, amount of loss, and recovery of 
guns taken during burglaries and other property crimes, which 
include motor vehicle theft and other theft. It presents 
information on how firearms may end up in the hands of 
persons to whom they do not belong.

Trend estimates are based on two-year rolling averages 
centered on the most recent year (figure 1). For example, 
estimates reported for 2010 represent the average estimates 
for 2009 and 2010. This method improves the reliability and 
stability of estimate comparisons over time. For all tables 
in this report, aggregate data for the time from 2005 through 
2010 are the focus.
 
************************************
Firearms were stolen in 2% of violent and 1% of property 
crimes involving theft from 2005 through 2010
************************************

On average, firearms were stolen in an annual average of 
about 4% of the 2.4 million burglaries occurring each year, 
in 2% of the 529,200 robberies, and in less than 1% of the 
13.6 million other crimes involving theft from 2005 through 
2010 (table 1). Burglaries accounted for 58% of the 153,900 
victimizations each year in which a gun was stolen, whereas 
robberies accounted for about 7% of the victimizations 
involving a gun theft. About 0.4% of thefts involved the 
theft of a gun, yet thefts accounted for about a third (33%) 
of the victimizations in which a gun was stolen. Overall, 
about 93% of gun thefts occurred during property crimes. 
Therefore, remainder of this report focuses on property 
crime.

Between 1994 and 2010, no statistically significant change 
was observed in the percentage of completed burglaries or 
other property crimes that involved the theft of at least one 
firearm (figure 2). This may suggest that the overall decline 
in the number of victimizations involving gun theft was not 
due to a decline in the number of privately owned guns that 
could be stolen.

************************************
Handguns were the most common type 
of firearm stolen
************************************

At least one handgun was stolen in 63% of burglaries 
involving gun theft (table 2). In 19% of burglaries, a 
handgun was stolen along with another type of firearm. About 
39% of burglaries involving gun theft resulted in the theft 
of multiple guns, compared to about 15% of other property 
crimes involving gun theft. An average of about three guns 
were stolen during burglaries involving the theft of multiple 
guns, and about two guns were stolen during other property 
crimes involving multiple gun thefts. Due to the greater 
percentage of victimizations involving more than one gun, as 
well as the greater number of victimizations involving stolen 
firearms each year, burglaries accounted for nearly three 
times as many stolen guns than did other property crimes. In 
the six-year period from 2005 through 2010, an average of 
about 172,000 guns were stolen during burglaries and 60,300 
guns were stolen during other property crimes each year. A 
total of 1.4 million guns were stolen during the six-year 
period.

************************************
Property crimes involving only stolen 
firearms resulted in an average annual
loss of $27 million
************************************

Each year from 2005 through 2010, households that experienced 
gun theft from burglaries or other property crimes lost a 
total of about $600 million on average from these crimes. The 
majority of the loss was from other items stolen along with 
firearms. Households that experienced the theft of a firearm 
and other items had a mean loss of $7,600 in burglaries and 
$4,700 in other property crimes (table 3). The mean loss when 
only one gun and nothing else was stolen was between $400 and 
$500 per incident. Among households that experienced 
burglaries and other property crimes in which a gun was the 
only type of item stolen, the total loss was about $27 
million per year.

************************************
Nearly 90% of burglaries involving 
stolen firearms were reported to 
the police
************************************

From 2005 through 2010, 86% of burglaries and 75% of other 
property crimes involving a stolen firearm were reported to 
police (table 4). Households were more likely to report to 
the police burglaries or other property crimes involving a 
stolen gun than property crimes in which other items with 
comparable value were stolen (approximately $500 on average).
 
Among burglary victimizations, a greater percentage of 
households reported the incident to the police when a handgun 
(91%), another type of firearm (76%), or both (94%) were 
stolen than when other items valued from $500 to $999 were 
stolen (62%). A slightly greater percentage of households 
reported the theft of one firearm and no other items stolen 
to the police (77%) (not shown in table) than other stolen 
items valued from $500 to $999 (62%).

************************************
About 4 of 5 firearms stolen during 
household property crimes were not 
recovered
************************************

In 83% of burglaries and 85% of other property crimes that 
involved a stolen firearm, none of the stolen guns had been 
recovered at the time of the NCVS interview (table 5). 
Assuming these guns were not recovered later, this amounts to 
an annual average of at least 135,000 unrecovered guns from 
burglaries and 51,800 unrecovered guns from other property 
crimes.

Although the victimizations involving stolen firearms could 
have occurred from one day to up to six months before the 
NCVS interview, the amount of time that had elapsed made no 
significant difference in the percentage of households for 
which guns had not been recovered at the time of the 
interview (not shown in table).

No items had been recovered at the time of the NCVS interview 
in a lower percentage of burglaries involving the theft of a 
firearm (83%) than in burglaries involving the theft of items 
other than guns (89%). Among other property crimes, there was 
no difference in the percentage of incidents from which no 
items were recovered regardless of whether the victimization 
involved theft of a gun or other items. In about 85% of other 
property crime victimizations, no items were recovered. 

************************************
The majority of property crimes 
involving stolen firearms occurred 
in the South
************************************

An estimated 22% of burglaries involving a stolen firearm 
occurred in households comprised of one male adult with no 
children. In contrast, these households accounted for 13% of 
all households (table 6). Households comprised of one female 
adult with no children experienced 8% of the burglary 
victimizations in which a gun was stolen, while accounting 
for 16% of households nationwide.

A greater percentage of households with two or more adult 
residents with children experienced gun theft during 
burglaries or other property crime victimizations than 
households with one male or female adult resident with 
children. Households with a white non-Hispanic head of 
household accounted for the majority of burglaries and other 
property crimes in which a gun was stolen. White non-
Hispanics also accounted for the majority of U.S. households 
(71%).

Households in the South were more likely than households in 
other regions to have experienced gun theft during burglaries 
or other property crimes. Households in the South accounted 
for 37% of all households in the U.S., but 56% of all 
burglaries and 59% of other property crimes involving the 
theft of a firearm. Similarly, a disproportionate percentage 
of households in rural areas experienced burglaries involving 
the theft of a gun (34%), compared to the overall percentage 
of households in rural areas (17%).

*****************
Methodology
*****************
----------------
Survey coverage
----------------

The National Crime Victimization Survey (NCVS) is an annual 
data collection conducted by the U.S. Census Bureau for the 
Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS). The NCVS is a self-report 
survey in which interviewed persons are asked about the 
number and characteristics of victimizations experienced 
during the prior six months. The NCVS collects information on 
nonfatal personal crimes (rape or sexual assault, robbery, 
aggravated and simple assault, and personal larceny) and 
property crimes (burglary, motor vehicle theft, and other 
theft) both reported and not reported to police. 

The NCVS is administered to persons age 12 or older from a 
nationally representative sample of households in the United 
States. The NCVS defines a household as a group of members 
who all reside at a sampled address. Persons are considered 
household members when the sampled address is their usual 
place of residence at the time of the interview and when they 
have no usual place of residence elsewhere. Once selected, 
households remain in the sample for three years, and eligible 
persons in these households are interviewed every six months 
for a total of seven interviews. New households rotate into 
the sample on an ongoing basis to replace outgoing households 
that have been in the sample for the three-year period. The 
sample includes persons living in group quarters, such as 
dormitories, rooming houses, and religious group dwellings, 
and excludes persons living in military barracks and 
institutional settings, such as correctional or hospital 
facilities, and the homeless. (For more detail, see the 
Survey Methodology in Criminal Victimization in the United 
States, 2008, NCJ 231173, BJS website, May 2011.)
In 2010, about 41,000 households and 73,300 individuals age 
12 or older were interviewed for the NCVS. Each household was 
interviewed twice during the year. The response rate was 
92.3% of households and 87.5% of eligible individuals.

From 2005 through 2010, the primary reference period for this 
data brief, a total of 835,000 persons from about 472,000 
households were interviewed. This equates to an annual 
average of 139,000 persons age 12 or older in 79,000 
households interviewed each year from 2005 through 2010. 

Victimizations that occurred outside of the U.S. were 
excluded from this report. From 2005 through 2010, about 1% 
of the total unweighted victimizations involving theft of a 
firearm occurred outside the U.S. and were excluded from the 
analyses. Also excluded were the smaller number of attempted 
burglaries and other thefts in which the perpetrator tried to 
steal a firearm. The NCVS is unable to measure whether safes, 
locks, alarms, or other target hardening devices were in 
place in the home. The use of anti-theft measures may vary by 
population demographics. 

************************************
Weighting adjustments for estimating 
household victimization
************************************

Estimates in this report use data from the 1993 to 2010 NCVS 
data files. These files are weighted to produce annual 
estimates of victimization for persons age 12 or older living 
in U.S. households. Because the NCVS relies on a sample 
rather than a census of the entire U.S. population, weights 
are designed to inflate sample point estimates to known 
population totals and to compensate for survey nonresponse 
and other aspects of the sample design. 

The NCVS data files include both person and household 
weights. Person weights provide an estimate of the population 
represented by each person in the sample. Household weights 
provide an estimate of the total U.S. household population. 
Both household and person weights, after proper adjustment, 
are also used to form the denominator in calculations of 
crime rates.

Victimization weights used in this analysis account for the 
number of persons present during an incident and for repeat 
victims of series incidents. The weight counts series 
incidents as the actual number of incidents reported by the 
victim, up to a maximum of 10 incidents. Series 
victimizations are similar in type but occur with such 
frequency that a victim is unable to recall the details of 
each individual event. Survey procedures allow NCVS 
interviewers to identify and classify these similar 
victimizations as series victimizations and to collect 
detailed information on only the most recent incident in the 
series.
 
In 2010, about 3% of all victimizations were series 
incidents. Weighting series incidents as the number of 
incidents up to a maximum of 10 incidents produces more 
reliable estimates of crime levels, while the cap at 10 
minimizes the effect of extreme outliers on the rates. 
Additional information on the series enumeration is detailed 
in the report Methods for Counting High Frequency Repeat 
Victimizations in the National Crime Victimization Survey, 
NCJ 237308, BJS website, April 2012.

Trend estimates provided are based on two-year rolling 
averages centered on the most recent year. For example, 
estimates reported for 2010 represent the average estimate 
from 2009 through 2010. This method is used to smooth trend 
lines and improve the reliability of estimates by increasing 
the sample sizes for each annual average estimate. 

---------------------------
Standard error computations
---------------------------

When national estimates are derived from a sample, as is the 
case with the NCVS, caution must be taken when comparing one 
estimate to another estimate or when comparing estimates over 
time. Although one estimate may be larger than another, 
estimates based on a sample have some degree of sampling 
error. The sampling error of an estimate depends on several 
factors, including the amount of variation in the responses, 
the size of the sample, and the size of the subgroup for 
which the estimate is computed. When the sampling error 
around the estimates is taken into consideration, the 
estimates that appear different may, in fact, not be 
statistically different.

One measure of the sampling error associated with an estimate 
is the standard error. The standard error can vary from one 
estimate to the next. In general, for a given metric, an 
estimate with a smaller standard error provides a more 
reliable approximation of the true value than an estimate 
with a larger standard error. Estimates with relatively large 
standard errors are associated with less precision and 
reliability and should be interpreted with caution.

In order to generate standard errors around estimates from 
the NCVS, the Census Bureau produces generalized variance 
function (GVF) parameters for BJS. The GVFs take into account 
aspects of the NCVS complex sample design and represent the 
curve fitted to a selection of individual standard errors 
based on the Jackknife Repeated Replication technique. The 
GVF parameters were used to generate standard errors for each 
point estimate (such as counts, percentages, and rates) in 
the report.

In this report, BJS conducted tests to determine whether 
differences in estimated numbers and percentages were 
statistically significant once sampling error was taken into 
account. Using statistical programs developed specifically 
for the NCVS, all comparisons in the text were tested for 
significance. The primary test procedure used was Student’s 
t-statistic, which tests the difference between two sample 
estimates. To ensure that the observed differences between 
estimates were larger than might be expected due to sampling 
variation, the significance level was set at the 95% 
confidence level.

Data users can use the estimates and the standard errors of 
the estimates provided in this report to generate a 
confidence interval around the estimate as a measure of the 
margin of error. The following example illustrates how 
standard errors can be used to generate confidence intervals:

According to the NCVS, from 2005 through 2010, 86% of 
burglaries involving the theft of a firearm were reported to 
police (see table 4). Using the GVFs, BJS determined that the 
estimate has a standard error of 2.6% (see appendix table 5). 
A confidence interval around the estimate was generated by 
multiplying the standard errors by ±1.96 (the t-score of a 
normal, two-tailed distribution that excludes 2.5% at either 
end of the distribution). Thus, the confidence interval 
around the 86% estimate is equal to 86% ± 2.6% X 1.96 (or 
80.9% to 91.1%). In other words, if different samples using 
the same procedures were taken from the U.S. population 
during the period from 2005 through 2010, 95% of the time the 
percentage of burglaries involving gun theft that were 
reported to police would fall between 80.9% and 91.1%.

In this report, BJS also calculated a coefficient of 
variation (CV) for all estimates, representing the ratio of 
the standard error to the estimate. CVs provide a measure of 
reliability and a means to compare the precision of estimates 
across measures with differing levels or metrics. In cases 
where the CV was greater than 50%, or the unweighted sample 
had 10 or fewer cases, the estimate was noted with a “!” 
symbol (interpret data with caution; estimate is based on 10 
or fewer sample cases, or the coefficient of variation 
exceeds 50%). 

Many of the variables examined in this report may be related 
to one another and to other variables not included in the 
analyses. Complex relationships among variables were not 
fully explored in this report and warrant more extensive 
analysis. Readers are cautioned not to draw causal inferences 
based on the results presented.

************************************
Appendix: External measures of gun 
ownership, gun stock, and gun theft
************************************

Gun theft in this report varies by demographic group. This 
variation is driven, in part, by the prevalence of gun 
ownership; however, the NCVS does not collect information on 
gun ownership. This appendix describes external measures of 
gun ownership, stock, and theft. One of the limitations of 
this report is that NCVS data are not aligned with these 
external measures to the extent that rates of firearm theft 
can be easily or reliably computed from a denominator of 
households with guns or the total number of guns in the 
United States. For example, although the NCVS shows a decline 
in the percentage of households experiencing firearm theft 
from 1994 to 2010, and the General Social Survey and Gallup 
poll both show declines in the percentage of households 
owning firearms during the same period, when these data were 
combined to generate trends in the rate of firearm theft 
among gun-owning households, no differences were detected in 
the rate in 1994 compared to 2010 (figure 3). This may be 
indicative of stability in the rate of gun theft among gun-
owning households over time or it may be a function of the 
lack of precision due to the large standard errors associated 
with generating estimates from surveys with different 
sampling methodologies. Similarly, while the UCR theft 
measure provides context for these findings, due to 
methodological differences in the collection of data on 
firearm theft, direct comparison between NCVS and UCR 
measures of gun theft are not feasible.

------------------------- 
Household gun ownership
-------------------------

Although a number of surveys have collected data on household 
gun ownership at the state level or at particular points in 
time,***Footnote 1 1See Cook, P.J., & Ludwig, J. (1997). Guns 
in America: Results of a Comprehensive National Survey on 
Firearms Ownership and Use. Washington, DC: Police 
Foundation; Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (2001–
04). Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance System Survey Data. 
Atlanta, GA: Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention.***there are two main sources of national data on 
long-term trends in household gun ownership: the General 
Social Survey (GSS) and the Gallup poll. 

----------------------
General Social Survey 
----------------------

The National Opinion Research Center (NORC) has administered 
the GSS since 1972 to collect data on the demographics, 
behaviors, and attitudes of the U.S. population. In 1993 and 
every other year from 1994 through 2010, the GSS included the 
question, “Do you happen to have in your home (IF HOUSE: or 
garage) any guns or revolvers?” According to the GSS, the 
percentage of households that reported having a gun in the 
home declined from 46% in 1993 to 32% in 2010.***Footnote 2 
Smith, T.W., Marsden, P., Hout, M., & Kim, J. (2011). General 
Social Surveys, 1972–2010 [machine-readable data file]. 
Chicago, IL: National Opinion Research Center.***

Figure 3 uses GSS data to present trends in the rate of 
burglaries and other property crimes involving firearm theft 
per 1,000 gun-owning households. To compute the denominator 
for the rate, the percentage of GSS households that owned 
guns was applied to the total number of NCVS households for 
the year. The rate was then computed using two-year rolling 
averages. 

The GSS and NCVS standard errors were pooled to compute a 
standard error around the rate. Although the GSS shows a 
significant decline in the percentage of households that 
owned guns from 1994 through 2010, the differences in the 
rate of burglaries and other property crimes involving 
firearm theft per 1,000 households across the period did not 
test at the p<.1 level using the pooled standard errors.
 
The GSS data were based on a full probability sample of 
persons age 18 or older living in noninstitutionalized 
arrangements in the U.S. Until 2004, the survey was 
administered to English-speaking persons only. Beginning in 
2006, Spanish-speaking respondents were eligible. From 1993 
to 2010, data on household gun ownership were collected from 
an average of about 1,500 respondents. For more information 
on the sampling and weighting of GSS data, see the GSS 
Codebook at 
http://publicdata.norc.org/GSS/DOCUMENTS/BOOK/GSS_Codebook.pdf.

-------------
Gallup poll
-------------

Gallup produces a national public opinion poll that dates 
back to 1935. Gallup frequently conducts polls of persons in 
U.S. households to measure opinions on gun possession rights 
and gun laws as well as household gun ownership. From 1993 to 
2010, Gallup conducted 13 polls in which respondents were 
asked, “Do you have a gun in your home? Do you have a gun 
anywhere else on your property such as in your garage, barn, 
shed, or in your car or truck?” From December 1993 to October 
2010, Gallup polls showed a decline in the percentage of 
households with guns on the property, from 54% to 
41%.***Footnote 3 Gallup poll, Do you have a gun in your 
home? Do you have a gun anywhere else on your property such 
as in your garage, barn, shed or in your car or truck? 
[COMBINED RESPONSES] 1991–2011. More information is available 
at www.gallup.com/poll/1645/Guns.aspx.***

Figure 3 also uses Gallup data to show trends in the rate of 
burglaries and other property crimes involving firearm theft 
per 1,000 gun-owning households. The process of computing the 
denominator for the rate was the same as used with the GSS; 
the percentage of Gallup households that owned guns was 
applied to the total number of NCVS households for the year. 
The rate was then computed using two-year rolling averages.
 
Gallup reports that survey results are accurate within a 
margin of error of ±4%, so a conservative standard error of 
2.04 was applied to all estimates. The Gallup and NCVS 
standard errors were pooled to compute a standard error 
around the rate. As with the rate computed using the GSS 
percentages from 1994 through 2010, the differences in the 
rate of burglaries and other property crimes involving 
firearm theft per 1,000 Gallup households that owned guns did 
not test at the p<.1 level using the pooled standard errors. 

The Gallup data were based on adults age 18 or older with a 
landline or cellular telephone who were selected for the poll 
through a process of random-digit dialing. When a sampled 
household was contacted on a landline phone, Gallup pollsters 
requested an interview with the person age 18 or older who 
had the most recent birthday. Any person reached on a 
cellular phone was interviewed directly. For a standard 
survey, Gallup used a sample of between 1,000 and 1,500 
persons. For more information on the Gallup polling 
methodology, see “How are polls conducted?” at 
http://www.gallup.com/poll/101872/How-does-Gallup-polling-
work.aspx.

-----------
Gun stock
-----------

Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives 

The Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives (ATF) 
collects data on the number of firearms that are manufactured 
in, imported to, and exported from the United States each 
year. Measures of U.S. gun stock are sometimes computed by 
adding the number of manufactured guns to the number of 
imported guns and subtracting exported firearms to get a 
total for each year, and then summing across years to get a 
count of the total number of guns in circulation. In 2010, 
about 5.5 million guns were manufactured, about 2.8 million 
were imported, and about 240,000 were exported, giving a 
total of about 8.1 million new guns added to the existing gun 
stock in 2010.***Footnote 4 United States Department of 
Justice, Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms, and 
Explosives. (2012). Firearms Commerce in the United States: 
Annual Statistical Update. Available at 
http://www.atf.gov/publications/firearms/050412-firearms-
commerce-in-the-us-annual-statistical-update-2012.pdf.*** 
Guns that were destroyed or otherwise removed from 
circulation were not taken into consideration in this count. 
Moreover, although the ATF counts exclude firearms 
manufactured for the U.S. military, they include firearms 
purchased by law enforcement agencies. Because of these 
limitations in using the ATF data to estimate the number of 
privately owned guns, the report does not include a rate of 
the number of stolen guns per 1,000 guns owned.

-----------
Gun theft
-----------

Federal Bureau of Investigation 

Through the Uniform Crime Reporting (UCR) Program, the 
Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) collects limited data 
on firearm theft and recovery. A supplemental UCR reporting 
form, which is optional for UCR participating agencies, 
collected monthly data from state and local law enforcement 
agencies on the aggregate dollar value of items stolen, by 
type of stolen item. The supplemental form also collected 
aggregate data on the value of items recovered by police. In 
addition to collecting information on items stolen and 
recovered from household burglaries and other property 
crimes, the supplemental form collected information on 
burglaries and other property crimes involving commercial 
establishments. From 2005 through 2010, out of the 
approximate 17,800 agencies that submitted UCR data annually, 
about 13,000 agencies submitted supplemental data that were 
eligible for inclusion in Crime in the United 
States.***Footnote 5 5For more information on the FBI’s 
Uniform Crime Reporting Program, see 
http://www.fbi.gov/about-us/cjis/ucr. UCR supplemental data 
on the value of firearms stolen and recovered for each year 
are found in Table 24, Property Stolen and Recovered.***

From 2005 through 2010, the FBI agencies that submitted 
supplemental data reported that an average of $122 million 
worth of firearms was stolen each year. During the same 
period, an average of $11 million worth of stolen firearms 
(or about 8.7% of the value of total stolen firearms) was 
recovered each year.***Footnote 6 FBI, Uniform Crime 
Reporting Program, Crime in the United States, 2005–2010.*** 
Because the NCVS estimates of monetary loss include the 
monetary value of any other items stolen along with firearms, 
the UCR and NCVS estimates of the monetary value of stolen 
firearms cannot be directly compared. The UCR data cannot be 
used to generate an estimate of the number of incidents that 
involved a gun theft because the value of different types of 
firearms varies and agencies only submit aggregate data on 
the total value of all firearms stolen during the reporting 
period.

*******************************************************
The Bureau of Justice Statistics is the statistical agency of 
the U.S. Department of Justice. James P. Lynch is the 
director.

This report was written by BJS statistician Lynn Langton. 
Matthew Durose verified the report. 

Morgan Young, Jill Thomas, and Brian Higgins (Lockheed 
Martin) edited the report, and Tina Dorsey and Morgan Young 
produced the report, under the supervision of Doris J. James.
November 2012, NCJ 239436
******************************************************

******************************************************
Office of Justice Programs * Innovation * Partnerships 
* Safer Neighborhoods * http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov
******************************************************
______________________
10/26/12/JER/9:20pm
______________________


