U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Programs
Bureau of Justice Statistics
Bulletin

Felony Sentences in State Courts, 2000 

--------------------------------------------------------------
This file is text only without graphics and many of the tables.
A Zip archive of the tables in this report in spreadsheet format
(.wk1) and the full report including tables and graphics in
.pdf format are available from:
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/abstract/fssc00.htm

This report is one in a series.  More recent editions
may be available.  To view a list of all in the series go to
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/pubalp2.htm#fssc
---------------------------------------------------------------

By Matthew R. Durose 
and Patrick A. Langan, Ph.D. 
BJS Statisticians

June 2003, NCJ 198821

Highlights

* In 2000 State courts convicted an estimated 924,700 adults of
a felony.  Federal courts convicted 59,123, bringing the
combined U.S. total to 983,823.  State courts accounted for 94%
of the national total.

* Drug offenders were 34.6% of felons convicted in State courts
in 2000.  Property offenders made up 28.3%; violent offenders,
18.7%; and those convicted of weapon offenses and other
nonviolent crimes made up the rest (18.4%).

* State courts sentenced 40% of convicted felons to a State
prison, 28% to a local jail, and 32% to straight probation with
no jail or prison time to serve.

* The average State court sentence to local jail was 6 months. 
The average probation sentence was 3 years and 2 months.  A fine
was imposed on 25% of convicted felons, restitution on 14%,
community service on 5%, and treatment was ordered for 7%.

* The average sentence length to State prison has decreased
since 1992 (62 years versus 42 years), but felons sentenced in
2000 were likely to serve more of that sentence before release
(38% versus 55%).  

* Guilty pleas accounted for 95% of felony convictions in State
courts in 2000.  Trial convictions accounted for the remaining
5%.    

* Nationally, of the felons convicted in State courts in 2000,
54% were white, 44% were black, and 2% were other races.  The
median age of felons convicted in State courts in 2000 
was 30.  

* Females accounted for an increasing portion of felons
convicted in State courts. In 1992, females were 13% 
of convicted felons; in 2000, 17%.

* The median time from arrest to State court sentencing in 2000
was about 5 months.  An estimated 86% of convicted felons were
sentenced within 1 year of arrest.

In 2000 State courts convicted almost 925,000 adults of a
felony. Forty percent of convicted felons were sentenced to a
State prison, and 28% were sentenced to a local jail (usually
for a year or less). The remaining 32% were sentenced to
probation. These findings come from a survey conducted every 2
years and is the Nation's sole source of statistical information
on the sentences felons receive in State courts nationwide.

National Judicial Reporting Program

The "National Judicial Reporting Program" (NJRP) compiles
detailed information on the sentences and characteristics of
convicted felons.  Previous national surveys of felony
sentencing in State courts have been conducted every 2 years
since 1986.

***Note: See Felony Sentences in State Courts, 1986, NCJ 115210,
February 1989; Felony Sentences in State Courts, 1988, NCJ
126923, December 1990; Felony Sentences in State Courts, 1990,
NCJ 140186, March 1993; Felony Sentences in State Courts, 1992,
NCJ 151167, January 1995; Felony Sentences in State Courts,
1994, NCJ 163391, January 1997; Felony Sentences in State
Courts, 1996, NCJ 173939, May 1999; Felony Sentences in State
Courts, 1998, NCJ 190103, October 2001.***

The 2000 survey was based on a sample of 344 counties (out of
the Nation's approximately 3,100 counties) selected to be
nationally representative.  The 344 included the District of
Columbia and at least 1 county from every State except, by
chance, Delaware, Montana, and Wyoming. The 2000 survey excluded
Federal courts and those State or local courts that did not
adjudicate adult felony cases.

According to the BJS Federal Justice Statistics Program, Federal
courts convicted 59,123 persons of a felony in 2000. *** Note:By
comparison, the State court in 1 county, Los Angeles, accounted
for about 41,000 felony convictions in 2000. *** That number
represents 6% of the combined State and Federal total number of
felony convictions during 2000.

The 2000 survey included only offenses that State penal codes
defined as felonies. Felonies are widely defined as crimes with
the potential of being punished by more than 1 year in prison. 

Felony conviction offenses

An estimated 924,700 persons were convicted of a felony in State
courts in 2000, including 173,200 (or 18.7% of the total) for a
violent felony; 262,000 (28.3%) for property offenses of
burglary, larceny, fraud, and forgery; 319,700 (34.6%) for drug
offenses; and 28,200 (3.1%) for weapon offenses (table 1). The
remaining 141,600 (15.3%) consisted of persons convicted of
nonviolent offenses such as receiving stolen property and
escaping custody. Marijuana trafficking convictions were 2.7% of
the conviction total, and marijuana possession convictions were
3.7% of the total. 

Sentences for felonies

In 2000, 68% of all convicted felons were sentenced to a period
of confinement -- 40% to State prisons and 28% to local jails.
Jail sentences are for short-term confinement (usually for a
year or less) in a county or city facility, while prison
sentences are for long-term confinement (usually for over a
year) in a State facility. An estimated 32% of all convicted
felons were sentenced to probation with no jail or prison time
to serve. 

Sentence length

An offender convicted of multiple offenses receives a sentence
for each offense. If multiple prison sentences are imposed, the
court then decides whether the convicted felon will serve the
sentences concurrently (at the same time) or consecutively (one
after another). For persons with consecutive sentences, the
total time is the sum of the sentence lengths, and for persons
with concurrent sentences, the total time is the same as the
longest sentence. For persons convicted of a single offense, the
total time refers simply to the sentence for that offense.
Whenever an offender received a prison sentence range, such as 5
to 10 years, the total time refers to the maximum.

For the Nation in 2000, the mean felony sentence to
incarceration (prison or jail) was 3 years; the median was 1
year and 4 months.

State prison sentences

In 2000 the mean length of sentences to State prison was almost
4 years and 7 months; the median term was 3 years. The mean
prison sentence for murder and nonnegligent manslaughter was
nearly 20 years and 8 months; the median was 24 years and 3
months. 

Life sentences are rare among convicted felons, whether measured
as a percentage of all sentences (0.4%) or as a percentage just
of prison sentences (1%).  However, among the 8,600 persons
convicted of murder or nonnegligent manslaughter, 23.3% were
sentenced to life in prison.  

***Box:  Felony convictions and sentences in State courts
relative to the number of arrests, 2000

The number of State felony convictions in 2000 was compared to
the number of crimes reported to police and the number of
arrests made for these crimes in 2000.  Comparisons are limited
to crimes likely to be felonies.

These aggregate numbers should not be interpreted as tracking
individual cases through the criminal justice system.
Nevertheless, the comparisons illustrate the approximate odds of
conviction and a prison sentence, given an arrest for a felony.
For example, the FBI reports that in 2000 almost 12,000 adults
were arrested for murder (including nonnegligent manslaughter). 
That year, 8,600 persons were convicted of murder, and 7,998
murderers received a prison sentence.  For every 100 persons
arrested for murder in 2000, 72 were convicted and 67 were
sentenced to prison for that offense.  Corresponding findings
for drug traffickers were 78 convictions and 32 prison sentences
for every 100 arrests.***

In 2000 about 2% of the 8,600 persons convicted of murder or
nonnegligent manslaughter were sentenced to death.  Not all
8,600 were subject to the death penalty.  Twelve States did not
authorize the death penalty in 2000.  In the 38 States that did,
only certain types of murder were capital offenses.  

In summary, of the 8,600 persons convicted of murder or
nonnegligent manslaughter in 2000, about 23% received a life
sentence, 2% were sentenced to the death penalty, and the
remaining 75% received a probation or an incarceration sentence
expressed in days, months, or years.

Jail and probation sentences

Among felons who received a sentence to local jail in 2000, the
mean sentence was just over 6 months, and the median was 5
months.  Probation sentences had a mean length of about 3 years
and 2 months and a median of 3 years.

Estimated State prison time to be served 

The amount of time felons actually serve in prison is typically
some fraction of the total sentence received. Two primary
reasons explain the difference between sentences received and
time served: 

In States that impose indeterminate sentences, a judge specifies
the minimum and/or maximum sentence length, but a parole board
decides when the prisoner will actually be released.  In 2000
about a quarter of prison releases were determined by a parole
board decision.

In most but not all States, prisoners gain early release through
time credits that they receive automatically or that are granted
to them for good behavior or special achievements -- provisions
that are intended to help correctional officials manage
institutional populations.

For both types of sentence reduction, released offenders usually
serve the remaining portion of their sentences under supervision
in the community.

To calculate time to be served by felons sentenced in 2000, the
fraction of their sentence they might reasonably be expected to
serve was obtained from records of inmates released from prison
in a recent year. Life sentences and death sentences were
excluded because it is not possible to specify the percentage
served. The percentage of the sentence that released inmates had
served was applied to felons sentenced to prison in 2000.

Based on data collected by BJS in its "National Corrections
Reporting Program," inmates released from prisons in 2000 had
served an average of 55% of their total sentence in prison. The
percentage of sentence served ranged from 67% for those
convicted of weapon offenses to a low of 49% for those convicted
of a drug offense.

Applying these percentages to State prison sentences received in
2000, it is estimated that felons sentenced in 2000 would serve
about 22 years, or 55% of their average 42 year prison sentence. 

Since life sentences and death are rare for most types of
crimes, this method gives reasonably sound estimates of time to
be served for most offenses (assuming, among other things, that
prison release policies applicable to persons sentenced in 2000
are not markedly different from those governing recent
releases). However, life sentences and death are not rare for
murder, though they are rare for nonnegligent manslaughter.
Consequently, time to be served shown for "murder and
nonnegligent manslaughter" perhaps substantially underestimates
the amount of time all persons convicted of these offenses are
likely to serve since the time only applies to persons not
receiving a life or death sentence.

Convicted felon populations: Sex, race, and age

In 2000 men comprised 48% of adults (age 18 or older) in the
U.S. population but 83% of persons convicted of a felony and 90%
of persons convicted of a violent felony. Whites were 79% of the
adult U.S. population but 54% of persons convicted of a felony
and 53% of the persons convicted of a violent felony.
Corresponding figures for blacks were 12% of the adult U.S.
population but 44% of convicted felons and 44% of felons
convicted of a violent crime. The other races (American Indians,
Alaska Natives, Asians, and Pacific Islanders) represented 9% of
the U.S. population but 2% of convicted felons and 3% of those
convicted of a violent crime.

Persons in their twenties represented about 18% of the adult
U.S. population but 39% of convicted felons. The mean age of
felons was 32 years; the median was 30.


Number of felony conviction offenses

At time of sentencing, almost three-quarters of felons sentenced
in 2000 were sentenced for a single felony offense. An estimated
16% were sentenced for two felony offenses, and the remaining
10% were sentenced for three or more. The number of offenses totaled
about 1.3 million felony conviction offenses for which 924,700
felons were convicted and sentenced in 2000. ***Note: The 1.3
million figure pertains to current, not past, convictions.***

The greater the number of felony conviction offenses, the more
severe was the sentence. The likelihood of a State prison
sentence rose from 38% for those convicted of one felony to 44%
for two felonies and 50% for three or more. The mean sentence to
State prison also increased from about 4 years for those
convicted of one felony to 5 years and 9 months for those
convicted of two or more. 

Method of conviction

Of the estimated 924,700 convicted felons, the vast majority --
about 879,200, representing 95% of those sentenced for a felony
in 2000 -- pleaded guilty. The rest were found guilty either by
a jury or by a judge in a bench trial. Persons convicted of
murder were the least likely to have pleaded guilty (58%) and
the most likely to have been convicted by a jury (38%).  In 2000
violent crime accounted for most jury trials.  Of all jury trial
felony convictions in 2000, 52% (15,300 cases) were for violent
crime; 48% (14,000 cases) were for nonviolent crime.  Juries
convicted 3,200 persons of murder in 2000, and 4,700 of
aggravated assault.

Murderers convicted by a jury were the most likely to have
received a life sentence (43%) or the death penalty (4%).  Most
of these murders were not subject to the death penalty.

Juries accounted for an estimated 61% of life and death
sentences for murder or nonnegligent manslaughter in 2000. ***
Note: Juries seldom impose a sentence.  With rare exception,
sentencing in a jury trial is the responsibility of the judge.
***

****Box: Case processing time   

The median time from arrest to State court sentencing in 2000
was about 5 months.  In 2000, 9% of all convicted felons in
State courts were sentenced within the first 30 days following
their arrest, and 58% of felons were sentenced within 6 months. 
An estimated 86% of convicted felons were sentenced within 1
year of arrest.

On average, murder cases took the most time to process in 2000. 
Half of all felons convicted of murder in State courts were
sentenced more than a year after their arrest.****

Additional penalties

Besides being sentenced to incarceration or probation, 39% or
more of convicted felons also were ordered to pay a fine, pay
victim restitution, receive treatment, perform community
service, or comply with some other additional penalty (for
example, undergo house arrest or appear periodically for drug
testing). A fine was imposed on at least 25% of convicted
felons. 

Estimates of the percentages of felons receiving other penalties
are 14% restitution, 7% some form of treatment, and 5% community
service. 

Trends in the United States: 1992 to 2000

Number of convictions increasing 

State courts convicted an estimated 924,700 adults of a felony
in 2000.  That total is about 3% greater than the number
convicted in 1992.  

Increasing likelihood of arrest leading to conviction

The likelihood of a felony arrest leading to a felony conviction
is approximated by dividing the number of adult felony
convictions in a year by the number of adult felony arrests that
year. In 2000, for example, robbery convictions totaled 36,800,
and robbery arrests totaled 79,279, indicating about a 46%
likelihood of conviction for robbery. Since 1992 the likelihood
of an arrest leading to a conviction has generally risen. 

Guilty pleas 

In 1992 guilty pleas accounted for 92% of all felony
convictions, and trials accounted for the remaining 8%. 
Corresponding figures for 2000 were 95% guilty pleas and 5%
trials. 

Aging of convicted felons

The average age of the American population is rising, a trend
reflected in the changing average age of convicted felons. In
1992, persons age 30 or older comprised 76% of adults (age 18
and older) in the U.S. population and accounted for 45% of
persons convicted; in 2000, persons age 30 or older comprised
78% of adults in the U.S. population and accounted for 53% of
persons convicted. The median age of convicted felons was 28
years in 1992 but 30 years in 2000.

Changing racial composition of convicted felons

Blacks, American Indians, Alaska Natives, Asians, and Pacific
Islanders comprise a growing fraction of the U.S. population but
a decreasing percentage of convicted felons. In 1992, the races
other than whites were 14% of persons age 18 or older and 48% of
persons convicted of a felony. In 2000 those same racial groups
accounted for 21% of U.S. adults and 46% of those convicted.

Prison sentences less likely 

The percentage of felons receiving a State prison sentence in
1992 was 44%. In 2000 the percentage receiving prison sentences
dropped to 40%. The drop in prison sentences was accompanied by
an increase in the percentage receiving jail and probation. Of
all felony offenses, drug trafficking had one of the largest
decreases in the percentage sentenced to prison between 1992 and
2000 (from 48% in 1992 to 41% in 2000). 

Shorter imposed prison sentences and a growing fraction of
sentence served before release

Prior to being discharged, inmates released from State prison in
1992 had served, on average, a third of the sentence imposed on
them by the court. In 2000 inmates were released after serving
approximately half of their court-imposed sentence. While
prisoners are serving a growing percentage of their
court-imposed sentence, the average court-imposed sentence has
been decreasing.


In 1992 the typical felon received a 62 year sentence and
(assuming a person sentenced in 1992 will serve the same
fraction of his/her sentence as was typical among persons
released in 1992) would serve 38% of that sentence before
release, or 22 years.  By contrast, in 2000 the typical felon
received a 42 year sentence but (assuming a person sentenced in
2000 will serve the same fraction of his/her sentence as was
typical among persons released in 2000) would serve 55% of that
sentence before release, or 22 years.  

Methodology

Sampling

The 2000 NJRP sample consisted of 429,471 persons convicted of a
felony in State courts in 344 counties selected to be nationally
representative. Of these convicted felons, 272,889 cases were in
the 75 largest counties.  Additional details on the sampling are
in the BJS publication Felony Sentences in State Courts, 1996
(NCJ 173939). 

Sampling error

NJRP data were obtained from a sample and not from a complete
enumeration; consequently, they are subject to sampling error. A
standard error, which is a measure of sampling error, is
associated with each number in the report. In general, if the
difference between two numbers is at least twice the standard
error of that difference (the criterion used in this report),
there is at least 95% confidence that the two numbers do in fact
differ; that is, the apparent difference is not simply the
result of surveying a sample rather than the entire population.

National estimates of the number of convictions for individual
crime categories and for the aggregate total had a coefficient
of variation of 3.6%.  Standard errors for each table in the
report are available on the Internet:
<http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/abstract/fssc00.htm>. Standard
errors did not take into account missing data, which are
sometimes substantial for certain tables.

Sources of data

State courts were the source of NJRP data for about 61% of the
344 counties sampled. For other counties, sources included
statistical agencies, sentencing commissions, department of
public safety, probation departments, state police departments,
and department of corrections. Individual-level NJRP records
were obtained either electronically (83% of the counties) or
through manual data collection (17%).

Electronic methods of data submission included diskettes, 
magnetic tape, and Internet transmission. Manual methods 
included photocopies of official documents, survey questionnaires 
completed by court officials, and on-site collections by Census 
Bureau staff. All data were collected by the U.S. Census Bureau.

Targeted population

The survey targeted and recorded initial sentences imposed in
2000. If a sentence was imposed on one date and then modified at
a later date, the revision was ignored. The survey recorded
sentences that were actually executed. If a prison sentence was
initially imposed but immediately suspended in its entirety, the
case was coded as probation because that was the actual
sentence.                 

Because the year of conviction was not a defining
characteristic, some cases in the sample were of persons
convicted before 2000 but not sentenced until 2000.

In 2 counties sampled from Florida, 10 counties from Minnesota,
21 from Pennsylvania, and 1 from Virginia it was impractical to
target sentences in 2000. Cases sampled from these counties were
all sentenced in 1999.

The 2000 conviction data that were submitted by four Illinois
counties -- McHenry, Rock Island, St. Clair, and Sangamon --
were very different from prior years' NJRP data files as well as
other court data sources. Consequently, the conviction data
submitted by these counties for the 1998 NJRP survey were used
in place of the 2000 data.

In 2000 Missouri was unable to provide data for seven counties
in the sample (Andrew, Boone, Franklin, Jasper, Madison, Oregon,
and St. Charles).  These counties were replaced with seven
others in the same respective strata (Lawrence and Bath
Counties, Kentucky; Lafourche Parish, Louisiana; Cole County,
Missouri; Lancaster County, Virginia; and Mercer and
Northumberland Counties, Pennsylvania).

The second stage weights for two sampled counties from Florida
-- St. Lucie and Hillsborough -- were adjusted to account for
less than a full year of reporting.

Crime definitions

Crime definitions are in the BJS publication Felony Sentences in
State Courts, 1996 (NCJ 173939).

***Box: The Bureau of Justice Statistics is the statistical
agency of the U.S. Department of Justice.  Lawrence A. Greenfeld
is director.

BJS Bulletins present the first release of findings from
permanent data collection programs.  This Bulletin was written
by Matthew R. Durose and Patrick A. Langan of BJS.  Mark
Motivans of BJS assisted with tabulating the Federal data. 
Erica Schmitt and Maureen Henneberg assisted with verification. 
Tina Dorsey edited the report; Jayne Robinson prepared it for
final printing.

Sample design and selection was performed by Terri L. Carter
under the supervision of Carma R. Hogue of the Economic
Statistical Methods and Programming Division of the U.S. Census
Bureau.

Data collection and processing was performed by Victoria
Campbell, Martha Greene, Neil MacLean, Patti Mattson-Hannigan,
and Patricia Torreyson under the supervision of Latrice
Brogsdale-Davis of the Governments Division of the U.S. Census
Bureau.

June 2003, NCJ 198821 ***

End of file
6/18/03 th



