U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Programs
Bureau of Justice Statistics

-----------------------------------------------------
This file is text only without graphics and many of the
tables. A Zip archive of the tables in this report in
spreadsheet format (.csv) and the full report including
tables and graphics in .pdf format are available on BJS
website at:http://bjs.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbdetail&iid=4594
-----------------------------------------------------

***************
Special Report
***************

Female Victims of Sexual Violence, 1994-2010

Michael Planty, Ph.D., and Lynn Langton, Ph.D., BJS 
Statisticians
Christopher Krebs, Ph.D., Marcus Berzofsky, Dr.P.H., and Hope 
Smiley-McDonald, Ph.D., RTI International

From 1995 to 2005, the total rate of sexual violence 
committed against U.S. female residents age 12 or older 
declined 64% from a peak of 5.0 per 1,000 females in 1995 to 
1.8 per 1,000 females in 2005 (figure 1, appendix table 1). 
It then remained unchanged from 2005 to 2010. Sexual violence 
against females includes completed, attempted, or threatened 
rape or sexual assault. In 2010, females nationwide 
experienced about 270,000 rape or sexual assault 
victimizations, compared to about 556,000 in 1995. 

Completed rape or sexual assault accounted for more than 50% 
of the total rape or sexual violent victimizations in 2010. 
Between 1995 and 2010, the rate of completed rape or sexual 
assault declined from 3.6 per 1,000 females to 1.1 per 1,000. 
Over the same period, the rates of attempted rape or sexual 
assault and victimizations involving the threat of rape 
remained relatively stable.

****************************************************
***********
Highlights
***********

* From 1995 to 2010, the estimated annual rate of female rape 
or sexual assault victimizations declined 58%, from 
5.0 victimizations per 1,000 females age 12 or older to 
2.1 per 1,000. 

* In 2005-10, females who were age 34 or younger, who lived 
in lower income households, and who lived in rural areas 
experienced some of the highest rates of sexual violence.

* In 2005-10, 78% of sexual violence involved an offender who 
was a family member, intimate partner, friend, or 
acquaintance.

* In 2005-10, the offender was armed with a gun, knife, or 
other weapon in 11% of rape or sexual assault victimizations. 

* The percentage of rape or sexual assault victimizations 
reported to police increased to a high of 56% in 2003 before 
declining to 35% in 2010, a level last seen in 1995.

* The percentage of females who were injured during a rape or 
sexual assault and received some type of treatment for their 
injuries increased from 26% in 1994-98 to 35% in 
2005-10.

* In 2005-10, about 80% of female rape or sexual assault 
victims treated for injuries received care in a hospital, 
doctor’s office, or emergency room, compared to 65% in 1994-
98.
 
* In 2005-10, about 1 in 4 (23%) rape or sexual assault 
victims received help or advice from a victim service agency.
****************************************************

The data in this report were drawn from the Bureau of Justice 
Statistics’ (BJS) National Crime Victimization Survey (NCVS). 
The NCVS collects information on nonfatal crimes reported and 
not reported to the police from a nationally representative 
sample of persons age 12 or older who live in U.S. 
households. Persons are interviewed every 6 months over 3 
years with the first interview conducted in person and 
follow-up interviews conducted either in person or by phone.
The NCVS produces national rates and levels of violent and 
property victimization, as well as information on the 
characteristics of crimes and victims and the consequences of 
victimization. Because the NCVS collects information from 
victims, it does not measure homicide. 
Unless noted, this report presents estimates for the 
aggregate of rape or sexual assault victimizations. The term 
sexual violence is used throughout to refer to rape or sexual 
assault victimizations, including attempts and threats. 
Victimization is the basic unit of analysis used throughout 
the report, and the number of victimizations is equal to the 
number of victims present during a criminal incident. 
Trend estimates are based on 2-year rolling averages centered 
on the most recent year. For example, estimates reported for 
2010 represent the average estimates for 2009 and 2010. For 
other tables in this report, the focus is on aggregate data 
from 1994 through 1998, 1999 through 2004, and 2005 through 
2010. These methods of analysis improves the reliability and 
stability of comparisons over time and between subgroups. For 
additional estimates not included in this report, see the 
NCVS Victimization Analysis Tool (NVAT) on the BJS website.
****************************************************

****************************************************
Measuring sexual violence using the NCVS
****************************************************

This report focuses on sexual violence that includes 
completed, attempted, and threatened rape or sexual assault. 
NCVS survey respondents are asked to respond to a series of 
questions about the nature and characteristics of their 
victimization. The NCVS classifies victimizations as rape or 
sexual assault even if other crimes, such as robbery or 
assault occur at the same time. The NCVS then uses the 
following rape and sexual assault definitions:

Rape is the unlawful penetration of a person against the will 
of the victim, with use or threatened use of force, or 
attempting such an act. Rape includes psychological coercion 
and physical force, and forced sexual intercourse means 
vaginal, anal, or oral penetration by the offender. Rape also 
includes incidents where penetration is from a foreign object 
(e.g., a bottle), victimizations against male and female 
victims, and both heterosexual and homosexual rape. Attempted 
rape includes verbal threats of rape.

Sexual assault is defined across a wide range of 
victimizations, separate from rape or attempted rape. These 
crimes include attacks or attempted attacks generally 
involving unwanted sexual contact between a victim and 
offender. Sexual assault may or may not involve force and 
includes grabbing or fondling. Sexual assault also includes 
verbal threats. 

The measurement of rape and sexual assault presents many 
challenges. Victims may not be willing to reveal or share 
their experiences with an interviewer. The level and type of 
sexual violence reported by victims is sensitive to how items 
are worded, definitions used, data collection mode, and a 
variety of other factors related to the interview process. In 
addition, the legal definitions of rape and sexual assault 
vary across jurisdictions. The NCVS presents one approach to 
measuring and enumerating these incidents as well as other 
forms of violence and property crime. (For more information 
about the technical aspects of the NCVS, see Methodology.)
****************************************************

****************************************************
In 2005-10, females who were age 34 or younger, 
who lived in lower income households, and who lived 
in rural areas had some of the highest rates of 
sexual violence 
****************************************************

The rate of sexual violence against females declined with 
age. In 2005-10, sexual violence was committed against 
females ages 12 to 34 at a rate of about 4 victimizations per 
1,000, compared to a rate of 1.5 victimization per 1,000 for 
females ages 35 to 64 and 0.2 per 1,000 for age 65 or older 
(table 1). This pattern was consistent across all three 
aggregate time periods. Over time, the rate of sexual 
violence declined for both the 12-to-17 and 18-to-24 age 
groups. Females ages 12 to 17 had the largest decline, from 
11.3 per 1,000 in 1994-98 to 4.1 in 2005-10.

For all racial and ethnic groups, the rate of sexual violence 
was lower in 2005-10 than it was in 1994-98. Within each time 
period, few differences existed in the rates of sexual 
violence across racial and ethnic groups. Non-Hispanic white 
females and black and Hispanic females had a similar rate of 
sexual violence over time. However, Hispanic females had 
lower rates of sexual violence than black females in 1999-04 
and in 2005-10. Although American Indians and Alaska Natives 
appeared to experience rape or sexual assault victimization 
at rates higher than other racial and ethnic groups, these 
rates were based on small sample sizes and are not reliable. 

Across all three time periods between 1994 and 2010, females 
who had never been married or who were divorced or separated 
at the time of the interview had higher rates of rape or 
sexual assault victimization than females who were married or 
widowed. ***Footnote 1 The NCVS collects information on 
respondent’s marital status at the time of the interview, but 
it does not obtain marital status at the time of the incident 
or whether a change in marital status occurred after the 
incident.*** From 1994 to 2010, females who had never been 
married, those who were divorced or separated, and those who 
were married experienced about a 50% decline in the rate of 
sexual violence.

****************************************************

****************************************
Males had lower rates of rape or sexual 
assault than females from1995 to 2010
****************************************

From 1995 to 2010, approximately 9% of all rape or sexual 
assault victimizations recorded in the NCVS involved male 
victims (figure 2). In 2010, the male rate of rape or sexual 
assault was 0.1 per 1,000 males compared to a rate of 2.1 
per 1,000 for females (appendix table 3). Due to the 
relatively small number of sample cases, coupled with a low 
rate of victimization, estimates of male sexual violence from 
the NCVS cannot be used reliably for further disaggregation 
by victim and incident characteristics. Therefore, this 
report focuses exclusively on females.
****************************************************
Consistently across all three time periods, females living in 
households in the lowest income bracket (less than $25,000 
annually) experienced rape or sexual assault victimization at 
higher rates than females in higher income brackets. In 2005-
10, females in households earning less than $25,000 per year 
experienced 3.5 rape or sexual assault victimizations per 
1,000 females, compared to 1.9 per 1,000 in households 
earning between $25,000 and $49,999 and 1.8 per 1,000 in 
households earning $50,000 or more.

In 1994-98, the rate of rape or sexual assault victimization 
for females living in urban areas (5.1 per 1,000) was higher 
than the rate for females in suburban (3.9 per 1,000) and 
rural (3.9 per 1,000) areas. In 2005-10 this pattern 
reversed, and the rate of sexual violence for females in 
rural areas (3.0 per 1,000) was higher than the rate of 
sexual violence for females in urban (2.2 per 1,000) and 
suburban (1.8 per 1,000) areas. 

************************************
The percentage of rape or sexual 
assault victimizations that occurred 
at or near the victim’s home increased 
over time
*************************************

In 2005-10, about 55% of rape or sexual assault 
victimizations occurred at or near the victim’s home, and 
another 12% occurred at or near the home of a friend, 
relative, or acquaintance (table 2). The percentage of sexual 
violence that occurred at or near the home of the victim 
increased from 49% in 1994-98 to 55% in 2005-10. In 
comparison, the percentage of sexual violence that occurred 
at or near the home of a friend or in a commercial place or 
parking lot declined between 1994-98 and 2005-10. The number 
of rape or sexual assault victimizations occurring at or near 
the victim’s home declined at a slower rate over time 
compared to the number of victimizations that occurred 
outside the home (not shown in table).

Over all three periods, between 41% and 48% of victims of 
sexual violence were undertaking activities at or around 
their homes at the time of the incident. In 2005-10, 12% of 
rape or sexual assault victimizations against females 
occurred while the victim was working, and 7% occurred while 
the victim was attending school. Another 29% of sexual 
violence occurred while the victim went to or from work or 
school, was out shopping, or was engaged in leisure 
activities away from the home.

*************************************
About 3 in 4 victims of sexual violence 
knew the offender
*************************************

About 90% of rape or sexual assault victimizations involved 
one offender, a percentage that was stable across the three 
periods (table 3). In 2005-10, most rape or sexual assault 
victims (78%) knew the offender. About 34% of all rape or 
sexual assault victimizations were committed by an intimate 
partner (former or current spouse, girlfriend, or boyfriend), 
6% by a relative or family member, and 38% by a friend or 
acquaintance. Strangers committed about 22% of sexual 
violence, a percentage that was also unchanged from 1994 to 
2010.

In 2005-10, about half of rape or sexual assault 
victimizations were committed by an offender age 30 or older 
(table 4). Fifteen percent of offenders were age 17 or 
younger and 34% were ages 18 to 29. These percentages were 
stable across the three periods from 1994 to 2010.

Across all three periods, white males committed the majority 
of sexual violence. ***Footnote 2 Males committed about 95% 
of all sexual violence against females. *** Over time, the 
percentage of sexual violence committed by white offenders 
declined from 70% in 1994-98 to 57% in 2005-10. The 
percentage of black offenders increased from 18% in 1994-98 
to 27% in 2005-10. White males consistently accounted for 
more than 82% of the total U.S. population and black males 
accounted for 11%. The NCVS did not collect information on 
the ethnicity of the offender. Therefore, Hispanic offenders 
make up an unknown portion of the white, black, and other 
race of offender categories.

Consistent across all three periods, about 40% of victims 
believed the offender had been drinking or using drugs prior 
to the victimization. In 2005-10, in 30% of the 
victimizations the victim did not believe the offender had 
been drinking or using drugs, and in 30% the victim did not 
know whether there had been substance use.

*************************************
About 1 in 10 rape or sexual assault 
victimizations involved a weapon
*************************************

Across all three periods, the offender in the majority of 
rape or sexual assault victimizations did not have a weapon 
(table 5). In 2005-10, victims reported that the offender 
possessed or used a weapon in 11% of all sexual violence. The 
victim reported that the offender had a firearm in 6% of 
victimizations and a knife in 4%. The percentage of offenders 
armed with a weapon increased from 6% in 1994-98 to 11% in 
the two later periods. The NCVS does not ask victims if they 
were incapacitated in some manner, such as being drugged or 
intoxicated.

*************************************
The percentage of female victims of 
sexual violence who received medical 
treatment increased between 1994-98 
and 2005-10
*************************************

In 2005-10, 58% of female victims of sexual violence suffered 
a physical injury during the victimization, such as cuts, 
bruises, internal injuries, broken bones, gunshot wounds, or 
rape injuries (table 6). Of the females who suffered an 
injury in 2005-10, 35% said that they received some type of 
treatment for their injuries, an increase from 26% in 1994-
98. About 80% of victims who received treatment for their 
injuries in 2005-10 received this care in a hospital, 
doctor’s office, or emergency room. The other 20% were 
treated at the scene, in their home, at a neighbor or 
friend’s house, or in some other location. In comparison, in 
1994-98, 65% of treated victims received care in a hospital, 
doctor’s office, or emergency room, while 35% received first 
aid or treatment at the scene, at home, at a neighbor or 
friend’s house, or in some other location.  

In 2005-10, about 1 in 4 victims of sexual violence received 
help or advice from a private or public victim service agency 
(table 7). This percentage remained stable over the three 
periods.

*************************************
The percentage of sexual violence 
reported to police increased to a 
high of 56% in 2003 before dropping 
to 35% in 2010, a level last seen
in 1995
*************************************

In 1995, 29% of rape or sexual assault victimizations against 
females were reported to police (figure 3). This percentage 
increased to 56% in 2003 before declining to 35% in 2010.

Of the 36% of rape or sexual assault victimizations reported 
to police in 2005-10, about 64% were reported directly by the 
victims, an increase from 50% in 1994-98 (table 8). The 
percentage of victimizations known to police because they 
were reported by another household member declined from 26% 
in 1994-98 to 10% in 2005-10, while the percentage reported 
by an official other than the police increased from 4% to 
14%. 

Of the rape or sexual assault victimizations that were 
reported to police in 2005-10, 28% were reported in an 
attempt to protect the victim from future victimizations, and 
25% were reported to try to stop or prevent escalation of the 
victimization as it was occurring (table 9). Among rape or 
sexual assault victimizations that went unreported, the most 
common reason victims gave for not reporting the crime during 
2005-10 was fear of reprisal (20%). The percentage of 
victimizations that went unreported because the victim 
considered the incident a personal matter declined from 23% 
in 1994-98 to 13% in 2005-10.

*************************************
A lower percentage of sexual violence 
reported to police resulted in arrests 
in 2005-10 (31%) than in 1994-98 (47%)
*************************************


The police may take a variety of actions in response to 
reported rape or sexual assault victimizations. During 2005-
10, about 84% of victims stated that police came to the 
victim after being called, up from 75% during 1994-98 (table 
10). About 1 in 10 victims who reported went directly to the 
police to report the incident, a percentage that has remained 
stable over time (not shown in table). 

Across all three periods, when police responded after being 
notified, the most common police activity was to 
take a report from the victim, followed by questioning 
witnesses or conducting a search for the offender 
(table 11). In 2005-10, police took the victim’s report in 
86% of victimizations reported to police, and the police 
questioned witnesses or conducted a search in 48% of cases. 
During the same period, about 19% of victims reported that 
the police collected evidence, up from 8% in 1994-98. 

The percentage of reported rape or sexual assault 
victimizations against females that resulted in an arrest 
either at the scene or during a follow-up investigation 
decreased, from 47% in 1994-98 to 31% in 2005-10 (not shown 
in table). Out of the 283,200 annual average rape or sexual 
assault victimizations in 2005-10 both reported and not 
reported to the police, approximately 12% resulted in an 
arrest at the scene or during a follow-up investigation.

**************
Methodology
**************

Survey coverage
****************

The National Crime Victimization Survey (NCVS) is an annual 
data collection conducted by the U.S. Census Bureau for the 
Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS). The NCVS is a self-report 
survey in which interviewed persons are asked about the 
number and characteristics of victimizations experienced 
during the prior 6 months. The NCVS collects information on 
nonfatal personal crimes (rape or sexual assault, robbery, 
aggravated and simple assault, and personal larceny) and 
household property crimes (burglary, motor vehicle theft, and 
other theft) both reported and not reported to police. In 
addition to providing annual level and change estimates on 
criminal victimization, the NCVS is the primary source of 
information on the nature of criminal victimization 
incidents. Survey respondents provide information about 
themselves (such as age, sex, race and ethnicity, marital 
status, education level, and income) and whether they 
experienced victimization. The survey collects information 
for each victimization incident, including data about the 
offender (such as age, race and ethnicity, sex, and victim-
offender relationship), characteristics of the crime 
(including time and place of occurrence, use of weapons, 
nature of injury, and economic consequences), whether the 
crime was reported to police, reasons why the crime was or 
was not reported, and experiences with the criminal justice 
system.
 
Trained interviewers administer the NCVS to persons age 12 or 
older from a nationally representative sample of households 
in the United States. The NCVS defines a household as a group 
of members who all reside at a sampled address that is their 
usual place of residence at the time of the interview and 
when they have no other usual place of residence. Once 
selected, households remain in the sample for 3 years, and 
eligible persons in the households are interviewed every 6 
months for a total of seven interviews. New households rotate 
into the sample on an ongoing basis to replace outgoing 
households that have been in the sample for the 3-year 
period. The sample includes persons living in group quarters, 
such as dormitories, rooming houses, and religious group 
dwellings. Persons living in military barracks and 
institutional settings, such as correctional or hospital 
facilities, and the homeless are excluded from the sample. 
(For more detail, see the Survey Methodology in Criminal 
Victimization in the United States, 2008, NCJ 231173, BJS 
website, May 2011.)

In 2010, about 81,950 households and 146,570 individuals age 
12 or older were interviewed for the NCVS. The response rate 
was 92.3% of households and 87.5% of eligible individuals. 
Victimizations that occurred outside of the United States 
were excluded from this report. 


Weighting adjustments for estimating 
household victimization
*******************************************

Estimates in this report use data from the 1994 to 2010 NCVS 
data files. These files can be weighted to produce annual 
estimates of victimization for persons age 12 or older living 
in U.S. households. Because the NCVS relies on a sample 
rather than a census of the entire U.S. population, weights 
are designed to inflate sample point estimates to known 
population totals and to compensate for survey nonresponse 
and other aspects of the sample design. 

The NCVS data files include both person and household 
weights. Person weights provide an estimate of the population 
represented by each person in the sample. Household weights 
provide an estimate of the total U.S. household population. 
Both household and person weights, after proper adjustment, 
are also typically used to form the denominator in 
calculations of crime rates.

Victimization weights used in this analysis account for the 
number of persons present during an incident and for repeat 
victims of series incidents. The weight counts series 
incidents as the actual number of incidents reported by the 
victim, up to a maximum of 10 incidents. Series 
victimizations are similar in type but occur with such 
frequency that a victim is unable to recall each individual 
event or describe each event in detail. Survey procedures 
allow NCVS interviewers to identify and classify these 
similar victimizations as series victimizations and to 
collect detailed information on only the most recent incident 
in the series. In 2010, about 3% of all victimizations were 
series incidents. Weighting series incidents as the number of 
incidents up to a maximum of 10 incidents produces more 
reliable estimates of crime levels, while the cap at 10 
minimizes the effect of extreme outliers on the rates. 
Additional information on the series enumeration is detailed 
in the report Methods for Counting High Frequency Repeat 
Victimizations in the National Crime Victimization Survey, 
NCJ 237308, BJS website, April 2012.

Trend estimates are based on 2-year rolling averages centered 
on the most recent year or three 6-year periods. For example, 
estimates reported for 2010 represent the average estimates 
for 2009 and 2010. For other tables in this report, aggregate 
data for the time from 1994 through 1998, 1999 through 2004, 
and 2005 through 2010 are the focus. These methods of 
analysis improves the reliability and stability of estimate 
comparisons over time.
 
Standard error computations
*****************************

When national estimates are derived from a sample, as is the 
case with the NCVS, caution must be taken when comparing one 
estimate to another estimate or when comparing estimates over 
time. Although one estimate may be larger than another, 
estimates based on a sample have some degree of sampling 
error. The sampling error of an estimate depends on several 
factors, including the amount of variation in the responses, 
the size of the sample, and the size of the subgroup for 
which the estimate is computed. When the sampling error 
around the estimates is taken into consideration, the 
estimates that appear different may not actually be 
statistically different.

One measure of the sampling error associated with an estimate 
is the standard error. The standard error can vary from one 
estimate to the next. In general, for a given metric, an 
estimate with a smaller standard error provides a more 
reliable approximation of the true value than an estimate 
with a larger standard error. Estimates with relatively large 
standard errors are associated with less precision and 
reliability and should be interpreted with caution.

In order to generate standard errors around numbers and 
estimates from the NCVS, the Census Bureau produces 
generalized variance function (GVF) parameters for BJS. The 
GVFs take into account aspects of the NCVS complex sample 
design and represent the curve fitted to a selection of 
individual standard errors based on the Jackknife Repeated 
Replication technique. The GVF parameters were used to 
generate standard errors for each point estimate (such as 
counts, percentages, and rates) in the report.

BJS conducted tests to determine whether differences in 
estimated numbers and percentages in this report were 
statistically significant once sampling error was taken into 
account. Using statistical programs developed specifically 
for the NCVS, all comparisons in the text were tested for 
significance. The primary test procedure used was Student’s 
t-statistic, which tests the difference between two sample 
estimates. To ensure that the observed differences between 
estimates were larger than might be expected due to sampling 
variation, the significance level was set at the 95% 
confidence level.

Data users can use the estimates and the standard errors of 
the estimates provided in this report to generate a 
confidence interval around each estimate as a measure of the 
margin of error. The following example illustrates how 
standard errors can be used to generate confidence intervals:

According to the NCVS, from 2005 to 2010, 36.4% of rape or 
sexual assault victimizations were reported to the police 
(see table 8). Using the GVFs, BJS determined that the 
estimate has a standard error of 2.7% (see appendix table 
14). A confidence interval around the estimate was generated 
by multiplying the standard errors by ±1.96 (the t-score of a 
normal, two-tailed distribution that excludes 2.5% at either 
end of the distribution). Therefore, the confidence interval 
around the 36.4% estimate is equal to 36.4% ± 2.7% X 1.96 (or 
31.1% to 41.7%). In other words, if different samples using 
the same procedures were taken from the U.S. population 
during the period from 2005 to 2010, 95% of the time the 
percentage of rape or sexual assault victimizations that were 
reported to police would fall between 31.1% and 41.7%.
 
In this report, BJS also calculated a coefficient of 
variation (CV) for all estimates, representing the ratio of 
the standard error to the estimate. CVs provide a measure of 
reliability and a means to compare the precision of estimates 
across measures with differing levels or metrics. In cases 
where the CV was greater than 50%, or the unweighted sample 
had 10 or fewer cases, the estimate was noted with a “!” 
symbol (interpret data with caution; estimate is based on 10 
or fewer sample cases, or the coefficient of variation 
exceeds 50%). 

Many of the variables examined in this report may be related 
to one another and to other variables not included in the 
analyses. Complex relationships among variables in this 
report were not fully explored and warrant more extensive 
analysis. Readers are cautioned not to draw causal inferences 
based on the results presented.

Methodological changes to the NCVS in 2006
*******************************************

Methodological changes implemented in 2006 may have affected 
the crime estimates for that year to such an extent that they 
are not comparable to estimates from other years. Evaluation 
of 2007 and later data from the NCVS conducted by BJS and the 
Census Bureau found a high degree of confidence that 
estimates for 2007, 2008, 2009, and 2010 are consistent with 
and comparable to estimates for 2005 and previous years. The 
reports, Criminal Victimization, 2006, NCJ 219413, December 
2007; Criminal Victimization, 2007, NCJ 224390, December 
2008; Criminal Victimization, 2008, NCJ 227777, September 
2009; Criminal Victimization, 2009, NCJ 231327, October 2010; 
and Criminal Victimization, 2010, NCJ 235508, September 2011, 
are available on the BJS website. Although caution is 
warranted when comparing data from 2006 to other years, the 
aggregation of multiple years of data in this report 
diminishes the potential variation between 2006 and other 
years. In general, findings do not change significantly if 
the year 2006 is excluded from the analyses.

****************************************************

The Bureau of Justice Statistics is the statistical agency of 
the U.S. Department of Justice. William J. Sabol is the 
acting director.

This report was written by Michael Planty and Lynn Langton of 
BJS and Christopher Krebs, Marcus Berzofsky, and Hope Smiley-
McDonald from RTI International. RTI International and 
Jennifer Truman verified the report.

Catherine Bird and Jill Thomas edited the report, and Barbara 
Quinn and Tina Dorsey produced the report under the 
supervision of Doris J. James.

March 2013, NCJ 240655

****************************************************
Office of Justice Programs
Innovation * Partnerships * Safer Neighborhoods
www.ojp.usdoj.gov
****************************************************

2/21/13/JER/3:52pm











