U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Programs
Bureau of Justice Statistics

Selected Findings

Female Victims of Violence

September 2009, NCJ 228356

------------------------------------------------------------
This file is text only without graphics and many of
the tables. A Zip archive of the tables in this
report in spreadsheet format (.csv) and the full
report including tables and graphics in .pdf format
are available from:
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/abstract/fvv.htm
------------------------------------------------------------

Catalano, Ph.D., Erica Smith,
Howard Snyder, Ph.D., and Michael Rand

BJS Statisticians

This report provides the current findings on nonfatal and
fatal violent crimes committed against females. Data are from
the Bureau of Justice Statistics' National Crime
Victimization Survey (NCVS), 1993 to 2008, and the Federal
Bureau of Investigation's (FBI) Uniform Crime Reporting
Program's (UCR) Supplementary Homicide Reports (SHR), 1993 to
2007 (the most recent data available). The report focuses on
non-fatal intimate partner violence (IPV), fatal IPV, rape
and sexual assault, and stalking. It includes estimates of
the extent of crimes against females and the characteristics
of crimes and victims. Crime trends are also presented, along
with comparative estimates of crimes against males.

Non-fatal intimate partner violence

*Intimate partner violence includes victimization committed
by spouses or ex-spouses, boyfriends or girlfriends, and
ex-boyfriends or ex-girlfriends.

*In 2008 females age 12 or older experienced about 552,000
nonfatal violent victimizations (rape/sexual assault,
robbery, or aggravated or simple assault) by an intimate
partner (a current or former spouse, boyfriend or girlfriend)
(table 1).

*In the same year, men experienced 101,000 nonfatal violent
victimizations by an intimate partner.

*The rate of intimate partner victimizations for females was
4.3 victimizations per 1,000 females age 12 or older. The
equivalent rate of intimate partner violence against males
was 0.8 victimizations per 1,000 males age 12 or older.

*Females age 18 or older experienced higher rates of intimate
partner violence than females age 12 to 17 (4.5 per 1,000
compared to 1.7 per 1,000, respectively).

*Black females historically have experienced intimate partner
violence at rates higher than white females.

*In 2008, Hispanic and non-Hispanic females experienced
intimate partner violence at about the same rates (4.1 per
1,000 females age 12 or older versus 4.3 per 1,000,
respectively).

*In 2008, 72% of the intimate partner violence against males
and 49% of the intimate partner violence against females was
reported to police.

*About 99% of the intimate partner violence against females
in 2008 was committed by male offenders. About 83% of the
intimate partner violence against males was committed by
female offenders in 2008.

Trends in nonfatal intimate partner violence

Intimate partner violence against both males and females
declined at a similar rate between 1993 and 2008 (figure 1).

*The rate of intimate partner violence against females
declined 53% between 1993 and 2008, from 9.4 victimizations
per 1,000 females age 12 or older to 4.3 per 1,000. Against
males, the rate declined 54%, from 1.8 victimizations per
1,000 males age 12 or older to 0.8 per 1,000.

Fatal intimate partner violence

*Fatal intimate partner violence includes homicide or murder
and non-negligent manslaughter, defined as the willful
killing of one human being by another.

*In 2007 intimate partners committed 14% of all homicides in
the U.S. The total estimated number of intimate partner
homicide victims in 2007 was 2,340, including 1,640 females
and 700 males.

*Females made up 70% of victims killed by an intimate partner
in 2007, a proportion that has changed very little since
1993.

*Females were killed by intimate partners at twice the rate
of males. In 2007 the rate of intimate partner homicide for
females was 1.07 per 100,000 female residents compared to
0.47 per 100,000 male residents.

*Females are generally murdered by people they know. In 64%
of female homicide cases in 2007, females were killed by a
family member or intimate partner. In 2007, 24% of female
homicide victims were killed by a spouse or ex-spouse; 21%
were killed by a boyfriend or girlfriend; and 19% by another
family member. 

*In an additional 25% of cases in 2007, females were killed
by others they knew. An estimated 10% of female murder
victims were killed by a stranger. 

*In 2007 black female victims of intimate partner homicide
were twice as likely as white female homicide victims to be
killed by a spouse (0.96 and 0.50 per 100,000, respectively). 

*Black females were four times more likely than white females
to be murdered by a boyfriend or girlfriend (1.44 and 0.34
per 100,000, respectively).

*Men were more likely than women to be killed by strangers.
Among male homicide victims in 2007, 16% were murdered by a
family member or intimate partner. Of male homicide victims,
2% were killed by a spouse or ex-spouse and 3% were killed by
a girlfriend or boyfriend. Over half (54%) were killed by
others they knew, and 29% were killed by strangers. 

Trends in fatal intimate partner violence

*Between 1993 and 2007 the total number of homicide victims
in the U.S. fell 31%, with a somewhat greater decline for
females (-34%) than males (-30%). Homicide victims killed by
intimate partners fell 29%, with a greater decline for males
(-36%) than females (-26%) (figure 2).

*Homicide victims killed by an intimate partner declined from
an estimated 3,300 in 1993 to an estimated 2,340 in 2007. 

*Between 1993 and 2007, female victims killed by an intimate
partner declined from 2,200 to 1,640 victims, and male
intimate partner homicide victims declined from 1,100 to 700
victims. 

*The overall rate of female homicides fell 43% from 4.18 to
2.38 homicides per 100,000 female U.S. residents between 1993
and 2007. 

*The rate of intimate partner homicides of females decreased
35% (from 1.66 to 1.07 per 100,000 female U.S. residents),
while the rate of non-intimate female homicide fell 48% (from
2.52 to 1.31).

*Between 1993 and 2007 the overall rate of male homicides
fell 40% from 14.94 to 8.94 homicides per 100,000 male U.S.
residents. 

*The rate of intimate partner homicides of males decreased
46% (from 0.87 to 0.47), while the rate of non-intimate male
homicides fell 40% (from 14.07 to 8.47).

*An estimated 40% of female homicide victims were killed by
an intimate partner in 1993; the percentage increased to 45%
in 2007. An estimated 6% of male homicide victims were killed
by an intimate partner in 1993; this figure was 5% in 2007.

*From 1993 through 2007, the rate of homicide by a spouse
fell 41% for females and 54% for males. Over the same period,
the rate of homicide by a boyfriend or girlfriend fell 27%
for females and 36% for males.

*Between 1993 and 2007, 18% of female victims of intimate
partner homicide were under age 25, compared to 10% of male
victims. During the same period 11% of female victims of
intimate partner homicide were over age 54, compared to 14%
of male victims. 

*The number of black female homicide victims killed by
intimate partners fell 39% between 1993 and 2007. The number
of white female homicide victims killed by intimate partners
fell 21%.

*From 1993 through 2007, the rate of homicide by a spouse
declined 58% for black females (from 2.28 homicides per
100,000 black female residents to 0.96 per 100,000).

*The rate of homicide for white females killed by a spouse
fell 36% (from 0.78 homicides per 100,000 female residents to
0.50 per 100,000). 

*Over the same period, the rate of homicide by a boyfriend or
girlfriend fell 42% (from 2.50 to 1.44) for black females and
15% (from 0.40 to 0.34) for white females.

Children who witness violence

*The NCVS was not designed to capture information on the
number of children who witness intimate partner violence;
however, the survey is able to examine the characteristics of
households with a victim of IPV, including whether children
under age 12 were living in the home. 

*Using NCVS data from 2001 to 2005, among households with a
female IPV victim, 38% had children under age 12 living in
the home. Of the households with a male IPV victim, 21% had
children under age 12 living in the home.

*Court statistics can identify whether a child witnessed a
violent incident between intimate partners. Of 3,750 intimate
partner violence cases filed in state courts in 16 large
urban counties in 2002, children were present during the
violent incident in 36% of the cases. Of those children who
were present, 60% directly witnessed the violence. 

*Additional findings on domestic violence court cases are
available in Profile of Intimate Partner Violence Cases in
State Courts, a forthcoming BJS report expected to be
released in mid-October 2009 (table 2).

Characteristics of rape/sexual assault

*Rape includes forced sexual intercourse, both psychological
coercion and physical force, and attempted rapes. Sexual
assault includes a wide range of victimizations distinct from
rape or attempted rape.

*Based on the NCVS which interviews victims, females age 12
or older experienced an estimated 182,000 rapes or sexual
assaults in 2008, and males experienced 40,000 rapes or
sexual assaults. 

*The rates of rape or sexual assaults against females and
males in 2008 were 1.4 and 0.3 per 1,000 persons age 12 or
older, respectively.

*Black females experienced higher rates of rape or sexual
assault in 2008 than white females or females of other races
(2.9 compared to 1.2 and 0.9 per 1,000 females age 12 or
older, respectively.)

*In 2008, Hispanic and non-Hispanic females experienced rape
or sexual assault at about the same rates (1.1 compared to
1.5 per 1,000 females age 12 or older, respectively.)

*In 2008, 57% of the rape or sexual assaults against females
were committed by an offender whom they knew. Strangers
committed about one third (31%) of all rape/sexual assaults.

*One in five rape or sexual assaults against females (20%)
was committed by an intimate partner. 

*Almost half (47%) of the rape or sexual assaults against
females in 2008 were reported to police.

*Four out of five (80%) of the rapes against females were
committed by males.

Trends in rape/sexual assault

*Based on the NCVS, between 1993 and 2008 the rate of rape or
sexual assault against females declined by 70% (from 4.7 to
1.4 per 1,000 females age 12 or older).

*The rate of rape or sexual assault against males declined by
36% between 1993 and 2008 (from 0.5 to 0.3 per 1,000 males
age 12 or older).

Characteristics of stalking

*Data on stalking are from the NCVS Supplemental
Victimization Survey (SVS), administered during January
through June 2006. The SVS defined stalking as a course of
conduct directed at a specific person that would cause a
reasonable person to feel fear.

*During a 12-month period in 2005 and 2006, an estimated 3.4
million persons age 18 or older were victims of stalking. 

*During the 12-month period an estimated 14 in every 1,000
persons age 18 or older were victims of stalking. 

*Females were at higher risk of stalking victimization than
males. During the study period, females experienced 20
stalking victimizations per 1,000 females age 18 or older.
The rate of stalking victimization for males was
approximately 7 per 1,000 males age 18 or older. 

*As with victimization risk more generally, the risk of being
stalked diminished with age. Persons age 18 to 19 and 20 to
24 experienced the highest rates of stalking victimization.

*Asians and Pacific Islanders (7 per 1,000 persons age 18 and
older) were less likely to experience stalking than whites
(14 per 1,000), blacks (12 per 1,000), and persons of two or
more races (32 per 1,000).

*Non-Hispanics were more likely than Hispanics to experience
stalking (14 versus 11 per 1,000 persons age 12 or older,
respectively.)

*About 1 in 10 of all victims were stalked by a stranger, and
nearly 3 in 4 of all victims knew their offender in some
capacity. Stalking victims most often identified the stalker
as a former intimate (21.5%) or a friend, roommate, or
neighbor (16.4%).

*Stalking victimization was equally likely to be reported to
police whether the victim was male or female. Thirty-seven
percent of male and 41% of female victimizations were
reported to the police by the victim or another person aware
of the crime. 

*Males were as likely to report being stalked by a male as a
female offender. Forty-three percent of male stalking victims
stated that the offender was female, while 41% of male
victims stated that the offender was another male. 

*Female victims of stalking were significantly more likely to
be stalked by a male (67%) than by a female (24%) offender.

Definitions of violent crimes

Homicide murder and non-negligent manslaughter is defined as
the willful killing of one human being by another.

Rape forced sexual intercourse, including both psychological
coercion and physical force. Forced sexual intercourse means
vaginal, anal, or oral penetration by the offender(s). This
category includes incidents where the penetration is from a
foreign object, such as a bottle. This definition includes
attempted rapes, male and female victims, and heterosexual
and same sex rape.

Sexual assault includes a wide range of victimizations
distinct from rape or attempted rape. These crimes include
completed or attempted attacks generally involving unwanted
sexual contact between the victim and offender. Sexual
assaults may or may not involve force and include such things
as grabbing or fondling. Sexual assault also includes verbal
threats.

Robbery completed or attempted theft of property or cash by
force or threat of force, directly from a person, with or
without a weapon, and with or without injury.

Assault the unlawful physical attack or threat of attack.
Assaults may be classified as aggravated or simple. Rape,
attempted rape, and sexual assaults are excluded from this
category, as well as robbery and attempted robbery. The
severity of assaults ranges from minor threat to incidents
which are nearly fatal.

Aggravated assault the attack or attempted attack with a
weapon, regardless of whether or not an injury occurred and
attack without a weapon when serious injury results.

Simple assault an attack without a weapon resulting either in
no injury, less serious injury (for example, bruises, black
eyes, or cuts) or in undetermined injury requiring less than
2 days of hospitalization. Also includes attempted assault
without a weapon.

References

Bureau of Justice Statistics. National Crime Victimization
Survey [special analysis].

Federal Bureau of Investigation. Uniform Crime Reporting
Program. Supplemental Homicide Reports [special analysis]. 

Bureau of Justice Statistics. (2006). Violent Crime Rates
Declined for Both Males and Females Since 1994. Retrieved
from http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/glance/vsx2.htm.

Baum, K., Catalano S., Rand, M., and Rose, K. Bureau of
Justice Statistics (2009). Stalking Victimization in the
United States (NCJ 224527).

Catalano, S. Bureau of Justice Statistics. (2006). Intimate
Partner Violence in the United States. Retrieved from
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/intimate/ipv.htm.

Smith, E.L. and Farole, Jr., D.J. Bureau of Justice
Statistics. (2009). Profile of Intimate Partner Violence
Cases in Large Urban Counties (NCJ 228193). Forthcoming, 
mid-October 2009.

The Bureau of Justice Statistics is the statistical agency of
the U.S. Department of Justice. Michael D. Sinclair is Acting
Director.

This Selected Findings was written by Shannan Catalano, Erica
Smith, Howard Snyder, and Michael Rand. Jennifer E. Kaplan
and Catherine M. Poston of the Office of Violence Against
Women provided review and comments. Doris J. James and Jill
Duncan edited the report, and Tina Dorsey produced the
report. Jayne Robinson prepared the report for final
printing.      

September 2009, NCJ 228356

This report in portable document format and in ASCII and its
related statistical data and tables are available at the BJS
World Wide Web Internet site:
<http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/abstract/fvv.fm>.

Office of Justice Programs
Innovation  Partnerships  Safer Neighborhoods
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov
                    

9/30/2009/ JER