U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Programs
Bureau of Justice Statistics

------------------------------------------------------
This file is text only without graphics and many of the tables. 
A Zip archive of the tables in this report in spreadsheet format 
(.csv) and the full report including tables and graphics in
.pdf format are available on BJS's website at:
https://www.bjs.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbdetail&iid=5967
------------------------------------------------------

******************
Special Report
******************

************************************************
Hate Crime Victimization, 2004-2015
************************************************

Madeline Masucci, BJS Intern 
Lynn Langton, Ph.D., BJS Statistician
*************************************************

In 2015, the rate of violent hate crime victimization was 0.7 
hate crimes per 1,000 persons age 12 or older (figure 1). This 
rate was not significantly different from the rate in 2004 (0.9 
per 1,000).*** Footnote 1 Unless otherwise noted, the comparisons 
in this report are significant at the 95% confidence level.*** 
The absence of statistically significant change in rates from 
2004 to 2015 generally held true for violent hate crimes both 
reported and unreported to police. However, between 2012 and 
2015, the rate of unreported violent hate crime declined 
slightly, from 0.6 to 0.3 victimizations per 1,000 persons 12 or 
older (90% confidence level). 

Findings are primarily from the Bureau of Justice Statistics’ 
(BJS) National Crime Victimization Survey (NCVS), which has 
collected data on crimes motivated by hate since 2003. The NCVS 
and the FBI’s Uniform Crime Reporting (UCR) Hate Crime Statistics 
Program are the principal sources of annual information on hate 
crime in the United States. BJS and the FBI use the hate crime 
definition established by the Hate Crime Statistics Act (28 
U.S.C. § 534): “crimes that manifest evidence of prejudice based 
on race, gender or gender identity, religion, disability, sexual 
orientation, or ethnicity.” The NCVS measures crimes perceived by 
victims to be motivated by an offender’s bias against them for 
belonging to or being associated with a group largely identified 
by these characteristics.

*****************************************************
*************
HIGHLIGHTS
*************

* U.S. residents experienced an average of 250,000 hate crime 
victimizations each year from 2004 to 2015.

* There was no statistically significant change in the annual 
rate of violent hate crime victimization from 2004 to 2015 (0.7 
per 1,000 persons age 12 or older).

* The majority (99%) of victims cited offenders’ use of hate 
language as evidence of a hate crime.

* During the 5-year aggregate period from 2011-15, racial bias 
was the most common motivation for hate crime (48%).

* About 54% of hate crime victimizations were not reported to 
police during 2011-15.

* During 2011-15, Hispanics (1.3 per 1,000) experienced higher 
rate of violent hate crime victimization than non-Hispanic whites 
(0.7 per 1,000) and blacks (1.0 per 1,000).
*****************************************************

Hate crime victimization refers to a single victim or household 
that experienced a criminal incident believed to be motivated by 
hate. For violent crimes (rape or sexual assault, robbery, 
aggravated assault, and simple assault) and for personal larceny, 
the count of hate crime victimizations is the number of 
individuals who experienced a violent hate crime. For crimes 
against households (burglary, motor vehicle theft, or other 
theft), each household affected by a hate crime is counted as a 
single victimization. 

This report presents NCVS data on the characteristics of hate 
crime and its victims from 2004 to 2015. Trend estimates are 
based on 2-year rolling averages centered on the most recent 
year. For example, estimates reported for 2015 represent the 
average estimates for 2014 and 2015. This approach increases the 
reliability and stability of estimates, which facilitates 
comparing estimates over time. The report also presents 
comparisons between the NCVS and the UCR program in terms of 
overall trends in hate crime victimization and the type of bias 
that motivated the crime. 

***************************************
No significant change was observed 
in the number of violent or property 
hate crimes from 2004 to 2015
***************************************

On average, U.S. residents experienced approximately 250,000 hate 
crime victimizations each year between 2004 and 2015, of which 
about 230,000 were violent hate victimizations (not shown). The 
number of total and violent hate crime victimizations did not 
change significantly from 2004 to 2015 (table 1). During this 
period, property hate crime victimizations were also flat 
following a decline from 2004 to 2005. 

In 2015, hate crime victimizations accounted for 1% of the total 
victimizations captured by the NCVS. Violent hate crime 
victimizations accounted for 4% of all violent victimizations.

***************************************
Racial bias was the most common 
motivation for hate crime during 
2011–15
***************************************

The NCVS asked hate crime victims about the types of bias they 
suspected motivated the crime. During the aggregated 5-year 
period from 2011 to 2015, victims suspected that nearly half 
(48%) of hate crime victimizations were motivated by racial bias 
(figure 2). About a third of victims believed they were targeted 
because of their ethnicity (35%) or their gender (29%). About 1 
in 5 believed the hate crime was motivated by bias against 
persons or groups with which they were associated (23%) or by 
sexual orientation (22%). About 1 in 6 hate crime victimizations 
were thought to be motivated by bias against the victim’s 
religion (17%) or disability (16%).

Between 2007 and 2015, the percentage of hate crimes perceived by 
victims to be motivated by racial bias decreased from 62% to 48% 
(figure 3). During that time, the percentage of hate crimes 
suspected to be motivated by gender bias nearly doubled from 15% 
in 2007 to 29% in 2015. In 2009, the federal hate crime 
legislation was amended to include gender and gender identity as 
protected categories.

***************************************
The majority of victims cited offenders’ 
use of hate language as evidence 
of a hate crime
***************************************

For a crime to be classified as a hate crime in the NCVS, the 
victim must report at least one of three types of evidence that 
the act was motivated by hate: 

* the offender used hate language

* the offender left behind hate symbols

* police investigators confirmed that the incident was hate 
crime.

During 2011-15, almost all hate crime victims (99%) cited the 
offenders’ use of hate language as evidence that the crime was 
motivated by hate (table 2). Fewer than 1 in 10 hate crime 
victims reported that the offender left hate symbols at the scene 
(5%) or that the victimization was confirmed to be a hate crime 
by police investigators (7%). (See Methodology.) 

***************************************
During 2011-15, nearly two-thirds (62%) 
of hate crimes were simple assaults
***************************************

Overall, about 90% of NCVS-reported hate crimes involved 
violence, and about 29% were serious violent crimes (rape or 
sexual assault, robbery, and aggravated assault) (table 3). *** 
Footnote 2 For offense definitions see Criminal Victimization, 
2015 (NCJ 250180, BJS web, October 2016, p15), and Terms and 
Definitions: Victims (BJS web).*** During 2011-15, violent crime 
accounted for a higher percentage of hate (90%) than nonhate 
(25%) crime victimizations. The majority of hate crimes were 
simple assaults (62%), followed by aggravated assault (18%), 
robbery (8%), and theft (7%).

Except for rape or sexual assaults, the distribution of types of 
violent crimes was fairly similar across hate and nonhate 
victimizations during 2011-15 (figure 4). Rape or sexual assault 
accounted for a lower percentage of violent hate (3%) than 
nonhate (6%) crime victimizations.

***************************************
1 in 4 violent hate crimes involved 
a weapon during 2006-15
***************************************

During 2006-15, no statistically significant difference was 
observed in the percentage of violent hate (24%) and nonhate 
(21%) victimizations involving a weapon (table 4). However, a 
lower percentage of violent victimizations involved a firearm in 
hate (5%) than nonhate (7%) crime victimizations.

The majority (78%) of violent hate crime victims did not suffer 
from any injuries during the event. A lower percentage of violent 
hate (22%) victimizations than violent nonhate (26%) 
victimizations involved an injury (90% confidence level).

***************************************
Hate crime victimizations were more 
likely to occur outside of the home 
than nonhate crime victimizations
***************************************

During 2011-15, the largest portion of hate victimizations 
occurred at or near the victim’s home (39%) (table 5). However, 
hate crime victimizations were less likely to occur at or near 
the victim’s home than nonhate crime victimizations (61%). A 
greater percentage of hate victimizations than nonhate 
victimizations occurred in commercial places, parking lots, on 
public transportation, and at school.

*************************************************************
Violent hate crimes were less likely to result in arrest than 
violent nonhate crimes
*************************************************************

During 2011-15, less than half of total and violent (42% each) 
hate crime victimizations were reported to police (table 6). 
There was no significant difference in the percentage of violent 
hate (42%) and violent nonhate (46%) crimes reported to police. 

For total crime, a higher percentage of complaints were signed in 
reported hate (31%) than in nonhate (22%) crime victimizations 
(90% confidence level). This was not true for violent crime.

Violent nonhate (28%) crimes reported to police were nearly three 
times more likely to result in an arrest than violent hate (10%) 
crimes. About 4% of all violent hate crimes, whether reported or 
not, resulted in an arrest (not shown).

***************************************
About 2 in 5 hate crime victimizations 
not reported to police were handled 
another way
***************************************

Approximately 54% of hate crime victimizations were not reported 
to police during 2011-15. The most common reason for not 
reporting to police was that the victimization was handled 
another way (41%), such as privately or through a non-law 
enforcement official (e.g., apartment manager or school official) 
(table 7). About a quarter (23%) of hate crime victims who did 
not report the crime believed that police would not want to be 
bothered or to get involved, would be inefficient or ineffective, 
or would cause trouble for the victim. About 1 in 5 (19%) crime 
victims stated that the victimization was not important enough to 
report to police.

With the exception of reasons that fell in the “other” category, 
no significant difference was observed in the most important 
reasons for not reporting hate and nonhate violent crime 
victimizations to police.  

***************************************
Hispanics experienced a higher rate 
of violent hate crime victimization 
than non-Hispanic whites
***************************************

During 2011-15, males (0.9 per 1,000 persons age 12 or older) and 
females (0.8 per 1,000) had similar rates of hate crime 
victimization (table 8). Hispanics (1.3 per 1,000) experienced a 
higher rate of violent hate victimization than non-Hispanic 
whites (0.7 per 1,000). However, more than half (53%) of hate 
crime victimizations were against whites. Whites accounted for a 
lower percentage of victims of hate crimes than nonhate (64%) 
victimizations. A higher percentage of violent crime victims were 
Hispanic in hate (25%) than nonhate (14%) victimizations.

For both hate (90% confidence level) and nonhate violent crime 
victimizations, young persons ages 12 to 17 had a higher rate of 
victimization than persons age 50 or older. In both hate and 
nonhate violent victimizations, persons in households in the 
lowest income bracket had the highest rate of victimization than 
all other income categories.

***************************************
The largest percentage of violent hate 
crimes occurred in the West
***************************************

The percentage (46%) and rate (1.6 per 1,000) of violent hate 
victimization occurring in the West was greater than that of any 
other region (table 9). The South accounted for a lower 
percentage of hate (19%) than nonhate (32%) crime victimizations.

During 2011-15, more than 90% of violent hate crime 
victimizations were against persons living in urban (47%) and 
suburban (46%) areas. A lower percentage of violent hate crime 
(7%) than nonhate crime (13%) involved persons in rural areas. 
For both hate (1.2 per 1,000) and nonhate (24.9 per 1,000) 
crimes, the rates of victimization were highest in urban areas.

***************************************
Nearly half (46%) of violent hate 
crime victimizations were committed 
by a stranger
***************************************

The NCVS asks victims of violent crime about the characteristics 
of the offender. In both hate (63%) and nonhate (78%) violent 
crime victimizations, the majority of offenders acted alone 
during 2011-15 (table 10). However, a higher percentage of 
violent hate crimes (30%) involved multiple offenders than 
violent nonhate crimes (17%). 

Across violent hate and nonhate crimes, a greater percentage of 
offenders were male than female. Males were less likely to be 
offenders in violent hate crimes (61%) than violent nonhate 
crimes (69%) (90% confidence level). A lower percentage of 
violent victimizations were committed by white offenders in 
violent hate (38%) than violent nonhate (54%) crimes. Whites and 
blacks accounted for a similar proportion of violent hate crime 
offenders. 

During 2011-15, persons age 30 or older accounted for the largest 
percentage of offenders in both violent hate (43%) and violent 
nonhate (37%) crimes. A lower percentage of offenders were ages 
18 to 29 in violent hate crime (17%), compared to violent nonhate 
crime (28%).

Nearly half (46%) of violent hate crime victimizations were 
committed by a stranger. In comparison, the majority (55%) of 
violent nonhate victimizations were committed by someone at least 
casually known to the victim. A lower percentage of offenders 
were known to the victim in hate (44%) than nonhate (55%) violent 
crime.

***************************************
Differences in hate crime counts 
collected by the NCVS and UCR program 
can largely be attributed to victims’ 
reporting and police classification
***************************************

In addition to the NCVS data on hate crime victimization, the 
other main measure of hate crime in the United States is the 
FBI’s Hate Crime Statistics Program, part of the Uniform Crime 
Reporting (UCR) program. The NCVS and UCR were designed to be 
complementary but different.*** Footnote 3 For more information 
on the differences between the NCVS and UCR program, see The 
Nation’s Two Crime Measures (NCJ 246832, BJS web, September 
2014).*** The FBI’s Hate Crime Statistics Program includes only 
reported crimes that police determined to be and recorded as hate 
crimes. Alternatively, the NCVS is based on victims’ perceptions 
that a crime was motivated by bias because the offender used hate 
language, left hate symbols, or police confirmed that it was a 
hate crime. The NCVS includes hate crimes that were both reported 
and not reported to police.

Due to the differences in the scope of the two collections, the 
overall annual counts of hate crime in the United States are 
significantly higher based on NCVS data than the UCR program. 
Based on data from the NCVS during 2003-15, persons age 12 or 
older experienced an annual average of 252,630 hate crime 
victimizations, of which about 41% (104,600) were reported to 
police (figure 5). Of those 104,600, about 14% (14,380) were 
confirmed by police investigators as hate crimes. The remaining 
86% of those reported to police were classified as hate crimes in 
the NCVS because the offender used hate language or left hate 
symbols at the crime scene. 

The NCVS annual estimate of 14,380 hate crimes confirmed by 
police investigators as hate crimes was not statistically 
different from the UCR annual average number of hate crime 
victims (8,370) during the same period.

***************************************
Violent crimes made up 87% of NCVS 
hate crimes reported to police, but 
60% of hate crimes recorded in the 
UCR program
***************************************

Another major difference between the two collections is that the 
NCVS focuses on hate crimes experienced by individuals, while the 
UCR program also captures hate crimes committed against 
businesses, religious institutions, other organizations, and 
society as a whole. The two surveys also measure somewhat 
different types of crimes. For instance, the UCR program measures 
homicide and vandalism, while the NCVS does not.

Due to the differences between the two collections, from 2003-15, 
87% of NCVS hate crimes reported to police were violent crimes, 
while 60% of UCR program recorded hate crimes were violent (table 
11). Serious violent crime accounted for 31% of NCVS hate crime 
reported to police, compared to about 13% of UCR hate crime. 
Vandalism and intimidation, two crimes not measured in the NCVS, 
accounted for about 60% of UCR hate crime. 

During 2003-15, the UCR program also reveals that 100 persons 
were victims of hate crime homicide (murder or nonnegligent 
manslaughter) (not shown). This was an average of eight hate 
crime homicides per year in the United States during this 12-year 
period. However, in 2015 there were 18 recorded hate crime 
homicides.

****************
Methodology
****************

Survey coverage
****************

The National Crime Victimization Survey (NCVS) is an annual data 
collection conducted by the U.S. Census Bureau for the Bureau of 
Justice Statistics (BJS). The NCVS is a self-report survey in 
which interviewed persons are asked about the number and 
characteristics of victimizations experienced during the prior 6 
months. The NCVS collects information on nonfatal personal crimes 
(rape or sexual assault, robbery, aggravated and simple assault, 
and personal larceny) and household property crimes (burglary, 
motor vehicle theft, and other theft) both reported and not 
reported to police. In addition to providing annual level and 
change estimates on criminal victimization, the NCVS is the 
primary source of information on the nature of criminal 
victimization incidents.

Survey respondents provide information about themselves (e.g., 
sex, race, Hispanic origin, age, marital status, education level, 
and income) and whether they experienced a victimization. For 
each victimization incident, the NCVS also collects information 
about the offender (e.g., sex, race, Hispanic origin, age, and 
victim-offender relationship), characteristics of the crime 
(including time and place of occurrence, use of weapons, nature 
of injury, and economic consequences), whether the crime was 
reported to police, reasons the crime was or was not reported, 
and victim experiences with the criminal justice system.

The NCVS is administered to persons age 12 or older from 
a nationally representative sample of households in the United 
States. The NCVS defines a household as a group of persons who 
all reside at a sampled address. Persons are considered household 
members when the sampled address is their usual place of 
residence at the time of the interview and when they have no 
usual place of residence elsewhere. Once selected, households 
remain in the sample for 3 years, and eligible persons in these 
households are interviewed every 6 months either in person or 
over the phone for a total of seven interviews.

All first interviews are conducted in person with subsequent 
interviews conducted either in person or by phone. New households 
rotate into the sample on an ongoing basis to replace outgoing 
households that have been in the sample for the 3-year period. 
The sample includes persons living in group quarters, such as 
dormitories, rooming houses, and religious group dwellings, and 
excludes persons living in military barracks and institutional 
settings such as correctional facilities or hospitals, and 
persons who are homeless.

Nonresponse and weighting adjustments
***************************************

In 2015, 95,760 households and 163,880 persons age 12 or older 
were interviewed for the NCVS. Each household was interviewed 
twice during the year. The response rate was 82% for households 
and 86% for eligible persons.

Victimizations that occurred outside of the United States were 
excluded from this report. In 2015, less than 1% of the 
unweighted victimizations occurred outside of the United States 
and were excluded from the analyses.

Estimates in this report use NCVS data files from 2003 through 
2015, weighted to produce annual estimates of victimization for 
persons age 12 or older living in U.S. households. Because the 
NCVS relies on a sample rather than a census of the entire U.S. 
population, weights are designed to inflate sample point 
estimates to known population totals and to compensate for survey 
nonresponse and other aspects of the sample design.

The NCVS data files include both person and household weights. 
Person weights provide an estimate of the population represented 
by each person in the sample. Household weights provide an 
estimate of the U.S. household population represented by each 
household in the sample. After proper adjustment, both household 
and person weights are also typically used to form the 
denominator in calculations of crime rates.

Victimization weights used in this analysis account for the 
number of persons present during an incident and for high-
frequency repeat victimizations (i.e., series victimizations). 
Series victimizations are similar in type but occur with such 
frequency that a victim is unable to recall each individual event 
or describe each event in detail. Survey procedures allow NCVS 
interviewers to identify and classify these similar 
victimizations as series victimizations and to collect detailed 
information on only the most recent incident in the series.

The weight counts series incidents as the actual number of 
incidents reported by the victim, up to a maximum of 10 
incidents. Including series victimizations in national rates 
results in large increases in the level of violent victimization. 
However, trends in violent crime are generally similar, 
regardless of whether series victimizations are included. In 
2015, series incidents accounted for about 1% of all 
victimizations and 4% of all violent victimizations. Weighting 
series incidents as the number of incidents up to a maximum of 10 
incidents produces more reliable estimates of crime levels, while 
the cap at 10 minimizes the effect of extreme outliers on rates. 
Additional information on the series enumeration is detailed in 
the report Methods for Counting High-Frequency Repeat 
Victimizations in the National Crime Victimization Survey (NCJ 
237308, BJS web, April 2012).

Standard error computations 
*****************************

When national estimates are derived from a sample, as with the 
NCVS, caution must be used when comparing one estimate to another 
estimate or when comparing estimates over time. Although one 
estimate may be larger than another, estimates based on a sample 
have some degree of sampling error. The sampling error of an 
estimate depends on several factors, including the amount of 
variation in the responses and the size of the sample. When the 
sampling error around an estimate is taken into account, the 
estimates that appear different may not be statistically 
different.

One measure of the sampling error associated with an estimate is 
the standard error. The standard errors vary from one estimate to 
the next. Generally, an estimate with a small standard error 
provides a more reliable approximation of the true value than an 
estimate with a large standard error. Estimates with relatively 
large standard errors are associated with less precision and 
reliability and should be interpreted with caution.

To generate standard errors around numbers and estimates from the 
NCVS, the Census Bureau produced generalized variance function 
(GVF) parameters for BJS. The GVFs take into account aspects of 
the NCVS complex sample design and represent the curve fitted to 
a selection of individual standard errors based on the Jackknife 
Repeated Replication technique. The GVF parameters were used to 
generate standard errors for each point estimate (e.g., counts, 
percentages, and rates) in this report.

BJS conducted tests to determine whether differences in estimated 
numbers, percentages, and rates in this report were statistically 
significant once sampling error was taken into account. Using 
statistical programs developed specifically for the NCVS, all 
comparisons in the text were tested for significance. The primary 
test procedure was the Student’s t-statistic, which tests the 
difference between two sample estimates. Differences described as 
greater, larger than, or higher passed a test at the 0.05 level 
of statistical significance (95% confidence level). Findings that 
passed a test at the 0.10 level of significance are noted in the 
text (90% confidence level). Caution is required when comparing 
estimates not explicitly discussed in this report.

Data users can use the estimates and the standard errors of the 
estimates provided in this report to generate a confidence 
interval around the estimate as a measure of the margin of error. 
The following example illustrates how standard errors can be used 
to generate confidence intervals:

According to the NCVS, in 2015, the violent hate crime 
victimization rate among persons age 12 or older was 0.7 per 
1,000 persons (see table 1). Using the GVFs, it was determined 
that the estimated victimization rate has a standard error of 
0.15 (see appendix table 2). A confidence interval around the 
estimate was generated by multiplying the standard errors by 
±1.96 (the t-score of a normal, two-tailed distribution that 
excludes 2.5% at either end of the distribution). Therefore, 
the 95% confidence interval around the 0.7 estimate from 2015 
is 0.7 ± (0.15 × 1.96) or (0.4 to 1.0). In others words, if 
different samples using the same procedures were taken from the 
U.S. population in 2015, 95% of the time the violent 
victimization rate would fall between 0.4 and 1.0 per 1,000 
persons.

BJS also calculated a coefficient of variation (CV) for all 
estimates, representing the ratio of the standard error to the 
estimate. CVs provide a measure of reliability and a means for 
comparing the precision of estimates across measures with 
differing levels or metrics.

Evidence that hate crimes occurred
***********************************

For NCVS crimes to be classified as hate crimes, the victim had 
to report one of three types of evidence that the offender was 
motivated by bias: (1) the offender used hate language, (2) the 
offender left hate signs or symbols at the scene, or (3) police 
investigators confirmed that it was a hate crime. In addition to 
the three types of evidence that were used to classify incidents 
as hate crimes, victims may have additional reasons for believing 
that the victimization was bias-motivated. In addition to these 
three reasons, victims could have reported that--

* the offender committed similar hate crimes or crimes of bigotry 
in the past

* the incident occurred on or near a holiday, event, location, 
gathering place, or building commonly associated with a specific 
group (e.g., at a gay pride march, synagogue, Korean church, 
etc.)

* other hate crimes or crimes of prejudice or bigotry happened to 
the victim or occurred in the neighborhood

* their feelings, instincts, or perception lead them to suspect 
this incident was a hate crime or crime of prejudice or bigotry, 
even though there was not enough evidence to know for sure.

During 2011-15, about 83% of hate crime victims offered one or 
more additional reasons for believing the crime was motivated by 
hate beyond the type of evidence required for classification. 
More than 60% had a feeling or instinct that the crime was 
motivated by hate. Thirty percent reported the offender had 
previously committed crimes of prejudice or bigotry, and 18% 
stated that a hate crime had previously happened in the area. 
About 5% of victims said that the incident occurred near a 
holiday, event, location, gathering, or building commonly 
associated with a specific group. Although 7% of hate crimes were 
confirmed by police investigators, 22% of hate crime victims told 
police that they believed the incident was a hate crime (not 
shown).

About 91% of persons who reported these other types of evidence 
also reported one of the three needed to classify them as a 
victim of hate crime for the NCVS. If the NCVS standard was 
relaxed to include these other types of evidence, it would not 
have a statistically significant impact on the average annual 
number of hate crime victimizations. During 2011-15, there were 
about 254,200 hate crime victimizations each year using the 
expanded evidence categories, which is not statistically 
different from the 236,100 under the current definition.

*****************************************************
The Bureau of Justice Statistics of the U.S. Department of 
Justice is the principal federal agency responsible for measuring 
crime, criminal victimization, criminal offenders, victims of 
crime, correlates of crime, and the operation of criminal and 
civil justice systems at the federal, state, tribal, and local 
levels. BJS collects, analyzes, and disseminates reliable and 
valid statistics on crime and justice systems in the United 
States, supports improvements to state and local criminal justice 
information systems, and participates with national and 
international organizations to develop and recommend national 
standards for justice statistics. Jeri M. Mulrow is acting 
director.

This report was written by Madeline Masucci and Lynn Langton. 
Barbara Oudekerk verified the report. Caitlin Scoville and Jill 
Thomas edited the report. Tina Dorsey produced the report.

June 2017, NCJ 250653
*****************************************************

Office of Justice Programs 
Building Solutions • Supporting Communities • Advancing Justice  
www.ojp.usdoj.gov

*********************************
5/25/2017 JER 9:20am
*********************************
