U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Programs
Bureau of Justice Statistics

-----------------------------------------------------
This report is one in series. More recent 
editions may be available. To view a list 
of all reports in the series go to 
http://www.bjs.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbse&sid=72

This file is text only without graphics and many of the
tables. A Zip archive of the tables in this report in
spreadsheet format (.csv) and the full report including
tables and graphics in .pdf format are available on BJS
website at:http://bjs.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbdetail&iid=4614

------------------------------------------------------

Special Report

Hate Crime Victimization, 2003-2011

Nathan Sandholtz, BJS Intern, Lynn Langton, Ph.D., and 
Michael Planty, Ph.D., BJS Statisticians

From 2007 to 2011, an estimated annual average of 259,700 
nonfatal violent and property hate crime victimizations 
occurred against persons age 12 or older residing in U.S. 
households. Of these hate crimes, victims perceived that the 
offender was motivated by bias against the victim’s religion 
in 21% of victimizations. The percentage of hate crimes 
motivated by religious bias more than doubled in 2007-11, 
compared to the 10% motivated by religious bias in 2003-06 
(figure 1). In comparison, the percentage of hate crimes 
motivated by racial bias was slightly lower in 2007-11 (54%) 
than in 2003-06 (63%).
 
The findings from this report came primarily from the Bureau 
of Justice Statistics’ (BJS) National Crime Victimization 
Survey (NCVS), which has been collecting data on crimes 
motivated by hate since 2003. The NCVS and the FBI’s Uniform 
Crime Reports (UCR) Hate Crime Statistics Program, which are 
the principal sources of annual information on hate crime in 
the United States, use the definition of hate crime provided 
in the Hate Crime Statistics Act (28 U.S.C. § 534). The act 
defines hate crimes as “crimes that manifest evidence of 
prejudice based on race, gender or gender identity, religion, 
disability, sexual orientation, or ethnicity.” The NCVS 
measures crimes perceived by victims to be motivated by an 
offender’s bias against them for belonging to or being 
associated with a group largely identified by these 
characteristics. 

*******************************************************

************
Highlights

************

* Across the periods from 2003-06 and 2007-11, there was no 
change in the annual average number of total, violent, or 
property hate crime victimizations. 

* The percentage of hate crimes motivated by religious bias 
more than doubled between 2003-06 and 2007-11 (from 10% to 
21%), while the percentage motivated by racial bias dropped 
slightly (from 63% to 54%). 

* Violent hate crime accounted for a higher percentage of 
all nonfatal violent crime in 2007-11 (4%), compared to 
2003-06 (3%).

* About 92% of all hate crimes collected by the NCVS between 
2007 and 2011 were violent victimizations.

* About a third of hate crime victimizations occurred at or 
near the victim’s home. 

* Between 2003-06 and 2007-11, the percentage of hate crime 
victimizations reported to police declined from 46% to 35%.

* In 2007-11, whites, blacks, and Hispanics had similar rates 
of violent hate crime victimization.

*******************************************************

***********************************
Changes to the measurement of hate
crime in the NCVS
***********************************

Since the release of the previous BJS report on hate crime 
victimization (Hate Crime, 2003-2009, NCJ 234085, June 2011), 
BJS has instituted two changes to the measurement of hate 
crime using NCVS data. Beginning with the 2010 NCVS data, BJS 
modified the approach for counting high frequency repeat 
victimizations, or series victimizations. Series 
victimizations are those that are similar in type but occur 
with such frequency that a victim is unable to recall each 
individual event or to describe each event in detail. Survey 
procedures allow NCVS interviewers to identify and classify 
these similar victimizations as series victimizations and 
collect detailed information on only the most recent incident 
in the series. Prior to the release of the 2010 NCVS data, 
BJS counted series victimizations as one victimization. In 
order to capture these events, BJS now counts series 
victimizations as the number of incidents experienced by the 
victim, up to a maximum of 10 (see Methodology). 

This new approach to counting series victimizations impacts 
trends in the rate of violent hate crime victimization. With 
the previous approach to counting series victimizations, the 
rate of violent hate crime victimizations declined slightly 
from 2008 to 2010 and stabilized from 2010 to 2011 (figure 
2). In comparison, when series victimizations are counted up 
to a maximum of 10 victimizations, the rate of violent hate 
crime victimizations was stable from 2008 to 2010 and 
declined slightly from 2010 to 2011. Regardless of the 
approach used for counting hate crime victimizations, no 
significant change was observed in the rate of violent hate 
crime victimization in 2011 compared to 2004.

The second change to the measurement of hate crime is the 
inclusion of gender or gender identity bias in the hate crime 
definition. In 2009, the passage of the Matthew Shepard and 
James Byrd, Jr. Hate Crimes Prevention Act made gender, 
gender identity, and sexual orientation protected categories 
under federal hate crime statutes. The Hate Crime Statistics 
Act was also amended to reflect the newly protected 
categories of sexual orientation, gender, and gender 
identity. 

BJS and the FBI have been collecting and reporting on hate 
crimes motivated by bias against a victim’s sexual 
orientation since 2003. BJS has also previously reported on 
hate crimes motivated by gender bias when the victim reported 
an additional bias motivation (e.g., racial or ethnic bias, 
as well as gender bias). However, beginning with 2010, BJS 
began including crimes motivated solely by gender or gender 
identity bias in the hate crime statistics. The inclusion of 
crimes motivated solely by gender or gender identity bias did 
not significantly change the number or rate of hate crime 
victimizations in 2010 or 2011 (table 1).
*******************************************************

Hate crime victimization refers to a single victim or 
household that experienced a criminal incident believed to be 
motivated by hate. For violent crimes (rape or sexual 
assault, robbery, aggravated assault, and simple assault) and 
for personal larceny, the count of hate crime victimizations 
is the number of individuals who experienced a violent hate 
crime. For crimes against households (burglary, motor vehicle 
theft, or other theft), each household affected by a hate 
crime is counted as a single victimization. 

This report presents NCVS data on the characteristics of hate 
crimes and hate crime victims from 2003 to 2011. Trend 
estimates are based on 2-year rolling averages centered on 
the most recent year. For example, estimates reported for 
2011 represent the average estimates for 2010 and 2011. 
Subgroup estimates are aggregated annual estimates for two 
periods—2003 to 2006 and 2007 to 2011. This approach 
increases the reliability and stability of estimates, which 
facilitates comparing estimates over time. The report also 
presents comparisons between the NCVS and the UCR in terms of 
overall trends in hate crime victimization and the type of 
bias that motivated the crime. 

*******************************************
As a percentage of total violent crime, 
violent hate crime was greater in 2007-11 
(4%) than in 2003-06 (3%)
*******************************************

Overall, the total number of hate crime victimizations 
remained stable from 2004 to 2011 (table 2). Across the 
periods from 2003-06 and 2007-11, no change was detected in 
the annual average number of total, violent, or property hate 
crime victimizations (table 3). However, violent hate crimes 
accounted for a higher percentage of all nonfatal violent 
victimizations in the 2007-11 period (4%) than in the 2003-06 
period (3%).
*********************************************************

*************************************
Violent victimizations accounted 
for 92% of all hate crimes in 2007-11
*************************************

The percentage of hate crimes that involved violence was 
greater in 2007-11 (92%) than in 2003-06 (84%) (table 4). 
Property crimes accounted for a lower percentage of 
hate crime victimizations in 2007-11 (8%), compared to 2003-
06 (15%). The lower percentage of property hate crime 
victimizations in 2003-06 was driven by a decline in hate-
related burglaries. Hate-related burglaries accounted for 2% 
of all hate crimes during 2007-11 and 9% of all hate crimes 
during 2003-06.

While a greater percentage of hate crimes were violent 
victimizations in 2007-11 than in 2003-06, the opposite was 
true for nonhate crimes. The percentage of nonhate crimes 
that were violent victimizations declined from 2003-06 to 
2007-11 (not shown in a table). Overall, from 2003 through 
2011, violent crimes accounted for a greater percentage of 
hate crimes than nonhate crimes (figure 3).
 
*************************************
The percentage of violent hate crimes 
resulting in victim injury declined 
over time
*************************************

In 2007-11, the offender had a weapon in at least 25% of 
violent hate crime victimizations, and the victim sustained 
an injury in about 17% of violent hate crime victimizations 
(table 5). No differences were detected in the percentage of 
hate crime victimizations in which the offender was known to 
have a weapon between the 2003-06 and 2007-11 periods. 
However, the victim sustained an injury in a slightly higher 
percentage of violent hate crime victimizations in 2003-06 
(25%) than in 2007-11 (17%).

*************************************
About 30% of hate crime victimizations 
occurred at or near the victim’s home
*************************************

The locations in which hate crimes occurred did not change 
significantly from 2003-06 to 2007-11 (table 6). During both 
periods, about a third of hate crime victimizations occurred 
at or near the victim’s home. In 2007-11, about 24% of hate 
crime victimizations occurred in public places (such as 
parking lots, on the street, or on public transportation) and 
about 19% occurred at school. 

From 2003 to 2011, the overall percentage of violent nonhate 
victimizations (36%) that occurred at or near the victim’s 
home was greater than the percentage of violent hate 
victimizations (27%) that occurred at or near the victim’s 
home (figure 4). In comparison, the percentage of violent 
hate crimes that occurred in commercial places (16%) and at 
school (22%) was greater than the percentage of nonhate 
crimes occurring in these locations. A similar percentage of 
hate (24%) and nonhate (22%) violent crimes occurred in 
parking lots, on the street, or on public transportation.

*************************************
The percentage of hate crimes reported 
to police declined over time
*************************************

The percentage of all hate crime victimizations reported to 
police declined from 46% in 2003-06 to 35% in 2007-11 (table 
7). The percentage of violent hate crimes reported to police 
was 36% in 2007-11.

The decline in the percentage of total hate crimes reported 
to police was partially attributed to a drop in reporting by 
persons other than the victim, such as other household 
members or bystanders. In 2003-06, someone other than the 
victim reported 21% percent of hate crime victimizations, 
compared to 11% in 2007-11. About a quarter of all hate crime 
victimizations were reported to police by the victim, which 
was consistent across both time periods. 

The percentage of violent hate crime victimizations that 
resulted in the victim signing a complaint remained stable at 
about 10% from 2003-06 to 2007-11. However, the percentage of 
violent hate crimes that resulted in an arrest declined from 
10% in 2003-06 to 4% in 2007-11. 

*************************************
From 2003-06 to 2007-11, serious violent 
hate crimes reported to police declined
*************************************

The percentage of serious violent and property hate crimes 
reported to police declined from 2003-06 to 2007-11 (figure 
5). However, the percentage of reported simple assault hate 
crimes did not change significantly across the two periods. 
The percentage of all types of nonhate crimes reported to 
police remained stable across both periods. 

In 2007-11, the percentage of hate violent crimes reported to 
police was lower than the percentage of violent nonhate 
crimes reported. No differences were observed in the 
percentage of serious violent and simple assault hate and 
nonhate crimes reported to police in 2003-06. The percentage 
of property hate crimes reported to police was greater than 
the percentage of nonhate property crimes reported in 2003-
06, but a similar percentage of hate and nonhate property 
crime was reported to police in 2007-11.

******************************************************
The percentage of violent hate crime victimizations 
that were unreported due to a belief that police could 
not or would not help increased from 003-06 to 2007-11 
******************************************************

The NCVS asks violent hate crime victims who did not report 
the crime to police why the crime was not reported. The 
reasons victims described as most important to them varied 
between 2003-06 and 2007-11. In 2003-06, the most common 
reason for not reporting the violent hate crime to police was 
that it was dealt with in another way (e.g., reported to an 
official other than law enforcement) or that the victim 
considered it a private or personal matter (35%). The 
percentage of victims who dealt with the crime another way or 
considered it a private matter declined in 2007-11 
to 23% (figure 6). 

In 2003-06, 14% of hate crime victims said they did not 
report the crime because they believed that the police could 
not or would not help, compared to 24% in 2007-11. A slightly 
higher percentage of violent hate crime victims stated that 
fear of reprisal or getting the offender in trouble was the 
most important reason for not reporting the crime to the 
police in 2007-11 (15%) than in 2003-06 (9%).

******************************************************
Whites, blacks, and Hispanics had similar rates of 
violent hate crime victimization in 2007-11
******************************************************

In 2003-06, Hispanics (1.4 per 1,000) experienced a higher 
rate of violent hate crime victimization than white non-
Hispanics (0.8 per 1,000) and black non-Hispanics (0.5 per 
1,000) (table 8). In 2007-11, the rate of violent hate crime 
victimization was similar for all three groups. 
During both time periods, males consistently had a higher 
rate of violent hate crime victimization than females, and 
persons under age 18 experienced higher rates of 
victimization than adults age 18 or older. Persons in 
households with an income of under $25,000 per year 
consistently experienced a higher rate of violent hate crime 
victimization than persons in higher income categories in 
both time periods. 

******************************************************
The percentage of violent hate crimes committed by one 
offender declined from 70% in 2003-06 to 53% in 2007-11
******************************************************

The percentage of violent hate crimes committed by two or 
three offenders increased from 11% during 2003-06 to 25% 
during 2007-11, while the percentage committed by a single 
offender declined across the two time periods (table 9). The 
percentage of violent hate crime committed by a group of four 
or more offenders remained relatively stable.

The percentage of violent hate crime victims who perceived 
the offender to be white increased from 37% in 2003-06 to 53% 
in 2007-11. The age of offenders and the relationship between 
the victim and offender remained relatively unchanged across 
the two time periods. In 2007-11, about 46% of violent hate 
crime victims reported that the offender was a stranger, 
compared to 45% in 2003-06.

******************************************************
Police records indicate that hate crime incidents 
declined after a period of relative stability
******************************************************

According to the FBI’s UCR hate crime data collection, 1,944 
law enforcement agencies reported 6,222 hate crime incidents 
involving 7,713 victims in 2011. The remaining 87% of 
agencies that participated in the Hate Crime Statistics 
Program reported no hate crimes in their jurisdictions (not 
shown in a table).

Similar to the NCVS, the UCR showed a decline in the number 
of hate crime victimizations known to the police in 2011, 
compared to 2003. The number of hate crime victimizations 
known to the police declined by 15%, from 9,100 hate crime 
victimizations in 2003 to 7,700 in 2011 (figure 7).

******************************************************
From 2003 to 2011, an average of seven hate crime 
homicides occurred each year
******************************************************

According to the UCR Hate Crime Reporting Program, four 
people were victims of hate crime homicides (murder or non-
negligent manslaughter) in 2011 (not shown in table). Since a 
high of 14 homicides in 2003, the number of hate crime 
homicides ranged from three to nine victims each year between 
2004 and 2011. This was an average of six homicides per year.

******************************************************
Property crimes accounted for 39% of hate crimes 
recorded in the UCR and 14% of hate crimes reported 
to police in the NCVS
******************************************************

From 2003 to 2011, rape, robbery, aggravated assault, and 
simple assault accounted for 32% of hate crimes reported to 
the UCR, compared to about 86% of hate crimes reported to 
police in the NCVS (table 10). Intimidation, a crime 
classification not recognized in the NCVS, accounted for 28% 
of the UCR hate crimes. About 39% of hate crime 
victimizations collected by the UCR were property crimes, 
such as burglary, theft, and vandalism. Vandalism, another 
crime not captured through the NCVS, accounted for about 86% 
of the UCR’s property hate crimes (not shown in table).

******************************************************
Offenders targeted victims because of racial bias 
against the victim in more than half of hate 
crime victimizations reported to the UCR 
******************************************************

Similar to NCVS data, UCR data indicated that more than 50% 
of hate crime victims known to the police were targeted 
because of an offender’s racial bias (figure 8). In both data 
collections, the percentage of hate crimes motivated by 
racial bias declined from 2003-06 to 2007-11. In 2007-11, UCR 
and NCVS data showed a similar percentage of hate crime 
victims targeted due to bias against religion and sexual 
orientation bias.

The percentage of hate crimes motivated by the victim’s 
disability and the victim’s ethnicity differed between the 
UCR and the NCVS. In 2007-11, the UCR identified about 1% of 
hate crime victimizations as motivated by bias against a 
victim’s disability, compared to 14% identified in the NCVS. 
Similarly, bias against the victim’s ethnicity was the 
motivation for 13% of hate crimes in the UCR, compared to 30% 
of hate crimes in the NCVS. One potential reason for the 
differences between the two sources is that while 60% of 
victims surveyed by the NCVS reported multiple perceived 
types of bias against them (not shown in a table), in the UCR 
about 0.1% of hate crime victims were recorded as being 
targeted for multiple sources of bias. 

*************
Methodology
*************

National Crime Victimization Survey
***********************************

The National Crime Victimization Survey (NCVS) is an annual 
data collection conducted by the U.S. Census Bureau for the 
Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS). The NCVS collects 
information on nonfatal crimes, whether or not reported to 
the police, against persons age 12 or older in a nationally 
representative sample of household in the United States.

Survey results are based on data gathered from residents 
living throughout the United States, including persons living 
in group quarters, such as dormitories, rooming houses, and 
religious group dwellings. The survey excludes personnel 
living in military barracks and persons living in 
institutional settings, such as correctional or hospital 
facilities. For more detail, see the Survey Methodology for 
Criminal Victimization in the United States, 2008, NCJ 
231173, BJS website, May 2011. Victim self-reports capture 
information about the number and characteristics of 
victimizations reported and not reported to law enforcement 
each year. Hate crime victimizations are based on victims’ 
perceptions of the offenders’ motivations. Victims provide 
evidence of the hate motivation by words, symbols, and 
actions used by the offenders.

Weighting adjustments for estimating 
household victimization
*************************************

In 2011, about 79,800 households and 143,120 individuals age 
12 or older were interviewed for the NCVS. The response rate 
was 90% for households and 88% of eligible individuals.  
Victimizations that occurred outside of the United States 
were excluded from this report.

Estimates in this report use data from the 1994 to 2011 NCVS 
data files. These files can be weighted to produce annual 
estimates of victimization for persons age 12 or older living 
in U.S. households. Because the NCVS relies on a sample 
rather than a census of the entire U.S. population, weights 
are designed to inflate sample point estimates to known 
population totals and to compensate for survey nonresponse 
and other aspects of the sample design. 
and household weights. Person weights provide an estimate of 
the population represented by each person in the sample. 
Household weights provide an estimate of the total U.S. 
household population. Both household and person weights, 
after proper adjustment, are also typically used to form the 
denominator in calculations of crime rates.

Victimization weights used in this analysis account for the 
number of persons present during an incident and for repeat 
victims of series incidents. The weight counts series 
incidents as the actual number of incidents reported by the 
victim, up to a maximum of 10 incidents. Series 
victimizations are similar in type but occur with such 
frequency that a victim is unable to recall each individual 
event or describe each event in detail. Survey procedures 
allow NCVS interviewers to identify and classify these 
similar victimizations as series victimizations and to 
collect detailed information on only the most recent incident 
in the series. In 2010, about 3% of all victimizations were 
series incidents. Weighting series incidents as the number of 
incidents up to a maximum of 10 incidents produces more 
reliable estimates of crime levels, while the cap at 10 
minimizes the effect of extreme outliers on the rates. 
Additional information on the series enumeration is detailed 
in the report Methods for Counting High Frequency Repeat 
Victimizations in the National Crime Victimization Survey, 
NCJ 237308, BJS website, April 2012.

Year-to-year trend estimates are based on 2-year rolling 
averages centered on the most recent year. For example, 
estimates reported for 2011 represent the average estimates 
for 2010 and 2011. For other tables in this report, aggregate 
data for the time from 2003 through 2006, and 2007 through 
2011 are the focus. These methods of analysis improve the 
reliability and stability of comparisons over time. 

Standard error computations
****************************

Anytime national estimates are derived from a sample rather 
than the entire population, as is the case with the NCVS, 
caution is warranted when drawing conclusions about the size 
of one population estimate in comparison to another or about 
whether a time series of population estimates is changing. 
Estimates based on responses from a sample of the population 
each have some degree of sampling error. The sampling error, 
or margin of error, of an estimate depends on several 
factors, including the amount of variation in the responses, 
the size and representativeness of the sample, and the size 
of the subgroup for which the estimate is computed. One 
measure of the sampling error associated with an estimate is 
the standard error. The standard error can vary from one 
estimate to the next. In general, a smaller standard error 
provides a more reliable approximation of the true value than 
an estimate with a higher standard error. Estimates with 
relatively large standard errors are associated with less 
precision and reliability and should be interpreted with 
caution.

The coefficient of variation (CV) is a measure of an 
estimate’s reliability. The CV is the ratio of the standard 
error to the estimate. In this report, the CV was calculated 
for all estimates. In cases where the CV was greater than 50% 
or the estimate was based on 10 or fewer sample cases, the 
estimate was noted with a “!” symbol (interpret data with 
caution; estimate based on 10 or fewer sample cases, or 
coefficient of variation is greater than 50%). A statistical 
test is used to determine whether differences in means or 
percentages are statistically significant once sampling error 
is taken into account. Comparisons made in the text were 
tested for statistical significance at the p < .05 level to 
ensure that the differences were larger than might be 
expected due to sampling variation. 

Significance testing calculations were conducted at BJS using 
statistical programs developed specifically for the NCVS by 
the U.S. Census Bureau. These programs take into 
consideration many aspects of the complex NCVS sample design 
when calculating estimates. Standard errors for average 
annual estimates were calculated based on the ratio of the 
sums of victimizations and respondents across years. Many of 
the variables examined in this report may be related to one 
another and to other variables not included in the analyses. 
Complex relationships among variables were not fully explored 
in this report and warrant more extensive analysis. Readers 
are cautioned not to draw causal inferences based on the 
results presented.

Methodological changes to the NCVS in 2006
*******************************************

Methodological changes implemented in 2006 impacted the total 
violent crime estimates for that year to an extent that they 
were considered to be not comparable to estimates from other 
years. Evaluation of 2007 and later data from the NCVS 
conducted by BJS and the Census Bureau have found a high 
degree of confidence that estimates for 2007, 2008, and 2009 
are consistent with and comparable to those for 2005 and 
previous years. The reports, Criminal Victimization, 2006, 
NCJ 219413, December 2007; Criminal Victimization, 2007, NCJ 
224390, December 2008; Criminal Victimization, 2008, NCJ 
227777, September 2009; Criminal Victimization, 2009, NCJ 
231327, October 2010; Criminal Victimization, 2010, NCJ 
235508, September 2011; and Criminal Victimization, 2011, NCJ 
239437, October 2012, are available on the BJS website.

Although caution is warranted when comparing data from 2006 
to other years, the aggregation of multiple years of data in 
this report diminishes the potential variation between 2006 
and other years. In general, findings do not change 
significantly if data for 2006 are excluded.

Uniform Crime Reports (UCR)
****************************

The UCR Hate Crime Statistics Program captures information 
about the types of bias that motivate hate crimes, the nature 
of the offenses, and some information about the victims and 
offenders by attaching the collection of hate crime 
statistics to the established UCR data collection procedures. 
The hate crime data presented here comprise a subset of 
information that law enforcement agencies submit to the UCR 
Program. 

Crimes reported to the FBI involve those motivated by biases 
based on race, religion, sexual orientation, 
ethnicity/national origin, and disability. The 2012 UCR data 
collection will allow the reporting of crimes motivated by 
gender and gender identity bias, as well as crimes committed 
by and directed against juveniles. The victim of a hate crime 
may be an individual, business, institution, or society as a 
whole. In UCR data, law enforcement specifies the number of 
offenders and, when possible, the race of the offender or 
offenders as a group. Agencies that participated in the Hate 
Crime Statistics Program in 2011 represented nearly 285 
million residents, or 92.3% percent of the nation’s 
population. Their jurisdictions covered 49 states and the 
District of Columbia.

Hate crime legislation
***********************

On April 23, 1990, Congress passed the Hate Crime Statistics 
Act, which requires the Attorney General to collect data 
“about crimes that manifest evidence of prejudice based on 
race, religion, sexual orientation, or ethnicity.” The 
Attorney General delegated the responsibilities of developing 
the procedures for implementing, collecting, and managing 
hate crime data to the director of the FBI, who in turn 
assigned the tasks to the UCR Program. Under the direction of 
the Attorney General and with the cooperation and assistance 
of many local and state law enforcement agencies, the UCR 
Program created a hate crime data collection to comply with 
the congressional mandate.

In September 1994, lawmakers amended the Hate Crime 
Statistics Act to include bias against persons with 
disabilities in the Violent Crime Control and Law Enforcement 
Act of 1994. The FBI started gathering data for the 
additional bias type on January 1, 1997. 

The Church Arson Prevention Act, which was signed into law in 
July 1996, removed the sunset clause from the original 
statute and mandated that the collection of hate crime data 
become a permanent part of the UCR Program.

In 2009, Congress further amended the Hate Crime Statistics 
Act by passing the Matthew Shepard and James Byrd, Jr. Hate 
Crime Prevention Act. The amendment includes the collection 
of data for crimes motivated by bias against a particular 
gender and gender identity, as well as for crimes committed 
by, and crimes directed against, juveniles. The FBI is 
currently making plans to implement changes to collect these 
data.

The Hate Crime Statistics Act can be accessed at 
http://www.ssa.gov/OP_Home/comp2/D-USC-28.html.

*************************************************
The Bureau of Justice Statistics is the statistics agency of 
the U.S. Department of Justice. William J. Sabol is acting 
director.

This report was written by Nathan Sandholtz, Lynn Langton, 
and Michael Planty. Erika Harrell verified the report.

Catherine Bird and Jill Thomas edited the report, and Barbara 
Quinn produced the report under the supervision of Doris J. 
James.

March 2013, NCJ 241291
*************************************************

*************************************************
Office of Justice Programs
Innovation * Partnerships * Safer Neighborhoods
www.ojp.usdoj.gov
**************************************************

*******************
3/13/13/2:56pm/JER
*******************