U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Programs
Bureau of Justice Statistics

------------------------------------------------------

This file is text only without graphics and many of 
the tables. A Zip archive of the tables in this report 
in spreadsheet format (.csv) and the full report 
including tables and graphics in .pdf format are 
available on BJS website 
at https://www.bjs.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbdetail&iid=6026

This reports is one in a series. More recent editions 
may be available. To view a list of all reports in the 
series go to https://www.bjs.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbse&sid=7
------------------------------------------------------


**********************************************
HIV in Prisons, 2015 - Statistical Tables
**********************************************

******************************************************
Laura M. Maruschak and Jennifer Bronson, Ph.D., BJS 
Statisticians
******************************************************

At yearend 2015, an estimated 17,150 prisoners in the 
custody of state and federal correctional authorities were 
known to be living with HIV (human immunodeficiency virus), 
down from about 17,740 at yearend 2014 (figure 
1).***Footnote 1 Includes those who were HIV-positive or had 
confirmed AIDS (acquired immunodeficiency syndrome).*** This 
was the first year that the total number of state and 
federal prisoners who had HIV fell below the estimated 
number in 1991 (17,680), when HIV data were first collected 
by the Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS). The decrease 
continued an annual downward trend in the number of 
prisoners who had HIV that began more than 15 years ago. In 
1998, the year in which the number of prisoners who had HIV 
peaked, an estimated 25,980 state and federal prisoners had 
HIV. From 1998 to 2015, the decline in estimated HIV cases 
between single years ranged from 0.1% to almost 7%.

The decline observed in HIV among prisoners since 1998 was 
driven by the consistent year-to-year decline in the number 
of state prisoners who had HIV. Between 1998 and 2015, the 
estimated number of state prisoners who had HIV declined 
from 24,910 to 15,610 (down 9,300). During the same period, 
the federal prison population who had HIV grew from 1,066 to 
1,536. In 2015, federal prisons held 906 more prisoners who 
had HIV than in 1991, while state prisons held an estimated 
1,440 fewer prisoners who had HIV.

The rate of HIV per 100,000 persons in the custody of state 
and federal correctional authorities was 2,231 in 1991. The 
rate of prisoners who had HIV peaked the following year at 
2,471 per 100,000 before beginning a largely downward trend. 
In 2015, the rate of HIV among prisoners was 1,297 per 
100,000 state and federal prisoners, the lowest rate 
observed during the 25-year period in which BJS has 
collected HIV data.

*****************
List of tables
*****************

Table 1. Estimated number of prisoners who had HIV in the 
custody of state and federal correctional authorities, by 
sex, 2010–2015

Table 2. AIDS-related deaths among prisoners in the custody 
of state correctional authorities, by demographic 
characteristics, 2010–2015

Table 3. Number of jurisdictions that tested for HIV and 
percent of all prison admissions, by HIV testing practices 
during the intake process, 2011 and 2015

Table 4. Number of jurisdictions that tested prisoners for 
HIV while in custody, by HIV testing practices, 2011 and 
2015

Table 5. Number of jurisdictions that tested for HIV and 
percent of all prison releases, by HIV testing practices 
during discharge planning, 2011 and 2015

***********************************************************

**************************
List of appendix tables
**************************

Appendix Table 1. Estimated numbers for figure 1: Number of 
prisoners who had HIV and rate of HIV per 100,000 in the 
custody of state and federal correctional authorities, 1991–
2015

Appendix Table 2. Numbers for figure 2: Number of 
AIDS-related deaths and mortality rate among state 
prisoners, 1991–2015

Appendix Table 3. Estimated number of prisoners who had HIV 
in the custody of state and federal correctional 
authorities, by jurisdiction, 2010–2015

Appendix Table 4. Estimated number of prisoners who had HIV 
in the custody of state and federal correctional 
authorities, by sex and jurisdiction, 2010–2015

Appendix Table 5. HIV testing and consent practices for 
state and federal prisoners during the intake process, by 
jurisdiction, 2011

Appendix Table 6. HIV testing and consent practices for 
state and federal prisoners during the intake process, by 
jurisdiction, 2015

Appendix Table 7. HIV testing practices for state and 
federal prisoners while in custody, by jurisdiction, 2011

Appendix Table 8. HIV testing practices for state and 
federal prisoners while in custody, by jurisdiction, 2015

Appendix Table 9. Appendix Table 1. HIV testing practices 
for state and federal prisoners during discharge planning, 
by jurisdiction, 2011

Appendix Table 10. HIV testing practices for state and 
federal prisoners during discharge planning, by 
jurisdiction, 2015

Appendix Table 11. Number of prisoners in the custody of 
state and federal correctional authorities, by sex, 2010–
2015
************************************************************

In 1991, a total of 520 state prisoners died from AIDS-
related causes. This grew to 1,010 in 1995 (figure 2). Since 
1995, the number of AIDS-related deaths in state prison has 
declined overall, with a few upward fluctuations. In 2015, 
state prisons reported a preliminary count of 45 AIDS-
related deaths, the lowest number since data collection 
began in 1991. The AIDS-related mortality rate among state 
prisoners followed a similar trend in the number of AIDS-
related deaths among state prisoners.

In 1999, the first year in which BJS obtained federal death 
data, 16 AIDS-related deaths were reported among federal 
prisoners. Preliminary data indicate that one federal 
prisoner died in 2015 from AIDS-related causes (not shown). 
While the number of AIDS-related deaths among federal 
prisoners declined overall between 1999 and 2015, the number 
fluctuated during this period, from a high of 27 in 2005 to 
a low of zero in 2014. 

Findings in this report are based on data collected from 51 
jurisdictions, which include 50 states and the Federal 
Bureau of Prisons (BOP), through BJS’s National Prisoner 
Statistics (NPS) program. The NPS annually collects data on 
prisoner counts, characteristics, admissions, and releases. 
This report also includes data from the Deaths in Custody 
Reporting Program (DCRP), which collects individual-level 
data on cause of death and characteristics of those who 
died. Statistical tables provide national- and jurisdiction-
level data on the total number and sex of persons living 
with HIV who are in the custody of state and federal 
correctional authorities. Rates of HIV among prisoners and 
the number and rate of AIDS-related deaths that occurred in 
state prison by demographic characteristics are also 
presented.

************************************************************
***********************************************
Center for Disease Control and Prevention's 
HIV testing guidelines and testing measures
***********************************************

The correctional setting presents an opportunity to test 
people for HIV who may be at high risk for contracting the 
virus and who are unaware of their HIV status. Since 2009, 
the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention has 
recommended opt-out HIV screening at the time of admission 
for prisoners entering a correctional facility.***Footnote 2 
Center for Disease Control and Prevention. (2009). HIV 
Testing Implementation Guidance for Correctional Settings. 
Retrieved from
https://www.cdc.gov/hiv/pdf/group/cdc-hiv-correctional-
settings-guidelines.pdf*** In an opt-out HIV screening protocol, 
the prisoner is informed that an HIV test will be performed and 
the test is given unless they declined to take the test. 

In 2011, the HIV testing questions in the National Prisoner 
Statistics (NPS) instrument were enhanced to further assess 
HIV testing practices in prisons. A series of questions 
regarding a jurisdiction’s HIV testing practices for 
prisoners entering their facilities was added. Each state 
and the Federal Bureau of Prisons were asked to select the 
statement that best described their system's HIV testing 
practices at admission: 

* all inmates were tested for HIV, regardless of whether the 
inmate agreed

* all inmates were told that an HIV test would be performed, 
and the test was given unless the inmate declined

* all inmates were told that HIV testing was available, and 
the inmate must have requested a test 

* inmates were only tested based upon an assessment of high-
risk behavior, medical history, or other clinical evaluation 

* not all inmates were told that an HIV test was available, 
but were tested if they requested one

* other 

* did not provide HIV testing. 

Questions on testing during discharge planning were also 
added to the NPS, and questions regarding HIV testing for 
prisoners while in custody were modified.

The NPS does not measure the type of HIV test used in a 
given jurisdiction, and this report does not detail the 
type(s) of HIV screening and tests that may be used by 
correctional facilities to diagnose inmates who had HIV. 
Many factors, such as financial resources, staff hours, 
availability of confidential testing space, and laboratory 
processing times, may influence the testing practices 
adopted by a jurisdiction.
************************************************************

While BJS has collected HIV data since 1991, the highlights 
reported here focus on changes in HIV infection and AIDS-
related deaths during the past 5 years. Findings related to 
HIV testing practices covered 2011 to 2015. BJS expanded the 
HIV testing section of the NPS to include intake and 
discharge testing practice in 2011. 

**************************************
HIV among state and federal prisoners
**************************************

* In 2015, the total number of prisoners who had HIV in the 
custody of state and federal correctional authorities was 
17,150, a decline from 17,740 in 2014 (figure 1; appendix 
table 1).

* The number of state prisoners who had HIV declined by 560, 
from an estimated 16,170 in 2014 to 15,610 in 2015.

* The number of federal prisoners who had HIV declined by 
28, from 1,564 at yearend 2014 to 1,536 at yearend 2015.
* The rate of HIV among state and federal prisoners declined 
from 1,313 per 100,000 prisoners at yearend 2014 to 1,297 
per 100,000 at yearend 2015.

* During the most recent 5-year period, the number of state 
prisoners who had HIV declined each year, while the number 
of federal prisoners fluctuated. 

* Overall, 3,100 fewer state prisoners and 42 fewer federal 
prisoners had HIV in 2015 than in 2010.

************************************************
HIV among state and federal prisoners by sex
************************************************

* An estimated 15,920 male prisoners and 1,220 female 
prisoners had HIV at yearend 2015, both down from 2014 
(16,410 males and 1,330 females) (table 1).

* From yearend 2010 to yearend 2015, the number of male 
prisoners who had HIV declined from 18,510 to 15,920 (down 
2,590), and the number of females who had HIV declined from 
1,780 to 1,220 (down 560). 

* From 2010 to 2015, the number of males who had HIV 
declined by 14%, while the number of females who had HIV 
declined by 31%.

* In 2010, 1% of male prisoners had HIV, compared to 2% of 
females. By yearend 2015, about 1% of both male and female 
prisoners had HIV.

**********************************
AIDS-related deaths among state 
and federal prisoners
**********************************

* The number of AIDS-related deaths among state prisoners 
fluctuated from 2010 to 2015. Most recently, the number 
decreased from 64 deaths in 2014 to a preliminary count of 
45 deaths in 2015 (table 2).

* From 2010 to 2015, the AIDS-related mortality rate among 
state prisoners ranged from about 4 to 6 deaths per 100,000 
persons in the custody of state prison authorities. 

* The number of AIDS-related deaths among federal prisoners 
was less than 10 each year from 2010 to 2015. In 2015 there 
was one death, and in 2014 there were no deaths (not shown). 

* Among federal prisoners, the AIDS-related mortality rate 
between 2010 and 2015 ranged from none to 4 deaths per 
100,000 persons in the custody of federal authorities.

******************************************
AIDS-related deaths of state prisoners 
by sex, race, Hispanic origin, and age
******************************************

Sex
******

* Among state prisoners, 44 males and 1 female died from 
AIDS-related causes in 2015, down from 61 males and 3 
females in 2014.

* Between 2010 and 2015, males accounted for the majority of 
AIDS-related deaths among state prisoners, ranging from 44 
in 2015 to 71 in 2012.

* Between 2010 and 2015, three or fewer AIDS-related deaths 
occurred among female state prisoners each year.

* Between 2010 and 2015, the AIDS-related mortality rate in 
state prisons ranged from about 4 to 6 deaths per 100,000 
male prisoners and 1 to 3 deaths per 100,000 female 
prisoners. 

Race and Hispanic origin
***************************

* In 2015, 23 non-Hispanic black, 18 non-Hispanic white, and 
2 Hispanic state prisoners died from AIDS-related causes. In 
comparison, 38 black, 21 white, and 3 Hispanic state 
prisoners died from AIDS-related causes in 2014. 

* Between 2010 and 2015, the number of AIDS-related deaths 
among black prisoners in the custody of state authorities 
fluctuated, from a high of 44 (2010) to a low of 23 deaths 
(2015).

* In 2015, the AIDS-related mortality rate among black state 
prisoners was about 5 per 100,000 black prisoners in the 
custody of state authorities, the lowest rate observed among 
black prisoners between 2010 and 2015.

* In 2015, the AIDS-related mortality rate among white state 
prisoners was about 4 per 100,000 white persons in the 
custody of state prison authorities. Among Hispanic state 
prisoners, the AIDS-related mortality rate was 1 per 100,000 
Hispanic prisoners. 

Age
******

* In 2015, 64% (29) of AIDS-related deaths occurred among 
state prisoners age 45 or older, up from 52% (38) in 2010.

* The AIDS-related mortality rate in 2015 among those age 55 
and older was higher (11 per 100,000 persons in the custody 
of state prison authorities) than among those ages 45 to 54 
(6 per 100,000). 

********************************************
HIV testing practices in state and federal 
prison systems 
********************************************

During intake process
************************

* In 2015, as part of the prison intake process, 15 states 
reported that they tested all prisoners for HIV (i.e., 
mandatory testing) and 17 states reported that they offered 
opt-out HIV testing (i.e., all prisoners were offered the 
test and the test was given unless the prisoner declined). 
This was up from 14 states that tested all prisoners and 13 
that had opt-out HIV testing in 2011 (table 3).

* Among prison admissions in 2015, about a third (34%) were 
admitted in states that conducted mandatory HIV testing and 
an additional 31% were admitted in states with opt-out HIV 
testing during intake.

* Overall, a larger percentage of persons admitted to prison 
in 2015 (66%) than in 2011 (62%) were admitted in states 
that conducted either mandatory or opt-out HIV testing 
during intake.

* In 2015, eight states offered an HIV test to all incoming 
prisoners, but the prisoner had to opt-in or request the 
test to receive it. These eight states received about 13% of 
all newly admitted prisoners.

* The BOP reported offering an HIV test to all sentenced 
prisoners during the intake process in 2011. In 2015 the BOP 
specified that they provided opt-out testing to all 
sentenced prisoners.

While in custody 
*******************

* In 2015, a total of 41 states and the BOP reported testing 
those in custody for HIV upon request by the prisoner, down 
from 43 states and the BOP in 2011 (table 4). 

* HIV testing upon clinical indication, the second most 
commonly reported testing practice for prisoners while in 
custody, was reported by 40 states in 2015, up from 39 in 
2011. The BOP reported testing based on clinical indication 
in both years. 

* Thirty-seven states and the BOP in 2015 (up from 33 states 
and the BOP in 2011) reported testing prisoners for HIV 
after they were involved in an incident, such as an 
accident.

* Eighteen states offered HIV tests during routine medical 
exams in 2015, up from 14 states and the BOP in 2011. 

* In 2015, all reporting jurisdictions (49) said that they 
offered an HIV test to prisoners while in custody. 

During discharge process
**************************

* In 2011 and 2015, HIV testing upon prisoner request (24 
states and the BOP in 2011 and 20 states and the BOP in 
2015) was the most commonly reported testing practice during 
the discharge process (table 5).


* Approximately 41% of prisoners released in 2015 were in 
one of the 21 jurisdictions that offered HIV testing upon 
request by prisoners. 


* About 2 in 10 persons released from prison in 2015 (21%) 
and 2011 (22%) were released from states that offered all 
prisoners an HIV test as part of discharge planning. 


* In 2015, the six states that did not provide HIV testing 
upon discharge accounted for 8% of all releases, up from 5% 
in 2011.

***************
Methodology
***************

National Prisoner Statistics 
******************************

Started in 1926, the National Prisoner Statistics (NPS) 
Program collects annual data on prisoners at yearend. The 
series comprises reports from the departments of corrections 
in the 50 states and the Federal Bureau of Prisons. The NPS 
includes yearend counts of prisoners by jurisdiction, sex, 
race, Hispanic origin, and admissions and releases during 
the year. In 1991, the Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS) 
began using the NPS to collect data on the number of 
prisoners who had HIV and confirmed AIDS cases. NPS 
respondents also indicated the circumstances under which 
prisoners were tested for HIV. Through 2007, respondents 
provided the number of deaths among prisoners under the 
jurisdiction of state prisons disaggregated by cause of 
death, including those that were AIDS-related. In 2001, BJS 
began collecting deaths among prisoners in the custody of 
state authorities through the Deaths in Custody Reporting 
Program (DCRP). In this report, yearend custody counts 
provided by jurisdictions have been used as the denominator 
when calculating the rates of HIV.

Estimating counts for nonreporting states
*******************************************

State and national totals of the number of prisoners who had 
HIV include estimates in--

* Alaska (1993, 1994, 2000, 2003-2006, and 2010-2015)

* Delaware (1996)

* District of Columbia (1991-1995)

* Idaho (2011 and 2013)

* Illinois (2006-2007 and 2012)

* Indiana (1992-2015)

* Kentucky (2002-2003)

* Maine (1997 and 2002)

* Mississippi (1992)

* Montana (2015)

* Nevada (2013-2015)

* Oklahoma (1998)

* Oregon (2003-2007)

* South Dakota (1991-1993)

* Virginia (1997). 

Since HIV data collection began in the NPS, completeness of 
reporting HIV has ranged from one missing jurisdiction to 
four missing jurisdictions in any given year. To produce 
national and state totals of the number of prisoners who had 
HIV, estimates were made for nonreporting jurisdictions. 
Nonreporting jurisdictions fell into four categories: 
missing data at either end of the collection period (1991-
2015), missing data in all years except the first year of 
data collection (1991), missing data in the most recent 
reporting year (2015), and missing data that fell in between 
years in which data were reported.

Three states (Alaska, Nevada, and South Dakota) and the 
District of Columbia were missing data for a number of years 
on either end of the collection period (1991-2015). 
Estimates were made by applying the annual change in the 
rate of HIV observed in reporting jurisdictions to the last 
reported rate for each jurisdiction. For subsequent or 
earlier years of missing data, the annual change observed in 
the HIV rate of reporting jurisdictions was applied to the 
last estimated rate produced. The estimated rate for the 
missing year was then multiplied by the custody population 
of the jurisdiction in the year for which data were missing 
and divided by 100,000 in order to produce a count. 

In Indiana, the one state in which data were missing in all 
years except 1991, estimates on the number of persons in 
prison living with HIV were made based on the change in the 
HIV rate for states with similar HIV rates in the general 
population in 2013 (the most recent year for which data are 
available) and in the prison population in 1991. Estimates 
were made by applying the annual change in the HIV rate in 
similar states to the rate of HIV among prisoners in Indiana 
in 1991. For each year, the annual change in rates was 
applied to the last estimated rate of HIV infection. To 
produce the count in each year, the newly estimated rate was 
multiplied by the custody population for the given year and 
divided by 100,000. 

In Montana, the one state where data were only missing in 
2015, an estimate of the HIV count was made by assuming the 
change observed in the previous year occurred in the most 
recent year. The percentage change between the 2013 and 2014 
counts was multiplied by the 2014 count and then added to 
the 2014 count to produce the estimated 2015 count. 

For states with missing data that fell between reporting 
years (Alaska, Delaware, Idaho, Illinois, Kentucky, Maine, 
Mississippi, Oklahoma, Oregon, and Virginia), missing data 
were estimated by using observed data points that were 
closest in time to the missing data. The missing value was 
assumed to fall on a straight line plotted between the two 
known data points.
 
Rate of HIV among prisoners
******************************

To calculate the estimated rate of HIV per 100,000 state and 
federal prisoners, the estimated yearend count of prisoners 
who had HIV was divided by the yearend custody population 
for each year and multiplied by 100,000. The yearend 
jurisdiction count for New Mexico was used because New 
Mexico reported the number of prisoners who had HIV under 
their jurisdiction. Jurisdiction refers to the legal 
authority of state or federal correctional officials over a 
prisoner, regardless of where the prisoner is held. To have 
custody of a prisoner, a state or federal prison must 
physically hold that prisoner in one of its facilities. 
Custody counts do not include those held in private 
facilities or local jails. 

AIDS-related mortality rate in prison
**************************************

For this report, BJS presents data on AIDS-related deaths 
reported in NPS from 1991 to 2000 and in DCRP from 2001 to 
2015. The AIDS-related mortality rates were calculated for 
1991 to 2000 using the midyear jurisdiction population as 
the denominator because number of deaths were based on those 
under the jurisdiction of correctional authorities. For 2001 
to 2010, the AIDS-related mortality rate for state prisoners 
was calculated as the number of deaths per year divided by 
the midyear state prison population in custody multiplied by 
100,000. Starting in 2011, the rate was calculated using 
yearend custody counts because midyear populations were no 
longer available.

The Bureau of Justice Statistics of the U.S. Department of 
Justice is the principal federal agency responsible for measuring 
crime, criminal victimization, criminal offenders, victims of 
crime, correlates of crime, and the operation of criminal 
and civil justice systems at the federal, state, tribal, and local 
levels. BJS collects, analyzes, and disseminates reliable and 
valid statistics on crime and justice systems in the United States, 
supports improvements to state and local criminal justice information 
systems, and participates with national and international
organizations to develop and recommend national standards for 
justice statistics. Jeri M. Mulrow is acting director.

This report was written by Laura M. Maruschak and Jennifer Bronson. 
Todd Minton and Mary Cowhig verified the report.

Monika Potemra and Jill Thomas edited the report. Steve Grudziecki produced
the report.

August 2017, NCJ 250641

***************************************************************
Office of Justice Programs
Building Solutions • Supporting Communities • Advancing Justice
www.ojp.usdoj.gov
***************************************************************

7/28/2017 JER

