U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Programs
Bureau of Justice Statistics

Revised 1/28/2010

Bulletin

HIV in Prisons, 2007-08

December 2009   NCJ 228307

------------------------------------------------------------

This file is text only without graphics and many of the tables.
A Zip archive of the tables in this report in spreadsheet format
(.csv)and the full report including tables and graphics in
.pdf format are available from:
http://bjs.ojp.usdoj.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbdetail&iid=1747

This report is one in a series.  More recent editions 
may be available.  To view a list of all in the series go to
http://bjs.ojp.usdoj.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbse&sid=7

------------------------------------------------------------

Laura M. Maruschak
BJS Statistician
Randy Beavers, BJS Intern

This report provides the number of state and federal
prisoners who were infected with the human immunodeficiency
virus (HIV) or had confirmed acquired immune deficiency
syndrome (AIDS) at yearend 2007 and 2008. The number of
HIV/AIDS cases is reported by gender and type of infection.
Using data from the Deaths in Custody Reporting Program
(DCRP), this report presents the number of AIDS-related
deaths in state prisons and a profile of inmates who died in
2007.

In addition, data on federal inmates who died from
AIDS-related causes are included for both 2007 and 2008. The
circumstances under which federal inmates were tested for HIV
in 2008 are described in this report. General population
comparisons are provided on confirmed AIDS cases and
AIDS-related deaths. 

Highlights

*At yearend 2008, a reported 21,987 inmates held in state or
federal prisons were HIV positive or had confirmed AIDS,
accounting for 1.5% of the total custody population. Among
states that reported data in 2006 through 2008, the number
of inmates with HIV/AIDS was stable between 2007 and 2008.

*At yearend 2008, 1.5% (20,075) of male inmates and 1.9%
(1,912) of female inmates held in state or federal prisons
were HIV positive or had confirmed AIDS. 

*Florida (3,626), New York (3,500), and Texas (2,450)
reported the largest number of prisoners who were HIV
positive or had confirmed AIDS. These three states account
for 24% of the total state custody population, but 46% of the
state custody population who were HIV positive or had
confirmed AIDS.

*New York reported the large decreases (down 450 from 2007 to
2008) in the number of prisoners who were HIV positive or had
confirmed AIDS. 

*Between 2007 and 2008, California (up 246)and Florida (up
166) reported the largest increases in the number of
prisoners who were HIV positive or had confirmed AIDS. 

*At yearend 2008 an estimated 5,733 state and federal
prisoners had confirmed AIDS.

*During 2007, 130 state and federal prisoners died from
AIDS-related causes.

*Florida (14), New York (11), and Texas (10) reported 10 or
more AIDS-related deaths during 2007.

HIV infection by region and state

A total of the 21,987 inmates held in state or federal prison
on December 31, 2008, were HIV positive or had confirmed
AIDS (table 1). Among states reporting data in 2006 through 2008, HIV or
confirmed AIDS among state prisoners was stable between 2007 
(19,936) and 2008 (19,924). Between 2007 and 2008,
the percent of the state custody population with HIV or
confirmed AIDS remained stable at 1.6%. States in the South
held more than twice the number of prisoners who were HIV
positive or had confirmed AIDS than those states in the
Northeast (11,003 compared to 5,484). When comparing
percentage distribution, 1.9% of the custody
population in Southern states were HIV-positive or had
confirmed AIDS versus 3.2% in Northeastern states (see
appendix table 1). 

Nine states (Maine, New Hampshire, Vermont, Nebraska, North
Dakota, South Dakota, Alaska, Montana, and Wyoming) held less
than 20 prisoners who were HIV positive or had confirmed
AIDS. New York reported the largest percent of custody
population (5.8%) who were HIV positive or had confirmed
AIDS, followed by Florida (3.6%), Maryland (2.5%),
Massachusetts (2.4%), North Carolina (2.1%), and New Jersey
(2.1%).

At yearend 2008, 1,538 federal prisoners were HIV positive or
had confirmed AIDS. While there appears to be a decrease from
the 1,679 reported HIV/AIDS cases in 2007, a comparison
between years should not be made due to the implementation of
a new record-keeping system.

HIV infection by gender

At yearend 2008, 20,075 men and 1,913 women held in state or
federal prisons were HIV positive or had confirmed AIDS
(table 2). Among states reporting data in both 2007 and 2008,
the number of males with HIV/AIDS increased by 186, and the
number of females decreased 214. Between 2007 and 2008,
percent of male inmates with HIV/AIDS remained stable at
1,5%, while the percent of females who were HIV positive of
had confirmed AIDS decreased from 2.1% to 1.9%.

Florida (3,292), New York (3,200), and Texas (2,201) reported
more than 2,000 male inmates with HIV/AIDS (see appendix
table 2). Florida (334) reported the largest number of female
inmates with HIV/AIDS, followed by New York (300), and Texas
(249). Six states reported having zero female inmates with
HIV/AIDS. New York was the only state to report more than 5%
of its male custody population and more than 10% of its
female custody population with HIV or confirmed AIDS. Among
persons being held in federal prison, 1,460 male and 78
female inmates were HIV positive or had confirmed AIDS cases.

Confirmed AIDS cases

At yearend 2008, a reported 5,174 inmates in state (4,561)
and federal (613) prisons had confirmed AIDS (table 3).
Confirmed AIDS cases made up 0.5% of inmates in state prison
and 0.3% of inmates in federal prison. Confirmed AIDS cases
accounted for nearly a quarter (24%) of all HIV/AIDS cases in
state and federal prison.

For states that did not provide a breakdown of the number of
HIV cases by type of infection, estimates of the number of
confirmed AIDS cases were made to provide comparable
year-to-year data. Based on yearly estimates, the number of
confirmed AIDS cases in state prisons decreased from 4,836 in
2007 to 4,561 in 2008. 

Louisiana (2.2%) and New York (1.2%) reported the highest
percentage of confirmed AIDS cases in 2008 (see appendix
table 3). Five states  Maine, Iowa, North Dakota, South
Dakota, and Idaho reported zero cases of confirmed AIDS. 

At yearend 2008, a total of 613 federal inmates had confirmed
AIDS. While there appears to be a decrease from the 682
reported confirmed AIDS cases in 2007, a comparison between
years should not be made due to the implementation of a new
record-keeping system.

In 2007, the most recent year for which general population
data are available, the overall rate of estimated confirmed
AIDS among the state and federal prison population (0.41%)
was more than 2 times the rate in the general population
(0.17%)(table 4).***Footnote 1 Data to adjust for composition
differences in the populations are not available***.

AIDS-related deaths

During 2007, the most recent year for which data on inmates
deaths are available for state prisons, 120 state inmates
died from AIDS-related causes, down from an estimated 155 in
2006 (see appendix table 4). In 2006, counts of inmate deaths
were based on a combination of data from the National
Prisoners Statistics (NPS-1) collection and the Deaths in
Custody Reporting Program (DCRP). Because BJS no longer
collects data on deaths in the NPS-1, deaths in 2007 were
based solely on individual reports submitted to the DCRP.
When comparing 2006 and 2007 AIDS-related deaths reported in
the DCRP (131), a decline- while smaller-was still observed
during the period. 

Whether using reported or estimated data from multiple data
collections, there has been a downward trend in the number of
AIDS-related deaths over the past 12 years (figure 1). The
rate of AIDS deaths per 100,000 prisoners decreased from 11
deaths in 2006 to 9 in 2007. Florida (14) reported the
largest number of AIDS-related deaths, followed by New York
(11) and Texas (10).

Of the 120 AIDS-related deaths among state inmate in 2007,
112 were males and 8 were females (table 5). Nearly
three-quarters (73%) of state prisoners who died of
AIDS-related illness were ages 35 to 54. Nearly two-thirds
(65%) of AIDS-related deaths were among black, non-Hispanic
inmates.

Between 1995 and 2001, AIDS-related deaths as a percentage of
all deaths in state prisons decreased from 34.2% to 10.3%
(table 6). Over he next 6 years (between 2001 and 2007) the
percentage dropped to 3.5%. Between 1995 and 2001, the
percent of AIDS-related deaths in the general population fell
from 12.9% to 4.3%. That percent had fallen to 3.4% by 2006.
 
The rate of AIDS-related deaths in state prisons and in the
U.S. general population ages 15 to 54 has continued to
decline (table 7). Between 1995 and 2001 the rate in the
state prison population fell from 100 per 100,000 inmates to
25 per 100,000 inmates, while the rate in the U.S general
population ages 15 to 54 fell from 29 per 100,000 persons to
9 per 100,000 persons. By 2007 the rate had fallen to 9 per
100,000 state prison inmates and to 6 per 100,000 persons in
the general population.

Among federal inmates, 13 died from AIDS-related causes in
2008, up from 10 in 2007. The AIDS-related death rate among
federal inmates was 5 per 100,000 in 2007 and 6 per 100,000
in 2008 (table 8).

HIV testing in prisons

During 2008, a total of 24 states reported testing all
inmates for HIV at admission or sometime during custody
(appendix table 5). Among these 24 states, 23 tested
prisoners at admission, 5 tested while in custody, and 6
tested upon release. All fifty states and the federal system
tested inmates if they had clinical indication of HIV
infection or if they requested an HIV test. Forty-two states
and the federal system tested inmates after they were
involved in an incident in which an inmate was exposed to a
possible HIV transmission, and 18 states and the federal
system tested inmates who belonged to specific "high-risk"
groups.

Methodology

National Prisoner Statistics

The National Prisoner Statistics collection (NPS-1), which
primarily measures prison population movement, began in 1926.
The NPS-1 includes yearend counts of prisoners by
jurisdiction, gender, race, Hispanic origin, and admissions
and releases during the year. The series consists of reports
from the departments of corrections in the 50 states and the
Federal Bureau of Prisons. In 1991 BJS began collecting data
on HIV and confirmed AIDS in prisons in NPS-1. BJS
respondents have indicated the circumstances under which
inmates are tested for HIV and have provided the number of
HIV-infected inmates in their custody.

Deaths in Custody Reporting Program

To implement the data collection required by the Death in
Custody Reporting Act of 2000 (PL 106-297), BJS developed
four quarterly data collections of death records from local
jails (begun in 2000), state prisons (2001), state juvenile
correctional agencies (2002), and state and local law
enforcement agencies (2003). Records include data on the
deceased's characteristics (such as age, gender, race, and
Hispanic origin), criminal background (such as legal status,
offenses, and time in custody), and the death itself (such as
cause, time, location, and medical conditions and treatment).

Estimation of HIV and confirmed AIDS cases in New York State

New York estimates the number of HIV and confirmed AIDS cases
based on data from blind seroprevalence studies conducted
biennially by the New York State Department of Health. Blood
samples are taken from all inmates entering New York State
prisons. Every other year an extra sample from 1,000
sequential admissions at reception in four reception centers
is tested for various diseases, including HIV. The percentage
with HIV infection is applied to the total inmate population,
and then adjusted for length of stay and data from other
studies. Projections for interim years are made without blind
studies.

AIDS in the U.S. resident population

The number of persons with confirmed AIDS in the U.S. general
population (age 13 and older) was derived from the Centers
for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), HIV/ AIDS
Surveillance Report, yearend editions 1999 to 2007. For each
year the number of active AIDS cases in the United States was
calculated by taking the cumulative number of total AIDS
cases for persons age 13 or older at yearend (from the
HIV/AIDS Surveillance Report), minus estimated confirmed AIDS
cases in state and federal prisons, and subtracting the
cumulative number of AIDS deaths for people age 15 or older
at yearend, minus estimated number of AIDS-related deaths in
state and federal prisons. The rate of confirmed AIDS cases
in the U.S. general population was calculated by dividing the
annual total number of individuals with AIDS by the estimated
U.S. general population (age 13 or older before 2000; age 15
or older since 2000) minus the state and federal custody
population.

AIDS-related deaths in the United States

The number of AIDS-related deaths for persons ages 15 to 54
was based on the CDC, HIV/AIDS Surveillance Report, yearend
editions. Deaths in the U.S. population for persons ages 15
to 54 were taken from the CDC, Monthly Vital Statistics
Report, Vol. 45, No. 11(S). Also, deaths were taken from the
CDC, National Vital Statistics Report, Vol. 52, No. 3; Vol.
53, No. 5; Vol. 53, No. 15; Vol. 54, No. 19; and Vol. 57, No.
14. For 2005, U.S. general population deaths can be found in
National Center for Health Statistics, Deaths: Preliminary
Data for 2005. For 2001 to 2006, AIDS-related deaths were
calculated as a percent of all deaths among persons ages 15
to 54 in the U.S. general population. The difference of the
national estimate of AIDS deaths of persons ages 15 to 54
minus AIDS-related deaths of persons ages 15 to 54 in state
prisons was divided by the national mortality estimates of
persons ages 15 to 54 minus total deaths in state prisons.

For 2001 through 2006, the rates of AIDS-related deaths in
the general population were calculated by taking the
difference of the national estimate of AIDS-related deaths
for persons ages 15 to 54 minus AIDS-related deaths for those
ages 15 to 54 in state prisons, and dividing it by the U.S.
general population estimate minus the state prison population
ages 15 to 54.

Because data on AIDS-related deaths by age in state prisons
were not collected prior to 2001, the total number of
AIDS-related deaths in state prison was subtracted from the
national estimate of AIDS-related deaths for the 1995 rate
calculations.

-------------------------------------------------------------
-------------------------------------------------------------
The Bureau of Justice Statistics is the statistics agency of
the U.S. Department of Justice. Michael D. Sinclair is acting
director.

BJS Bulletins present the first release of findings from
permanent data collection programs.

The Bulletin was written by Laura M. Maruschak and Randy
Beavers. Todd Minton verified the report and provided
statistical support. Steve Simoncini and Joshua Giunta
carried out the 2008 data collection and processing under the
supervision of Jill R. O'Brien, Governments Division, Census
Bureau, U.S. Department of Commerce. Theresa Reitz carried
out the 2007 data collection and processing under the
supervision of Charlene M. Sebold, Governments Division, 
Census Bureau, U.S. Department of Commerce.  Duane H.
Cavanaugh provided technical assistance in both years.
 
Catherine Bird and Jill Duncan edited the report. Tina Dorsey
produced the report.  Jayne E. Robinson prepared the report
for final printing under the supervision of Doris J. James.

December 2009, NCJ 228307
-------------------------------------------------------------
-------------------------------------------------------------
This report in portable document format and in ASCII and its
related statistical data and tables are available at the BJS
World Wide Web Internet site:
<http://bjs.ojp.usdoj.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbdetail&iid=1747>.

Office of Justice Programs

Innovation - Partnerships - Safer Neighborhoods
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov
-------------------------------------------------------------
-------------------------------------------------------------

1/27/2010 TLD 12:20PM