U.S. Department of Justice 
Office of Justice Programs
Bureau of Justice Statistics
Crime Data Brief

Homicide Trends in the United States:  1998 Update
www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/homicide/homtrnd.htm
March 2000  NCJ 179767

----------------------------------------------------------
This report is one in a series. More recent
editions may be available.  To view a list of
all in the series go to 
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/pubalp2.htm#htius.htm
----------------------------------------------------------



By James Alan Fox, BJS Visiting Fellow and The Lipman
Family Professor of Criminal Justice, Northeastern
University
and
Marianne W. Zawitz, BJS Statistician

With the largest cities leading the way, the Nation's
murder rate in 1998 fell to its lowest level in three 
decades.  Much of the decline was in those cities with
more than 1 million inhabitants, where the rate fell
from 35.5 per 100,000 population in 1991 to 16.1 per
100,000 in 1998.  The sharp increase in homicides in the
late 1980’s and much of the subsequent decline are
attributable to a rise and fall in gun violence by
juveniles and young adults.  Despite the encouraging
improvement since 1993, the levels of gun homicides by
juveniles and young adults are well above those of the
mid-1980's.

These findings and many more are from Homicide Trends in
the United States, a section of the BJS web site that
describes homicide patterns and trends in the United
States since 1976. Homicide is of interest not only
because of its severity but also because it is a fairly
reliable barometer of all violent crime. At a national
level, no other crime is measured as accurately and
precisely. The site displays 50 graphics and supporting
tables and includes the recently released 1998 data.

Other major findings include — 
The Nation's murder rate was 6.3 per 100,000 population
in 1998 compared to 4.6 per 100,000 population in 1950. 


Homicide victimization and offending rates for younger
groups — teenagers and young adults —  rose sharply in
the late 1980’s and early 1990’s before falling more
recently, but the rates for those 25 years old and older
have declined steadily during the last two decades. 
Despite the encouraging improvement since 1993, levels
of youth homicide remain well above those of the early
and mid-1980's.

There were dramatic increases in both homicide
victimization and offending rates among young black
males in the late 1980’s and 1990’s before recent
declines in both categories.

The sharp increase in homicides in the late 1980's and
much of the subsequent decline in homicides are
attributable to gun violence by juveniles and young
adults, while nongun homicide rates remained largely
unchanged.

Males are most often the victims and the perpetrators in
homicides: males were more than 9 times more likely than
females to commit murder, and male and female offenders
were more likely to target male than female victims.

There has been a decline in homicide of intimates,
especially male victims. The number of white females
killed by intimates rose in the mid-1980's, declined
after 1993, and in 1997 reached the lowest level
recorded over the past two decades.  The number of
intimate homicides for all other race and gender groups
declined over the period; black males killed by
intimates dropped by 74%, black females 45%, and white
males by 44%.

Blacks were six times more likely to be homicide victims
and seven times more likely than whites to commit
homicides.

Eighty-six percent of white murder victims were killed
by whites, and 94% of black victims were killed by
blacks.

Among homicides in which the victim is killed by an
acquaintance, 1 in 10 is interracial, whereas when the
killer is a stranger, 3 in 10 are interracial.

The number of infanticides (victims under age 5) has
grown, roughly in proportion to the number of young
children in the population, with most of the
perpetrators being the parents.

The number of homicides of persons age 65 and over has
been decreasing.  Yet among all age groups, the elderly
have the highest percentage of homicides that occur
during the commission of a felony

The annual number of law enforcement officers killed in
the line of duty declined, mostly because of the decline
in law enforcement officers killed with handguns.
Few homicides involve multiple offenders and fewer
involve multiple victims. The percentage of homicides
involving multiple offenders increased dramatically in
the late 1980's and early 1990's, increasing from 10% in
1976 to 17% in 1998. The percentage of homicides
involving multiple victims increased gradually during
the last two decades from just under 3% of all homicides
to 4% in 1998.  

The mix of circumstances surrounding homicides has
changed over the last two decades. Although the number
of homicides resulting from arguments has declined,
arguments remain the most frequently cited circumstance.

The homicide victimization rates of cities with a
population of 1 million or more have plummeted to the
lowest level in the past two decades.  Cities of
250,000 to 499,999 had homicide rates that were the 
equivalent to the rates of the largest cities.  Most of
the swings in the prevalence of homicide during the past
two decades occurred in cities with a population of
100,000 or more.  Small cities, suburbs and rural areas
experienced relatively little change in homicide
prevalence. 

Compared to the national average, murder rates,
especially those involving guns, were higher in the
South and lower in New England, the Mountain region, and
the West North Central region of the United States.

The number of homicides cleared by arrest of the
perpetrator has been declining until recently: 69% of
all homicides were cleared in 1998 compared to 79% in
1976.

New on the Homicide Trends in the United States website!

All charts, tables and other information have been
updated with the 1998 preliminary and 1997 final
Supplementary Homicide Reports data and the 1998 Law
Enforcement Officers Killed and Assaulted data. In
addition, most tables which support the graphics now
contain the numbers on which the percentages and rates
are based. 

A section on eldercide, homicides of persons age 65 and
older, has been added.  Also, 18 new charts including
two animations have been added to the sections on Trends
by age, Infanticide, Intimate homicide, Multiple victim
and offender homicides, Circumstances, Weapons trends,
Regional trends, City trends, and Clearances.

Homicide Trends in the United States -
www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/homicide/homtrnd.htm

Organized for easy access, this section of the BJS
website contains sections with graphics, text and data
concerning these aspects of homicide:

Long term trends 
Demographic trends by  —
    Age 
    Gender 
    Race 
    Age, gender, and race 
Trends in special groups —
    Infanticide
 Eldercide
    Intimates 
    Law enforcement officers 
Multiple victims and offenders 
Circumstances 
Weapons trends 
Regional trends 
Trends by city size 
Clearances
The data for each of the 50 graphics are presented in
text format that can be imported into most spreadsheet
and charting programs. Links to other web resources on
homicide and violent crime are included.

The site analyzes data collected by the Federal Bureau
of Investigation through the Uniform Crime Reporting
Program.  Most of the data are from the Supplementary
Homicide Reports and are adjusted for missing reports
and unsolved cases.  The data files will be available
from the National Archive of Criminal Justice Data at
the University of Michigan, 1-800-999-0960.  The archive
can also be accessed through the BJS website.

Paper copies of the materials on the Internet site may
be ordered by contacting the BJS Clearing- house at
1-800-732-3277: "Homicide Trends in the United States”
website, NCJ 174433, $16.20 postage and handling.

3/17/00 mz
