U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Programs
Bureau of Justice Statistics

Bureau of Justice Statistics Selected Finding
Indigent Defense
February 1996, NCJ-158909


Full text with tables available from:
Bureau of Justice Statistics Clearinghouse
800-732-3277
Box 179
Annapolis Junction, MD. 20701-0179
FAX Number (for report orders and mail list signup only):
410-792-4358

U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Programs

-----------
Highlights
-----------

*States and localities use several methods for delivering indigent
defense services:  public defender programs, assigned counsel, and
contract attorney systems.    

*Twenty-eight percent of State court prosecutors reported that
their jurisdictions used public defender programs exclusively to
provide indigent counsel.  

*In 1990 State and local governments spent approximately $1.3
billion on public defenders services. In 1979 this figure was about
$300 million.   

*About three-fourths of the inmates in State prisons and about half
of those in Federal prisons received publicly-provided legal
counsel for the offense for which they were serving time. 

*In 1992 about 80% of  defendants charged with felonies in the
Nation's 75 largest counties relied on a public defender or on
assigned counsel for legal representation.

*Little current information is available regarding the workload,
staffing, procedures, or policies for indigent defense services
across the Nation.

-----------------
Indigent Defense
------------------

By Steven K. Smith
Carol J. DeFrances
BJS Statisticians

Court-appointed legal representation for indigent criminal
defendants plays a critical role in the Nation's criminal justice
system. In 1991 about three-quarters of State prison inmates and
half of Federal prison inmates reported that they had a
court-appointed lawyer to represent them for the offense for which
they were serving time. In 1989, nearly 80% of local jail inmates
indicated that they were assigned an attorney to represent them for
the charges on which they were being held. This report presents
selected findings drawn from Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS)
surveys containing information related to indigent defense for
criminal defendants.

-------------------------   
Types of delivery systems
--------------------------

Although the U.S. Supreme Court has mandated that the States must
provide counsel for indigents accused of crime, the implementation
of how such services are to be provided has not been specified. The
States have devised various systems, rules for organizing, and
funding mechanisms for indigent defense programs. As a consequence,
each State has adopted its own approach for providing counsel for
poor defendants.

Three systems have emerged throughout the country as the primary
means to provide defense services for indigent defendants.

Public defender programs are public or private nonprofit
organizations with full-or part-time salaried staff.  Local public
defenders operate autonomously and do not have a central
administrator.

By contrast, under a statewide system, an individual appointed by
the governor, a commission, council, or board is charged with
developing and maintaining a system of representation for each
county of the State. In 30 States a public defender system is the
primary method used to provide indigent counsel for criminal
defendants.  (For a more detailed description see Statewide
Defender Programs: The Lay of the Land, National Legal Aid and
Defender Association, 1992.)

Assigned counsel systems involve the appointment by the courts of
private attorneys as needed from a list of available attorneys.
Assigned counsel systems consist of two types.  Ad hoc assigned
counsel systems are those in which individual private attorneys are
appointed by an individual judge to provide representation on a
case-by-case basis.

Coordinated assigned counsel systems employ an administrator to
oversee the appointment of counsel and to develop a set of
standards and guidelines for program administration.

Contract attorney systems involve governmental units that reach
agreements with private attorneys, bar associations, or private law
firms to provide indigent services for a specified dollar amount
and for a specified time period.

--------------
Legal mandate
--------------

The sixth amendment to the U.S. Constitution establishes the right
to counsel in Federal criminal prosecution. Through a series of
cases, the U.S. Supreme Court has extended the right to counsel for
indigent defendants to State criminal prosecution.  A landmark
decision was made in 1963 when the Court held in Gideon v.
Wainwright Gideon v. Wainwright 372 U.S. 335 [1963]) that a
defendant charged with a felony, including state crimes, had the
right to counsel. Almost ten years later, Argersinger v. Hamlin
(Argersinger v. Hamilin 407 U.S. 25 [1972]) extended an indigent's
right to counsel to all criminal prosecutions, felony or
misdemeanor, which carry a sentence of imprisonment.

---------------------------
Federal Defender Services
---------------------------

The Federal justice system provides indigent defense to eligible
defendants through the Federal Defender Services, community
defender organizations, and private attorneys as established by the
Criminal Justice Act of 1964, as amended.  For more detailed
information see, Federal Defender Services:  A Status Report,
Administrative Office of the U.S. Courts, 1993.

-----------------------------------------------
Use of different types of counsel for indigent defense
----------------------------------------------

Traditionally, assigned counsel systems and public defenders have
been the primary means to provide legal representation to the poor. 
In 1992, 64% of State court prosecutors' offices nationwide
reported a public defender program in their jurisdiction and 58%
indicated an assigned counsel system.  In 1992, 25% of prosecutors'
offices  indicated that their district contracted with law firms,
private attorneys, or local bar associations to provide services to
indigent offenders.

In 1992 virtually all of the State court prosecutors' offices
nationwide (98%) had some felony cases in which an indigent
defendant was provided an attorney.  A majority of prosecutors'
offices (59%) reported only one method was used in their
jurisdiction to provide services to poor offenders.

Among all prosecutorial districts, a public defender program was
used exclusively in 28%, an assigned counsel system in 23%, and a
contract attorney system in 8%.  Forty-one percent of the
prosecutors' offices reported a combination of methods were used in
their jurisdiction.  The most prevalent was a combination of an
assigned counsel system and a public defender program reported by
23% of the offices. 

In the Nation's 75 largest counties, 43% of the State court
prosecutors' offices reported both an assigned counsel system and
a public defender program operating in their jurisdiction.

-----------------------------------------------
State and local expenditures for public defense
----------------------------------------------- 

In 1979 State and local governments spent more than $350 million to
provide legal counsel to indigent defendants. This included
expenditures for civil litigation. In 1990, State and local
governments spent an estimated $1.3 billion for these services. In
constant 1990 dollars, the State and local expenditures doubled for
public defense from 1979 to 1990.  In 1979, State-level
expenditures represented about 36% of the overall spending for
public defense. In 1990, State contribution accounted for 45% of
the State and local total. 

----------------------------------------------
Type of  legal representation reported by prison and jail inmates 
----------------------------------------------

State prison inmates
-----------------------

Ninety-seven percent of inmates in State correctional facilities
reported that they had an attorney to represent them for the
offense for which they were incarcerated. Seventy-six percent of
those who had an attorney were represented by a public defender or
assigned counsel.  Counsel assigned by the court may include legal
representation provided by a public agency or by private attorneys
whom the court pays.

Among those represented by counsel, 79% of black State prison
inmates reported they had been represented by an assigned attorney.
Among white State prison inmates, 73% said they had been
represented by an assigned  attorney.  

Among State prison inmates incarcerated for property offenses, 85%
had in assigned counsel; for violent offenses, 74%; and for drug
offenses, 70% .

Federal prison inmates
---------------------------

Ninety-nine percent of Federal inmates reported that they were
represented by counsel. Forty-three percent of those who had an
attorney, hired private counsel. Nearly 50% of white Federal
inmates hired private counsel, as did 33% of black Federal inmates.
Almost two-thirds of black Federal inmates were assigned counsel by
the court.

Overall, among those Federal inmates serving time for violent
offenses, 72% had court assigned counsel; for property offenses,
53%; and for drug offenses, 48%.

Local jail inmates
------------------

Eighty-three percent of jail inmates said they had a lawyer to
represent them for the offense for which they were being held.
Among those who had legal representation, about three-fourths had
assigned counsel. About three-fourths of those in jail for a drug
or violent offense relied on assigned counsel.  Among those charged
with property offenses, 85% had assigned counsel.  About two-thirds
of those jail inmates with hired counsel said they first met with
their attorney either before admission or during the first week
after admission.

------------------
Felony defendants
------------------

The BJS State Court Processing Statistics program collects data on
a sample of felony defendants in State courts in the Nation's 75
largest counties. Data from 1992 indicated that about 80% of the 
felony defendants relied on a public defender or on assigned
counsel for legal representation

---------------------------------
Sources and methodological notes
---------------------------------

Findings are drawn from BJS surveys: the Survey of Inmates in Local
Jails, 1989; the Survey of Inmates in State Correctional
Facilities, 1991; and the Survey of Inmates in Federal Correctional
Facilities, 1991.  

Respondents in State and Federal correctional facilities and in
local jails were asked "Did you have a lawyer for any of the
offenses?" and if so, "Did you hire your own lawyer or was one
assigned by the court?"  Respondents in local jails were asked
"When did you first talk to a lawyer about the charge?"  

Data on felony defendants in the Nation's 75 largest counties in
table 8 were obtained from the State Court Processing Statistics
program.  This series tracks felony defendants through the criminal
justice system including type of legal representation the defendant
had at adjudication.  

In 1992 National Survey of State Court Prosecutors asked "Were any
felony defendants in your districts provided an attorney on grounds
of indigency?" and if so, "Which type of defense delivery system
was used?"
-----------------------------------------------
The Bureau of Justice Statistics is the statistical arm of the U.S.
Department of Justice.  Jan M. Chaiken, Ph.D., is director.  BJS
Selected Findings summarize statistics about a topic of current
concern from both BJS and non-BJS datasets.  Priscilla Middleton
and Tom Hester edited the report.  Tracy Snell provided statistical
review.

February 1996, NCJ-158909
**********************************

END OF FILE

