U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Programs
Bureau of justice Statistics


Intimate Partner Violence

May 2000, NCJ 178247
Revised 7/14/00

By Callie Marie Rennison, Ph.D.
and Sarah Welchans
BJS Statisticians

--------------------------------------------------------------
This file is text only without graphics and many of the tables.
A Zip archive of the tables in this report in spreadsheet format
(.wk1) and the full report including tables and graphics in
.pdf format are available from:
http://www.opj.usdoj.gov/bjs/abstract/ipv.htm
---------------------------------------------------------------



----------------------------------------------------------------
Highlights

Intimate partners: current or former spouses, boyfriends, and
girlfriends

Violent crimes include lethal (homicide) and nonlethal (rape,
sexual assault, robbery, aggravated assault, and simple assault)
offenses.

Lethal

*  Intimate partners committed fewer murders in each of the 3
years 1996, 1997, and 1998 than in any other year since 1976.

*   Between 1976 and 1998, the number of male victims of
intimate partner homicide fell an average 4% per year and the
number of female victims fell an average 1%.

*  In 1998 women were nearly 3 out of 4 victims of the 1,830
murders attributable to intimate partners.  In 1976 women were
just over half the approximate 3,000 victims.

*   The percentage of female murder victims killed by intimate
partners has remained at about 30% since 1976. 

Nonlethal

*   The number of female victims of intimate violence declined
from 1993 to 1998.  In 1998 women experienced about 900,000
violent offenses at the hands of an intimate, down from 1.1
million in 1993.

*  In both 1993 and 1998, men were victims of about 160,000
violent crimes by an intimate partner.

*  Considered by age category, 1993-98, women ages 16 to 24
experienced the highest per capita rates of intimate violence
(19.6 per 1,000 women).

* About half the intimate partner violence against women,
1993-98, was reported to the police; black women were more
likely than other women to report such violence.

*   About 4 of 10 female victims of intimate partner violence
lived in households with children under age 12.  Population
estimates suggest that 27% of U.S. households were home to
children under 12.

*   Half of female victims of intimate partner violence reported
a physical injury.  About 4 in 10 of these victims sought
professional medical treatment.
-----------------------------------------------------------------

Estimates from the National Crime Victimization Survey (NCVS)
indicate that in 1998 about 1 million violent crimes were
committed against persons by their current or former spouses,
boyfriends, or girlfriends. Such crimes, termed intimate partner
violence, are committed primarily against women.  About 85% of
victimizations by intimate partners in 1998, about 876,340, were
against women.

Intimate partner violence made up 22% of violent crime against
women between 1993 and 1998.  By contrast, during this period
intimate partners committed 3% of the violence against men.

Women experienced intimate partner violence at lower rates in
1998 than in 1993.  From 1993 to 1997 the rate of intimate
partner violence fell from 9.8 to 7.5 per 1,000 women.  In 1998
the rate was virtually unchanged from that in 1997 (7.7 per
1,000 women).  Males experienced intimate partner violence at
similar rates in 1993 and 1998 (1.6 and 1.5 per 1,000 men,
respectively).

In 1998 about 1,830 murders were attributable to intimate
partners, down substantially from the 3,000 murders in 1976. 

Measuring intimate partner 
victimization 

This report updates findings presented in Violence by Intimates
(March 1998, NCJ 167237) and provides more complete statistics
of intimate partner violence against men.

Data

Findings regarding violent crime came from National Crime
Victimization Survey (NCVS) data collected by the Bureau of
Justice Statistics (BJS).  The NCVS collects data about criminal
victimizations from an ongoing nationally representative sample
of households in the United States.  Homicide data were
collected by the FBI, under the Supplementary Homicide Reports
(SHR) of the Uniform Crime Reporting Program (UCR).

Definitions

As defined in this report, intimate relationships involve
current or former spouses, boyfriends, or girlfriends.  These
individuals may be of the same gender.

Violent acts examined include murder, rape, sexual assault,
robbery, aggravated assault, and simple assault.  Definitions of
these violent crimes are provided in the definitions section on
page 9.

Intimate partner violence in 1998

In 1998 women were victims in about 876,340 violent crimes and
men were victims in about 157,330 violent crimes committed by an
intimate partner .  Women were victims of intimate partner
violence at a rate about 5 times that of males (767 versus 146
per 100,000 persons, respectively).

Women were more likely to be victimized by a nonstranger, which
includes a friend, family member, or intimate partner, while men
were more likely to be victimized by a stranger.  Sixty-five
percent of all intimate partner violence against women and 68%
of intimate partner violence against men involved a simple
assault, the least serious form of violence studied.

In 1998 intimate partner homicides accounted for about 11% of
all murders nationwide.  Of the 1,830 persons murdered by
intimates in 1998, 72% or 1,320 were women.  Female murder
victims were substantially more likely than male murder victims
to have been killed by an intimate partner.  In 1998 intimate
partner homicides comprised about 33% of the murders of women
but about 4% of the murders of men. 

Trends in violence against intimate 
partners, 1993-98

The rate of intimate partner violence against women decreased
21% from 1993 to 1998.  The estimated number of violent crimes
against women by intimate partners decreased from the 1993 level
of about 1.1 million to 848,480 in 1997.  The victimization rate
over the same period fell from 9.8 to 7.5 per 1,000 women.  A
nominal but not statistically significant increase in female
intimate partner violence rates occurred from 1997 to 1998 (7.5
to 7.7 per 1,000 women) .

Intimate partner victimization rates for males were similar in
1993 and 1998 (1.6 and 1.5 men victimized per 1,000 males),
despite some fluctuation during intervening years.  The rate of
victimization of male intimate partners in 1998 represented an
increase from 1.0 per 1,000 in 1997. 

Homicide of intimate partners, 
1976-98

Overall, the number of women killed by an intimate partner was
stable between 1976 and 1993 and then declined 23% between 1993
and 1997.  The number of women murdered by an intimate partner
increased 8% between 1997 and 1998. The number of men murdered
by an intimate partner fell 60% from 1976 to 1998 (Highlights
figure, page 1 and page 10).

Most victims of intimate partner homicide are killed by their
spouses, although much less so in recent years.  In 1998 murders
by spouses represented 53% of all intimate partner homicides,
down from 75% in 1976.

White females represent the only category of victims for whom
intimate partner homicide has not decreased substantially since
1976.  The number of intimate partner homicides for all other
racial and gender groups declined during the period. The number
of black females killed by intimates dropped 45%; black males,
74%; and white males, 44%.  Between 1997 and 1998 the number of
white females killed by an intimate partner increased 15%.

For additional information on trends of intimate partner
homicide, refer to the BJS website:  http://www.ojp.usdoj.
gov/bjs/homicide/intimates.htm

Characteristics of intimate partner 
violence victims, 1993-98

Regardless of the demographic characteristics considered, women
experienced intimate partner violence at higher rates than men
between 1993 and 1998.***The remainder of the report examines 
nonlethal violent victimization, although inclusion of homicides
would not affect the findings.***  Among women, being black, young,
divorced or separated, earning lower incomes, living in rental
housing, and living in an urban area were all associated with
higher rates of intimate partner victimization between 1993 and
1998.  Men who were young, black, divorced or separated, or
living in rented housing had significantly higher rates of
intimate partner violence than other men.

Race and ethnicity

Overall, blacks were victimized by intimate partners at
significantly higher rates than persons of any other race
between 1993 and 1998.  Black females experienced intimate
partner violence at a rate 35% higher than that of white
females, and about 22 times the rate of women of other races. 
Black males experienced intimate partner violence at a rate
about 62% higher than that of white males and about 22 times the
rate of men of other races.

No difference in intimate partner victimization rates between
Hispanic and non-Hispanic persons emerged, regardless of gender.

Age

For both women and men, rates of violence by an intimate partner
were below 3 victimizations per 1,000 persons under age 16 or
over age 50.  Women ages 20-24 were victimized by an intimate
partner at the highest rate, 21 per 1,000 women. This rate was
about 8 times the peak rate for men (3 victimizations per 1,000
men ages 25-34).

Household income

Women living in households with lower annual household incomes
experienced intimate partner violence at significantly higher
rates than women in households with higher annual incomes. 
Intimate partners victimized women living in households with the
lowest annual household income at a rate nearly 7 times that of
women living in households with the highest annual household
income (20 versus 3 per 1,000). No discernible relationship
emerged between intimate partner violence against males and
household income.

Marital status

For both men and women, divorced or separated persons were
subjected to the highest rates of intimate partner
victimization, followed by never- married persons .  Because the
NCVS reflects a respondent's marital status at the time of the
interview, it is not possible to determine whether a person was
separated or divorced at the time of the victimization or
whether separation or divorce followed the violence.

Home ownership 

Intimate partner victimization rates were significantly higher
for persons living in rental housing regardless of the victim's
gender .  Females residing in rental housing were victimized by
intimate partner violence at more than 3 times the rate of women
living in owned housing, and males residing in rental housing
were victimized by an intimate partner at more than twice the
rate of men living in purchased housing.

Urban, suburban, and rural 
households

Women in urban areas were victims of intimate partner violence
at significantly higher rates than suburban women and at
somewhat higher rates than rural women.  Ten per thousand urban
women were victims of intimate partner violence compared to 8
per 1,000 women in suburban and rural areas between 1993 and
1998.

Urban and suburban males were victims of intimate partner
violence at similar rates.  Men in urban areas experienced
violence at a rate slightly higher than that of men in rural
areas.  No significant difference emerged between the rates for
suburban and rural men.

The nature of intimate partner 
victimization

Location and time

Between 1993 and 1998 almost two-thirds of intimate partner
violence against women, and about half of all intimate partner
violence against men, occurred in the victim's home.  Intimate
partner violence occurred most often between 6 p.m. and 6 a.m.,
accounting for about 6 in 10 female and male victimizations by
intimate partners (60% and 59%).  

Children younger than 12 present 
in the household

Between 1993 and 1998 children under the age of 12 resided in
43% of the households where intimate partner violence occurred. 
Population estimates suggest that in general, 27% of households
in the United States were home to children under the age  12. 
This study is not able to determine the extent to which young
children witnessed intimate partner violence.

Injuries and treatment

Between 1993 and 1998, about two-thirds of the male and female
victims of intimate partner violence were physically attacked. 
The remaining third were victims of threats or attempted
violence.  Though percentages of males and females being
attacked were similar, the outcome of these attacks differed. 
Fifty percent of female victims of intimate partner violence
were injured by an intimate partner versus 32% of male victims.

Among those injured, similar percentages of men and women
suffered serious injuries (4% and 5%, respectively).  A
significantly higher percentage of women than men sustained
minor injuries (more than 4 in 10 females and fewer than 3 
in 10 males). 

Most victims injured by an intimate partner did not report
seeking professional medical treatment for their injuries.
About 6 in 10 female and male victims of intimate partner
violence were injured but not treated.  In general, injuries
were minor, involving cuts and bruises.  Most of those injured
who were treated received care at home or at the scene of the
victimization (17% of women and 24% of men).

Reporting to police

About half of all victims of intimate partner violence between
1993 and 1998 reported the violence to law enforcement authorities 
(53% of women and 46% of men).

The percentage of victims reporting to police differed by race
and ethnicity.  Black women (67%) reported their victimization
to police at significantly higher percentages than black men
(48%), white men (45%), and white women (50%).  No difference in
white male and female percentages reporting emerged (45% versus
50%).  Hispanic females reported intimate partner violence to
the police at higher percentages than did non-Hispanic females
(65% versus 52%).

Among victims of violence by an intimate partner, the percentage
of women who reported the crime was greater in 1998 (59%) than
in 1993 (48%).  There was no significant difference between 1993
and 1998 in the percentage of men's reporting their
victimization to the police.

In 1997 and 1998 a significantly higher percentage of female
intimate partner violence victims reported the victimizations to
the police than did not.  Prior to 1997 similar percentages of
females reported and did not report.

For males, for all years but 1997, approximately half the
victims did not report their victimization to the police.  In
1997 a slightly higher percentage of male victims did not report
to the authorities.  About half of the male victims' reasons and
a third of the female victims' reasons for not reporting their
intimate partner victimization to the police was because it was
a "private or personal matter".  While this reason was the most
often given by both male and female victims, it was given by
male victims in a significantly higher percentage than female
victims.

Fear of reprisal by the perpetrator made up 19% of the reasons
females did not report their victimization to the police.  About
1 in 10 male victims and fewer than 1 in 10 female victims said
they did not report the crime to the police because they did not
want to get the offender in trouble with the law. 

Methodology

Except for homicide data obtained from the FBI's Uniform Crime
Reporting Program, this report presents data from the BJS
National Crime Victimization Survey.  The NCVS gathers data
about crimes using an ongoing, nationally representative sample
of households in the United States.  NCVS data include
information about crime victims (age, gender, race, ethnicity,
marital status, income, and educational level), criminal
offenders (gender, race, approximate age, and victim-offender
relations) and the nature of the crime (for example, time and
place of occurrence, use of weapons, nature of injury, and
economic consequences).  NCVS victimization data include
incidents reported and not reported to police.

Between 1993 and 1998 approximately 293,400 households and
574,000 individuals age 12 or older were interviewed.  For the
NCVS data presented, response rates varied between 93% and 96%
of eligible households, and between 89% and 92% of eligible
individuals.  The 1998 data presented in this report were
collected during the calendar year being estimated.  Data for
1993 to 1997 are based on crimes occurring during the year.

Definitions of intimate partner
 
Intimate partner relationships involve current spouses, former spouses, 
current boy/girlfriends, or former boy/girlfriends.  Individuals involved in
an intimate partner relationship may be of the same gender.  The FBI does not
report  former boy/girlfriends in categories separate from current
boy/girlfriends.  Rather, are included in the boy/girlfriend category during
the data collection process.
 
The FBI, through the Supplementary Homicide Reports (SHR), and BJS, using the
NCVS, gather information about the victim's and offender's relationship, 
using different relationship categories.  In this report responses to the
victim-offender from both datasets are collapsed into four relationship
groups:  intimate, friend/acquaintance, other family, and stranger.  These
groups are created from following original response categories:
 
                 NCVS categories             SHR categories
Intimate         Spouse                      Husband/wife
                 Ex-spouse                   Common-law husband or wife
                 Boyfriend/girlfriend        Ex-husband/ex-wife
                 Ex-girlfriend/ex-boyfriend  Boyfriend/girlfriend
                                             Homosexual relationship
 
Friend/          Friend/ex-friend            Acquaintance
acquaintance     Roommate/boarder            Friend
                 Schoolmate                  Neighbor
                 Neighbor                    Employee
                 Someone at work/customer    Employer
                 Other non-relative          Other known
 
Other family     Parent or step parent       Mother/father
                 Own child or stepchild      Son/daugther
                 Brother/sister              Brother/sister
                 Other relative              In-law
                                             Stepfather/stepmother
                                             Stepson/stepdaugther
                                             Other family
 
Stranger         Stranger                    Stranger
                 Known by sight only
 
Because the NCVS samples households, it does not capture the
experiences of homeless individuals or those living in
institutional settings such as homeless or battered persons'
shelters.  The experiences and estimates of intimate partner
violence in this report reflect those of the individuals
residing in households.

The exact impact of this sampling limitation is unknown. 
Several studies estimate the impact that intimate partner
violence has on homelessness or on residing in shelters for
homeless or battered persons.  One study suggested that 50% of
homeless women and children became homeless after fleeing abuse
(Zorza, 1991).  A 1998 study conducted in 10 cities in the
United States estimated that of 777 homeless parents (most of
whom were mothers) 22% stated they left their previous home due
to intimate partner violence (Homes for the Homeless, 1998).  A
survey by the U.S. Conference of Mayors suggested that 46% felt
that intimate partner violence was a primary cause of
homelessness (U.S. Conference of Mayors, 1998).

Standard error computations 
for NCVS estimates

Comparisons of percentages and rates in this report were tested
to determine if differences were statistically significant. 
Differences described in the text as higher, lower, or different
and changes over time characterized as having increased or
decreased passed a hypothesis test at the .05 level of
statistical significance (95%-confidence level).  That is, the
tested difference in the estimates was greater than twice the
standard error of that difference.  For comparisons that were
statistically significant at the .10 level of statistical
significance (90%-confidence level), the terms somewhat
different, marginally different, or slight difference are used
to note the nature of the difference.

Caution is required when comparing estimates not explicitly
discussed in the text.  What may appear to be large differences
may not test as statistically significant at the 95%- or the
90%- confidence level.  Significance testing calculations were
conducted at the Bureau of Justice Statistics using statistical
programs developed specifically for the NCVS by the U.S. Bureau
of the Census.  These programs take into consideration many
aspects of the complex NCVS sample design when calculating
generalized variance estimates.  

FBI homicide data 

Homicide data presented in this report are collected by the FBI,
under the Supplementary Homicide Reports (SHR) of the Uniform
Crime Reporting Program (UCR).  The homicide data provide
incident-level data on about 92% of the homicides in the United
States, including the victim and offender relationship.

Definitions

An important consideration in generating intimate partner
violence estimates using NCVS data is the treatment of "series
data."  Series data are defined as six or more incidents similar
in nature, for which the victim is unable to furnish details of
each incident separately.  Because no information for each
incident is available, information on the most recent incident
in the series is collected.  Generally, series victimizations
represent 6%-7% of all violent victimizations recorded by the
NCVS, though some variation exists among the types of crime and
victim characteristics.

Series crimes are problematic in estimation because how or
whether these victimizations should be combined with the other
crime incidents is unclear.  BJS continues to study how these
types of victimizations should be handled in our published
estimates.  Currently, series victimizations are excluded from
the annual BJS estimates but included in Special Reports.  In
addition, series data are included for analyses where repeat
victimization is an important aspect of the subject being
analyzed.  This report includes series victimizations in
estimation of intimate partner violence, counting a series as
one victimization.

Violent acts covered in this report include murder, rape, sexual
assault, robbery, and aggravated and simple assault. 
Definitions used in this report are as follows:

*  Murder and non-negligent manslaughter is defined as the
willful killing of one human being by another.

*  Rape is forced sexual intercourse, including both
psychological coercion and physical force.  Forced sexual
intercourse means vaginal, anal, or oral penetration by the
offender(s).  This category includes incidents where the
penetration is from a foreign object such as a bottle.  Also
included are attempted rapes, male and female victims, and
heterosexual and homosexual rape.

*  Sexual assault covers a wide range of victimizations,
distinct from rape or attempted rape.  These crimes include
completed or attempted attacks generally involving unwanted
sexual contact between the victim and offender.  Sexual assaults
may or may not involve force and include such things as grabbing
or fondling.  Sexual assault also includes verbal threats.

*  Robbery is a completed or attempted theft directly from a
person, of property or cash by force or threat of force, with or
without a weapons, and with or without an injury.

*  Aggravated assault is defined as a completed or attempted
attack with a weapon, regardless of whether or not an injury
occurred, and an attack without a weapon in which the victim is
seriously injured.

*  Simple assault is an attack without a weapon resulting either
in no injury, minor injury (such as bruises, black eyes, cuts,
scratches, or swelling) or an undetermined injury requiring less
than 2 days of hospitalization.  Simple assaults also include
attempted assaults without a weapon.  

References

Homes for the Homeless. Ten Cities 1997-1998: A Snapshot of
Family Homelessness Across America. Available from Homes for the
Homeless & the Institute for Children and Poverty, 36 Cooper
Square, 6th Floor, New York, NY 10003; 212/529-5252.

Homicide Trends in the United States,
a section of the BJS website, http://
www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/homicide
/homtrnd.htm

U.S. Conference of Mayors. A Status Report on Hunger and
Homelessness in America's Cities: 1998.  Washington, DC.

Violence by Intimates: Analysis of Data on Crimes by Current or
Former Spouses, Boyfriends, and Girlfriends.  BJS report, NCJ
167237, March 1998.  

Zorza, Joan. "Woman Battering: A Major Cause of Homelessness,"
in Clearinghouse Review.  Vol. 25, no. 4, 1991. 


The Bureau of Justice Statistics is 
the statistical agency of the 
U.S. Department of Justice.  
Jan M. Chaiken, Ph.D., is director.

BJS Special Reports address a specific topic in depth from one
or more datasets that cover many topics.

Callie Marie Rennison, Ph.D., and Sarah Welchans wrote this
report.  Cathy Maston provided statistical review.   Tina Dorsey
produced and edited the report under the supervision of Tom
Hester.  Jayne Robinson prepared the report for final
publication.

May 2000, NCJ 178247

The primary source of data for tables presented in this report
is the National Crime Victimization Survey (NCVS).  Data for
lethal violence or homicide were collected by the FBI, under the
Supplementary Homicide Reports (SHR) of the Uniform Crime
Reporting Program (UCR).

Data presented in this report can be obtained from the National
Archive of Criminal Justice Data at the University of Michigan,
1-800-999-0960.  When at the archive site, search for dataset
ICPSR 6406.

The archive may also be accessed through the BJS website, where
the report, data, and supporting documentation are available:
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/

End of file
Revised 7/14/00  ih






