U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Programs
Bureau of Justice Statistics

-----------------------------------------------------
This file is text only without graphics and many of the
tables. A Zip archive of the tables in this report in
spreadsheet format (.csv) and the full report including
tables and graphics in .pdf format are available on BJS
website at:http://bjs.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbdetail&iid=4536
--------------------------------------------------------

Intimate Partner Violence, 1993–2010

Shannan Catalano, Ph.D., BJS Statistician

November 2012, NCJ 239203

From 1994 to 2010, the overall rate of intimate partner 
violence in the United States declined by 64%, from 9.8 
victimizations per 1,000 persons age 12 or older to 3.6 per 
1,000 (figure 1; table 1). The number of intimate partner 
victimizations also declined, from approximately 2.1 million 
victimizations in 1994 to around 907,000 in 2010—a decline of 
about 1.2 million victimizations over the 18-year data 
collection period. From 1994 to 2000, similar declines were 
observed for overall violent crime (down 47%) and intimate 
partner violence (down 48%). However, during the more recent 
10-year period from 2001 to 2010, the decline in the overall 
intimate partner violence rate slowed and stabilized while 
the overall violent crime rate continued to decline.

The data in this report were developed from the Bureau of 
Justice Statistics’ (BJS) National Crime Victimization Survey 
(NCVS), which annually collects information on nonfatal 
victimizations reported and not reported to the police 
against persons age 12 or older from a nationally 
representative sample of U.S. households. This special report 
examines trends in nonfatal intimate partner violence which 
includes rape, sexual assault, robbery, aggravated assault, 
and simple assault committed by an offender who was the 
victim’s current or former spouse, boyfriend, or girlfriend.

************
Highlights
************

* From 1994 to 2010, the overall rate of intimate partner 
violence in the United States declined by 64%, from 9.8 
victimizations per 1,000 persons age 12 or older to 3.6 per 
1,000.

* Intimate partner violence declined by more than 60% for 
both males and females from 1994 to 2010.
From 1994 to 2010, about 4 in 5 victims of intimate partner 
violence were female.

* Females ages 18 to 24 and 25 to 34 generally experienced 
the highest rates of intimate partner violence.
Compared to every other age group, a smaller percentage of 
female victims ages 12 to 17 were previously victimized by 
the same offender.

* The rate of intimate partner violence for Hispanic females  
declined 78%, from 18.8 victimizations per 1,000 in 1994 to 
4.1 per 1,000 in 2010.

* Females living in households comprised of one female adult 
with children experienced intimate partner violence at a rate 
more than 10 times higher than households with married adults 
with children and 6 times higher than households with one 
female only.

Trend estimates are based on two-year rolling averages 
centered on the most recent year. For example, estimates 
reported for 1994 represent the average estimates for 1993 
and 1994. For ease of discussion, all two-year estimates are 
referenced by the most recent year. This method improves the 
reliability and stability of estimate comparisons over time. 
This report examines long-term trends in intimate partner 
violence for three-time periods: 1993 to 2000, 2000 to 2005, 
and 2005 to 2010.

*****************************************
From 1994 to 2010, intimate partner 
violence declined by more than 60% for 
both males and females
*****************************************


Females and males experienced similar overall declines in 
intimate partner violence from 1994 to 2010. In 1994, the 
rate of female intimate partner violence was 16.1 
victimizations per 1,000 females age 12 or older (figure 2). 
By 2010, this rate had decreased by 63%, to 5.9 per 1,000. In 
comparison, male victims of intimate partner violence 
experienced 3.0 victimizations per 1,000 males age 12 or 
older in 1994, and this rate had decreased by 64%, to 1.1 per 
1,000 in 2010.

From 1994 to 2000, similar percentage declines in intimate 
partner victimization were observed for females (down 48%) 
and males (down 46%). After this period, trends differed 
between the two groups. From 2000 to 2005, the rate of 
intimate partner violence for females continued to decline 
(down 31%), while male victimization rates remained stable. 
In comparison, the rate of intimate partner violence against 
females remained stable from 2005 to 2010, while males 
experienced a 39% decline, from 1.7 to 1.1 victimizations per 
1,000 males age 12 or older.

*****************************************
About 4 in 5 victims of intimate partner 
violence were female from 1994 to 2010
*****************************************

Most intimate partner violence was perpetrated against 
females. In 1994, 85% of intimate partner violence victims 
were female and the remaining 15% were male (not shown in 
figure). These distributions remained relatively stable over 
time.

Because females comprise the majority of intimate partner 
violence victims, the remainder of this report focuses on 
females only. This approach is taken because the relatively 
smaller number of male victims of intimate partner violence 
inhibits reliable comparisons over time.

*****************************************
Rates of intimate partner violence declined 
for females of all age groups from 1994 to 2000
*****************************************

Females ages 18 to 24 and 25 to 34 generally experienced 
higher rates of intimate partner violence than females of 
other age categories from 1994 to 2010 (figure 3). During the 
period, the rate of intimate partner violence against females 
ages 25 to 34 declined by 62%, from 31.9 victimizations per 
1,000 females ages 25 to 34 to 12.1 per 1,000. In addition, 
the rates of intimate partner violence against females ages 
18 to 24 declined by 71%, from 33.9 victimizations per 1,000 
females ages 18 to 24 in 1994 to 9.7 per 1,000 in 2010.

The rate of intimate partner violence for females in all age 
categories declined from 1994 to 2000, but after 2000 the 
pattern differed between younger and older females. From 2000 
to 2005, rates of intimate partner violence continued to 
decline for females ages 12 to 17 (down 52%), 18 to 24 (down 
40%), and 25 to 34 (down 40%), while rates for females ages 
35 to 49 and 50 or older remained stable. 

From 2005 to 2010, rates of intimate partner violence 
remained stable for females in most age categories, with two 
exceptions. Females ages 18 to 24 experienced a 34% rate 
decline in intimate partner violence, from 14.7 
victimizations per 1,000 females ages 18 to 24 to 9.7 per 
1,000. Females ages 18 to 24 were the only age group to 
experience declines across all three periods. In comparison, 
females ages 35 to 49 were the only age group to experience a 
statistically significant increase in intimate partner 
violence from 2005 to 2010. From 2005 to 2010, females ages 
35 to 49 experienced a slight increase in rates of intimate 
partner violence, from 7.1 to 9.6 victimizations per 1,000 
females ages 35 to 49.

The rate of intimate partner victimization declined with age. 
Compared to all other age groups, females age 50 or older 
experienced the lowest rates of intimate partner violence 
both in 1994 (1.5 victimizations per 1,000) and 2010 (1.3 
victimizations per 1,000).

*****************************************
Compared to every other age group, a smaller 
percentage of female victims ages 12 to 17 
were previously victimized by the same offender
*****************************************

Most female victims of intimate partner violence were 
previously victimized by the same offender, including 77% of 
females ages 18 to 24, 76% of females ages 25 to 34, and 81% 
of females ages 35 to 49 (figure 4). In comparison, a smaller 
percentage of females ages 12 to 17 (38%) indicated that the 
same offender had previously committed a crime against them.

*****************************************
From 1994 to 2010, Hispanic females experienced 
slightly larger declines in intimate partner 
violence compared to white and black females
*****************************************

Among females who experienced intimate partner violence in 
1994, no rate differences were detected between Hispanics 
(18.8 victimizations per 1,000 females age 12 or older) and 
black non-Hispanics (20.3 per 1,000), or Hispanics and white 
non-Hispanics (15.6 per 1,000) (figure 5). White non-
Hispanic, black non-Hispanic, or Hispanic females experienced 
higher rates of intimate partner violence in 1994 compared to 
females of other racial categories (6.3 per 1,000) which 
includes females who were American Indians, Alaska Natives, 
Asian, Native Hawaiians, other Pacific Islanders and females 
of two or more races. Over the 18-year data collection 
period, white non-Hispanic and black non-Hispanic females 
experienced similar cumulative rate declines in intimate 
partner violence. By 2010, rates for both white non-Hispanics 
(6.2 victimizations per 1,000) and black non-Hispanics (7.8 
per 1,000) females had declined by about 61%. During the same 
period, the rate for Hispanic females declined by 78%, from 
18.8 to 4.1 per 1,000.

White non-Hispanic females (down 44%), black non-Hispanic 
females (down 58%), and Hispanic females (down 64%) 
experienced declines in intimate partner victimization from 
1994 to 2000. White non-Hispanic females were the only racial 
category to experience a decline in the rate of intimate 
partner violence from 2000 to 2005 (down 39%). During this 
same period, the intimate partner victimization rate for 
black non-Hispanic and Hispanic females remained unchanged.

*****************************************
From 1994 to 2010, intimate partner 
violence declined for females of all 
marital statuses
*****************************************

The overall rate of intimate partner violence among married 
females declined by 66%, from 5.9 victimizations per 1,000 
females age 12 or older in 1994 to 2.0 per 1,000 in 2010. 
Rates among divorced or widowed females declined by 67%, from 
19.9 victimizations per 1,000 in 1994 to 6.5 per 1,000 during 
the same period. 

Females who were either separated or never married 
experienced similar overall percentage declines from 1994 to 
2010. Separated females experienced the highest rate of 
intimate partner violence during the 18-year period. The rate 
among separated females declined from 151.4 victimizations 
per 1,000 females age 12 or older in 1994 to 59.6 per 1,000 
in 2010.

From 2000 to 2005, the rate of intimate partner victimization 
remained stable for married females, while rates for females 
who were never married (down 31%), divorced or widowed (down 
31%), or separated (down 30%) declined (figure 6). 

In 2010, the rate of intimate partner violence for married 
females (2.0 victimizations per 1,000 females age 12 or 
older) was about four times less than the rates for never 
married females (8.0 victimizations per 1,000), about three 
times less than the rate for divorced or widowed females (6.5 
victimizations per 1,000), and about 30 times less than the 
rate for separated females (59.6 victimizations per 1,000).

*****************************************
The rate of intimate partner violence for 
females living in households comprised of 
married adults with children declined by 
74% from 1994 to 2010
*****************************************

Females living in households comprised of married adults with 
children experienced a 74% decline in intimate partner 
violence, from 9.6 victimizations per 1,000 females age 12 or 
older in 1994 to 2.5 per 1,000 in 2010 (figure 7). The rate 
of intimate victims for females living in households 
comprised of one female adult with children declined by 57%, 
from 73.1 per 1,000 in 1994 to 31.7 per 1,000 in 2010.

From 1994 to 2000, similar overall declines occurred among 
households comprised of one female adult only (down 41%) and 
those with one female adult with children (down 45%). The 
rate of female intimate partner violence among households 
with one female adult remained stable from 2000 to 2005. In 
comparison, the rate among households with one female adult 
with children declined by more than a third (down 35%), from 
40.0 victimizations per 1,000 females in 2000 to 25.9 
victimizations per 1,000 in 2005, then remained stable until 
2010. 

In 2010, the rate of intimate partner violence against 
females living in households comprised of married adults with 
children was lower than those of households with one female 
only. The rate of female intimate partner violence in 2010 
among households comprised of one female adult with children 
(31.7 victimizations per 1,000 females age 12 or older) was 
more than 10 times higher than the rate for females in 
households with married adults with children (2.5 per 1,000), 
and more than 6 times higher than the rate for those in 
households with one female adult only (4.6 per 1,000).

************
Methodology
************

Survey coverage
----------------

The Bureau of Justice Statistics’ (BJS) National Crime 
Victimization Survey (NCVS) is an annual data collection 
conducted by the U.S. Census Bureau. The NCVS is a self-
report survey in which interviewed persons are asked about 
the number and characteristics of victimizations experienced 
during the prior six months. The NCVS collects information on 
nonfatal personal crimes (rape or sexual assault, robbery, 
aggravated and simple assault, and personal larceny) and 
property crimes (burglary, motor vehicle theft, and other 
theft) both reported and not reported to police. In addition 
to providing annual level and change estimates on criminal 
victimization, the NCVS is the primary source of information 
on the nature of criminal victimization incidents. Survey 
respondents provide information about themselves (such as 
age, sex, race and ethnicity, marital status, education 
level, and income) and whether they experienced 
victimization. Information are collected for each 
victimization incident about the offender (such as age, race 
and ethnicity, sex, and victim–offender relationship), 
characteristics of the crime (including time and place of 
occurrence, use of weapons, nature of injury, and economic 
consequences), whether the crime was reported to police, 
reasons why the crime was or was not reported, and 
experiences with the criminal justice system.

The NCVS is administered to persons age 12 or older from a 
nationally representative sample of households in the United 
States. The NCVS defines a household as a group of members 
who all reside at a sampled address. Persons are considered 
household members when the sampled address is their usual 
place of residence at the time of the interview and when they 
have no usual place of residence elsewhere. Once selected, 
households remain in the sample for three years, and eligible 
persons in these households are interviewed every six months 
for a total of seven interviews. New households rotate into 
the sample on an ongoing basis to replace outgoing households 
that have been in the sample for the three-year period. The 
sample includes persons living in group quarters, such as 
dormitories, rooming houses, and religious group dwellings, 
and excludes persons living in military barracks and 
institutional settings, such as correctional or hospital 
facilities, and the homeless. (For more detail, see the 
Survey Methodology in Criminal Victimization in the United 
States, 2008, NCJ 231173, BJS website, May 2011.) 

In 2010, about 41,000 households and 73,300 individuals age 
12 or older were interviewed for the NCVS. Each household was 
interviewed twice during the year. The response rate was 
92.3% of households and 87.5% of eligible individuals.

Victimizations that occurred outside of the U.S. were 
excluded from this report. From 1993 to 2010, 1,657 (0.8%) of 
the total 197,849 unweighted victimizations occurred outside 
the U.S. and were excluded from the analyses. Additional 
selection criteria used in this report include violent 
criminal victimizations and those perpetrated by intimates. 
From 1993 to 2010, about 22% (42,449) of the total 197,849 
unweighted victimizations were classified as violent crimes. 
During the same period, about 8% (5,385) of the total 65,690 
offenders identified by respondents were described as 
intimates.
*****************************************
Weighting adjustments for estimating 
household victimization
*****************************************

Estimates in this report use data from the 1993 to 2010 NCVS 
data files. These files are weighted to produce annual 
estimates of victimization for persons age 12 or older living 
in U.S. households. Because the NCVS relies on a sample 
rather than a census of the entire U.S. population, weights 
are designed to inflate sample point estimates to known 
population totals and to compensate for survey nonresponse 
and other aspects of the sample design.

The NCVS data files include both person and household 
weights. Person weights provide an estimate of the population 
represented by each person in the sample. Household weights 
provide an estimate of the total U.S. household population. 
Both household and person weights, after proper adjustment, 
are also used to form the denominator in calculations of 
crime rates.

Victimization weights used in this analysis account for the 
number of persons present during an incident and for repeat 
victims of series incidents. The weight counts series 
incidents as the actual number of incidents reported by the 
victim, up to a maximum of 10 incidents. Series 
victimizations are similar in type but occur with such 
frequency that a victim is unable to recall the details of 
each individual event. Survey procedures allow NCVS 
interviewers to identify and classify these similar 
victimizations as series victimizations and to collect 
detailed information on only the most recent incident in the 
series. In 2010, about 3% of all victimizations were series 
incidents. Weighting series incidents as the number of 
incidents up to a maximum of 10 incidents produces more 
reliable estimates of crime levels, while the cap at 10 
minimizes the effect of extreme outliers on the rates. 
Additional information on the series enumeration is detailed 
in the report Methods for Counting High-Frequency Repeat 
Victimizations in the National Crime Victimization Survey, 
NCJ 237308, BJS website, April 2012.

***********************************
Intimate partner violence defined
***********************************

As defined in the NCVS, intimate partner violence includes 
rape, sexual assault, robbery, aggravated assault, and simple 
assault committed by an offender who is the victim’s current 
or former spouse, boyfriend, or girlfriend. For some victims, 
intimates are primarily restricted to boyfriends and 
girlfriends. Others may be inclined to perceive romantic 
relationships as friends or acquaintances rather than 
ascribing the level of intimacy associated with a boyfriend 
or girlfriend. Thus, the characteristics of intimate violence 
as defined in this report may differ based on how the 
respondent perceives the relationship with the offender.

*****************************
Standard error computations
*****************************

When national estimates are derived from a sample, as is the 
case with the NCVS, caution must be taken when comparing one 
estimate to another estimate or when comparing estimates over 
time. Although one estimate may be larger than another, 
estimates based on a sample have some degree of sampling 
error. The sampling error of an estimate depends on several 
factors, including the amount of variation in the responses, 
the size of the sample, and the size of the subgroup for 
which the estimate is computed. When the sampling error 
around the estimates is taken into consideration, the 
estimates that appear different may, in fact, not be 
statistically different.

One measure of the sampling error associated with an estimate 
is the standard error. The standard error can vary from one 
estimate to the next. In general, for a given metric, an 
estimate with a smaller standard error provides a more 
reliable approximation of the true value than an estimate 
with a larger standard error. Estimates with relatively large 
standard errors are associated with less precision and 
reliability and should be interpreted with caution.

In order to generate standard errors around estimates from 
the NCVS, the Census Bureau produces generalized variance 
function (GVF) parameters for BJS. The GVFs take into account 
aspects of the NCVS complex sample design and represent the 
curve fitted to a selection of individual standard errors 
based on the Jackknife Repeated Replication technique. The 
GVF parameters were used to generate standard errors for each 
point estimate (such as counts, percentages, and rates) in 
the report.

In this report, BJS conducted tests to determine whether 
differences in estimated numbers and percentages were 
statistically significant once sampling error was taken into 
account. Using statistical programs developed specifically 
for the NCVS, all comparisons in the text were tested for 
significance. The primary test procedure used was Student’s 
t-statistic, which tests the difference between two sample 
estimates. To ensure that the observed differences between 
estimates were larger than might be expected due to sampling 
variation, the significance level was set at the 95% 
confidence level. 

Data users can use the estimates and the standard errors of 
the estimates provided in this report to generate a 
confidence interval around the estimate as a measure of the 
margin of error. The following example illustrates how 
standard errors can be used to generate confidence intervals:

According to the NCVS, in 1994, the overall rate of intimate 
partner violence was 9.8 victimizations per 1,000 persons age 
12 or older (appendix table 1). Using the GVFs, BJS 
determined that the estimate has a standard error of 0.4 
(appendix table 2). A confidence interval around the estimate 
was generated by multiplying the standard errors by ±1.96 
(the t-score of a normal, two-tailed distribution that 
excludes 2.5% at either end of the distribution). Thus, the 
confidence interval around the 9.8 estimate from 1994 is 
equal to 9.8 ± 0.4 X 1.96, (or 9.0 to 10.6). In other words, 
if different samples using the same procedures were taken 
from the U.S. population in 1994, 95% of the time the rate of 
overall intimate partner violence would fall between 9.0 and 
10.6 victimizations per 1,000 persons age 12 or older. 

In this report, BJS also calculated a coefficient of 
variation (CV) for all estimates, representing the ratio of 
the standard error to the estimate. CVs provide a measure of 
reliability and a means to compare the precision of estimates 
across measures with differing levels or metrics. In cases 
where the CV was greater than 50%, or the unweighted sample 
had 10 or fewer cases, the estimate was noted with a “!” 
symbol (interpret data with caution; estimate is based on 10 
or fewer sample cases, or the coefficient of variation 
exceeds 50%).

Many of the variables examined in this report may be related 
to one another and to other variables not included in the 
analyses. Complex relationships among variables were not 
fully explored in this report and warrant more extensive 
analysis. Causal inferences should not be made based on the 
results presented.

********************************
Statistical differences defined
********************************

BJS tested the comparisons between the percentages and rates 
for this report to determine if observed differences were 
statistically significant. Differences described as higher, 
lower, or different passed a test at the .05 level of 
statistical significance (95%-confidence level). Differences 
described as somewhat, slightly, or marginally different, or 
some indication of difference, passed a test at the .10 level 
of statistical significance (90%-confidence level). Caution 
is required when comparing estimates not explicitly discussed 
in this bulletin.

*****************************************
Methodological changes to the NCVS in 2006
*****************************************

Methodological changes implemented in 2006 may have affected 
the crime estimates for that year to such an extent that they 
are not comparable to estimates from other years. Evaluation 
of 2007 and later data from the NCVS conducted by BJS and the 
Census Bureau found a high degree of confidence that 
estimates from 2007 to 2010 are consistent with and 
comparable to estimates for 2005 and previous years. The 
reports, Criminal Victimization, 2006, NCJ 219413, December 
2007; Criminal Victimization, 2007, NCJ 224390, December 
2008; Criminal Victimization, 2008, NCJ 227777, September 
2009; Criminal Victimization, 2009, NCJ 231327, October 2010; 
and Criminal Victimization, 2010, NCJ 235508, September 2011, 
are available on the BJS website.

********************************************
The Bureau of Justice Statistics is the statistical agency of 
the U.S. Department of Justice. James P. Lynch is the 
director.

This report was written by Shannan Catalano. Jennifer L. 
Truman verified the report.

Morgan Young and Jill Thomas edited the report, and Barbara 
Quinn and Morgan Young produced the report, under the 
supervision of Doris J. James.

November 2012, NCJ 239203

********************************************

******************************************************
Office of Justice Programs * Innovation * Partnerships 
* Safer Neighborhoods * http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov
******************************************************
______________________
11/19/12/JER/4:38pm
______________________
