U.S. Department of Justice
Bureau of Justice Statistics

U.S. Department of Education
National Center for Education Statistics



Indicators of School Crime and Safety, 2000


----------------------------------------------------------------
This file is text only without graphics and tables.
A Zip archive of the tables in this report in spreadsheet format
(.wk1) and the full report including tables and graphics in
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/abstract/iscs00.htm

-----------------------------------------------------------------



Phillip Kaufman
Xianglei Chen
Susan P. Choy
MPR Associates, Inc.

Sally A. Ruddy
Amanda K. Miller
Jill K. Fleury
Education Statistics Services Institute

Kathryn A. Chandler
National Center for Education Statistics

Michael R. Rand
Patsy Klaus
Michael G. Planty
Bureau of Justice Statistics

U.S. Department of Education, Office of
Educational Research and Improvement, NCES
2001-017
U.S. Department of Justice, Office of Justice
Programs, NCJ 184176

U.S. Department of Education
Richard W. Riley, Secretary

U.S. Department of Justice
Janet Reno, Attorney General

Office of Educational Research and Improvement
C. Kent McGuire, Assistant Secretary

Office of Justice Programs
Mary Lou Leary, Acting Assistant Attorney
General

National Center for Education Statistics
Gary Phillips, Acting Commissioner

Bureau of Justice Statistics
Jan M. Chaiken, Director

This report is one in a series.  To determine if a
more recent version is available, go to
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/pubalp2.htm#indicators

 The National Center for Education Statistics
(NCES) is the primary federal entity for
collecting, analyzing, and reporting data
related to education in the United States and
other nations. It fulfills a congressional
mandate to collect, collate, analyze, and report
full and complete statistics on the condition of
education in the United States; conduct and
publish reports and specialized analyses of the
meaning and significance of such statistics;
assist state and local education agencies in
improving their statistical systems; and report
on education activities in foreign countries.

The Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS) is the
primary federal entity for collecting,
analyzing, publishing, and disseminating
statistical information about crime, its
perpetrators and victims, and the operation of
the justice system at all levels of government.
These data are critical to federal, state, and
local policymakers in combating crime and
ensuring that justice is both efficient and
evenhanded.

October 2000

Suggested Citation

Kaufman, P., Chen, X., Choy, S.P., Ruddy, S.A.,
Miller, A.K., Fleury, J.K., Chandler, K.A.,
Rand, M.R., Klaus, P., and Planty, M.G.
Indicators of School Crime and Safety, 2000.
U.S. Departments of Education and Justice. NCES
2001-017/NCJ-184176. Washington, D.C.: 2000.

This publication can be downloaded from the
World Wide Web at http://nces.ed.gov or
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/. Single hard
copies can be ordered through ED Pubs at
1-877-4ED-PUBS (NCES 2001-017) (TTY/TDD
1-877-576-7734), and the Bureau of Justice
Statistics Clearinghouse at 1-800-732-3277
(NCJ-184176).

Contact at NCES:
Kathryn Chandler
(202) 502-7326
(e-mail) kathryn_chandler@ed.gov

Contact at BJS:
Michael Planty
(202) 514-3214
(e-mail) Michael.Planty@usdoj.gov

Foreword

The national focus on school crime and safety
continues to be of paramount importance. During
the past year, overall levels of crime in school
decreased, and students seem to feel more safe
in school than they did in the last few years.
Yet, violence and theft still mar the school
experiences of many students and challenge
parents, teachers, and school officials to
respond. 

Continued progress in improving the safety of
our children entrusted to schools relies on
having accurate information about the nature,
extent, and scope of the problem. This report is
intended to provide information that will assist
in developing policies and/or programs to
prevent and cope with violence and crime in
schools.

This is the third edition of Indicators of
School Crime and Safety, a joint effort by the
Bureau of Justice Statistics and the National
Center for Education Statistics. The report
provides detailed statistical information to
inform the nation on the current nature of crime
in schools, and is a companion document to the
Annual Report on School Safety: 2000. The Annual
Report is a joint publication of the Departments
of Education and Justice that provides an
overview of the nature and scope of school crime
and describes actions schools and communities
can take to address this critical issue. The two
reports respond to a 1998 request by President
Clinton for an annual report card on school
violence. 

This edition of Indicators contains the most
recent available data on school crime and safety
drawn from a number of statistical series
supported by the federal government. These data
include results from a study of violent deaths
in school, sponsored by the Department of
Education and the Centers for Disease Control
and Prevention, and the 1999 School Crime
Supplement to the National Crime Victimization
Survey (NCVS), which is conducted by the Census
Bureau on behalf of our agencies. 

The Bureau of Justice Statistics and National
Center for Education Statistics continue to work
towards providing more timely and complete data
on the issue of school-related violence and
safety. Not only is this report available on the
Internet in its entirety, but individual
indicators are updated there throughout the year
as new data become available. The inclusion of
detailed data from the full calendar year 1999
NCVS (this edition includes only selected
statistics from January-June 1999) and from a
new survey of school administrators on crime and
victimization in the schools is planned for next
year's edition of Indicators.

Gary Phillips, Ph.D.
Acting Commissioner of Education Statistics

Jan M. Chaiken, Ph.D.
Director of the Bureau of Justice Statistics

Executive Summary

Schools should be safe and secure places for all
students, teachers, and staff members. Without a
safe learning environment, teachers cannot teach
and students cannot learn. In fact, as the data
in this report show, more victimizations happen
away from school than at school. In 1998,
students were about two times as likely to be
victims of serious violent crime away from
school as at school (Indicator 2).

In 1998, students ages 12 through 18 were
victims of more than 2.7 million total crimes at
school (Indicator 2). In that same year, these
students were victims of about 253,000 serious
violent crimes at school (that is, rape, sexual
assault, robbery, and aggravated assault). There
were also 60 school-associated violent deaths in
the United States between July 1, 1997 and June
30, 1998-including 47 homicides (Indicator 1). 

The total nonfatal victimization rate for young
people declined between 1993 and 1998. The
percentage of students being victimized at
school also declined over the last few years.
Between 1995 and 1999, the percentage of
students who reported being victims of crime at
school decreased from 10 percent to 8 percent
(Indicator 3). This decline was due in part to a
decline for students in grades 7 through 9.
Between 1995 and 1999, the prevalence of
reported victimization dropped from 11 percent
to 8 percent for 7th graders, from 11 percent to
8 percent for 8th graders, and from 12 percent
to 9 percent for 9th graders.

However, for some types of crimes at school,
rates have not changed. For example, between
1993 and 1997, the percentage of students in
grades 9 through 12 who were threatened or
injured with a weapon on school property in the
past 12 months remained constant-at about 7 or 8
percent (Indicator 4). The percentage of
students in grades 9 through 12 who reported
being in a physical fight on school property in
the past 12 months also remained unchanged
between 1993 and 1997-at about 15 percent
(Indicator 5). 

As the rate of victimization in schools has
declined or remained constant, students also
seem to feel more secure at school now than just
a few years ago. The percentage of students ages
12 through 18 who reported avoiding one or more
places at school for their own safety decreased
between 1995 and 1999-from 9 to 5 percent
(Indicator 14). Furthermore, the percentage of
students who reported that street gangs were
present at their schools decreased from 1995 to
1999. In 1999, 17 percent of students ages 12
through 18 reported that they had street gangs
at their schools compared with 29 percent in
1995 (Indicator 16). 

There was an increase in the use of marijuana
among students between 1993 and 1995, but no
change between 1995 and 1997. In 1997, about 26
percent of these students had used marijuana in
the last 30 days (Indicator 19). Furthermore,
almost one-third of all students in grades 9
through 12 (32 percent) reported that someone
had offered, sold, or given them an illegal drug
on school property-an increase from 24 percent
in 1993 (Indicator 20).

Therefore, the data shown in this report present
a mixed picture of school safety. While overall
school crime rates have declined, violence,
gangs, and drugs are still evident in some
schools, indicating that more work needs to be
done. 

Organization of the Current Report

This report, the third in a series of annual
reports on school crime and safety from the
Bureau of Justice Statistics and the National
Center for Education Statistics, presents the
latest available data on school crime and
student safety. The report repeats many
indicators from the 1999 report but also
provides updated data on fatal and nonfatal
student victimization, nonfatal teacher
victimization, students' perceptions of safety
and the presence of gangs, and students'
avoidance of places at school. In addition, it
provides new data on students' reports of being
the target of derogatory hate-related language
and seeing hate-related graffiti at school.

The report is organized as a series of
indicators, with each indicator presenting data
on a different aspect of school crime and
safety. It starts with the most serious
violence. There are five sections to the report:
Violent Deaths at School; Nonfatal Student
Victimization--Student Reports; Violence and
Crime at School--Public School
Principal/Disciplinarian Reports; Nonfatal
Teacher Victimization at School--Teacher
Reports; and School Environment. Each section
contains a set of indicators that, taken
together, describe a distinct aspect of school
crime and safety.

Rather than relying on data from a large omnibus
survey of school crime and safety, this report
uses a variety of independent data sources from
federal departments and agencies including the
Bureau of Justice Statistics, the National
Center for Education Statistics, and the Centers
for Disease Control and Prevention. Each data
source has an independent sample design, data
collection method, and questionnaire design, all
of which may be influenced by the unique
perspective of the primary funding agency. By
combining multiple and independent sources of
data, it is hoped that this report will present
a more complete portrait of school crime and
safety than would be possible with any single
source of information.

However, because the report relies on so many
different data sets, the age groups, the time
periods, and the types of respondents analyzed
can vary from indicator to indicator. Readers
should keep this in mind as they compare data
from different indicators. Furthermore, while
every effort has been made to keep key
definitions consistent across indicators,
different surveys sometimes use different
definitions, such as those for specific crimes
and "at school." Therefore, caution should be
used in making comparisons between results from
different data sets. Descriptions of these data
sets are located in appendix B of this report. 

Key Findings

Some of the key findings from the various
sections of this report are as follows:

Violent Deaths at School

From July 1, 1997 through June 30, 1998, there
were 60 school-associated violent deaths in the
United States. Forty-seven of these violent
deaths were homicides, 12 were suicides, and one
was a teenager killed by a law enforcement
officer in the line of duty (Indicator 1).
Thirty-five of the 47 school-associated
homicides were of school age children. By
comparison, a total of 2,752 children ages 5
through 19 were victims of homicide in the
United States from July 1, 1997 through June 30,
1998. Seven of the 12 school-associated suicides
occurring from July 1, 1997 through June 30,
1998 were of school age children. A total of
2,061 children ages 5 through 19 committed
suicide that year.

Nonfatal Student Victimization--Student Reports

Students ages 12 through 18 were more likely to
be victims of nonfatal serious violent
crime-including rape, sexual assault, robbery,
and aggravated assault-away from school than
when they were at school (Indicator 2). In 1998,
students in this age range were victims of about
550,000 serious violent crimes away from
schools, compared with about 253,000 at school.

The percentage of students in grades 9 through
12 who have been threatened or injured with a
weapon on school property has not changed
significantly in recent years. In 1993, 1995,
and 1997, about 7 to 8 percent of students
reported being threatened or injured with a
weapon such as a gun, knife, or club on school
property in the past 12 months (Indicator 4).

In 1998, 12- through 18-year-old students living
in urban, suburban, and rural locales were
equally vulnerable to serious violent crime and
theft at school. Away from school, however,
urban and suburban students were more vulnerable
to serious violent crime and theft than were
rural students. (Indicator 2).

Younger students (ages 12 through 14) were more
likely than older students (ages 15 through 18)
to be victims of crime at school. However, older
students were more likely than younger students
to be victimized away from school (Indicator 2).

Violence and Crime at School--Public School
Principal/Disciplinarian Reports

In 1996-97, 10 percent of all public schools
reported at least one serious violent crime to
the police or a law enforcement representative.
Principals' reports of serious violent crimes
included murder, rape or other type of sexual
battery, suicide, physical attack or fight with
a weapon, or robbery. Another 47 percent of
public schools reported a less serious violent
or nonviolent crime (but not a serious violent
one). Crimes in this category include physical
attack or fight without a weapon, theft/larceny,
and vandalism. The remaining 43 percent of
public schools did not report any of these
crimes to the police (Indicator 8).

Elementary schools were much less likely than
either middle or high schools to report any type
of crime in 1996-97. They were much more likely
to report vandalism (31 percent) than any other
crime (19 percent or less) (Indicator 9).

At the middle and high school levels, physical
attack or fight without a weapon was generally
the most commonly reported crime in 1996-97 (9
and 8 per 1,000 students, respectively). Theft
or larceny was more common at the high school
than at the middle school level (6 versus 4 per
1,000 students) (Indicator 9).

Nonfatal Teacher Victimization at
School--Teacher Reports

Over the 5-year period from 1994 through 1998,
teachers were victims of 1,755,000 nonfatal
crimes at school, including 1,087,000 thefts and
668,000 violent crimes (rape or sexual assault,
robbery, and aggravated and simple assault)
(Indicator 10). This translates into 83 crimes
per 1,000 teachers per year.

In the period from 1994 through 1998, senior
high school and middle/junior high school
teachers were more likely to be victims of
violent crimes (most of which were simple
assaults) than elementary school teachers (38
and 60, respectively, versus 18 crimes per 1,000
teachers) (Indicator 10).

In the 1993-94 school year, 12 percent of all
elementary and secondary school teachers were
threatened with injury by a student, and 4
percent were physically attacked by a student.
This represented about 341,000 teachers who were
victims of threats of injury by students that
year, and 119,000 teachers who were victims of
attacks by students (Indicator 11).

School Environment

Between 1995 and 1999, the percentages of
students who felt unsafe while they were at
school and while they were going to and from
school decreased. In 1995, 9 percent of students
ages 12 through 18 sometimes or most of the time
feared they were going to be attacked or harmed
at school. In 1999, this percentage had fallen
to 5 percent. During the same period, the
percentage of students fearing they would be
attacked while traveling to and from school fell
from 7 percent to 4 percent (Indicator 13).

Between 1993 and 1997, the percentage of
students in grades 9 through 12 who reported
carrying a weapon on school property within the
previous 30 days fell from 12 percent to 9
percent (a 25 percent reduction) (Indicator 12).

Between 1995 and 1999, the percentage of
students ages 12 through 18 who avoided one or
more places at school for fear of their own
safety decreased, from 9 to 5 percent. In 1999,
this percentage represented 1.1 million students
(Indicator 14).

Between 1995 and 1999, the percentage of
students who reported that street gangs were
present at their schools decreased. In 1995, 29
percent of students reported gangs being present
in their schools. By 1999, this percentage had
fallen to 17 percent (Indicator 16).

In 1997, about 51 percent of students in grades
9 through 12 had at least one drink of alcohol
in the previous 30 days. A much smaller
percentage (about 6 percent) had at least one
drink on school property during the same period
(Indicator 18). 

There was an increase in the use of marijuana
among students between 1993 and 1995, but no
change between 1995 and 1997. About one quarter
(26 percent) of ninth graders reported using
marijuana in the last 30 days in 1997. However,
marijuana use on school property did not
increase significantly between 1993 and 1995,
nor between 1995 and 1997 (Indicator 19).

In 1995 and 1997, almost one-third of all
students in grades 9 through 12 (32 percent)
reported that someone had offered, sold, or
given them an illegal drug on school property.
This was an increase from 1993 when 24 percent
of such students reported that illegal drugs
were available to them on school property
(Indicator 20).

In 1999, about 13 percent of students ages 12
through 18 reported that someone at school had
used hate-related words against them. That is,
in the prior 6 months someone at school called
them a derogatory word having to do with
race/ethnicity, religion, disability, gender, or
sexual orientation. In addition, about 36
percent of students saw hate-related graffiti at
school (Indicator 15).

Acknowledgments

The authors wish to thank the heads of their
respective agencies, Gary Phillips of the
National Center for Education Statistics (NCES)
and Jan Chaiken of the Bureau of Justice
Statistics (BJS), for backing this report. We
also appreciate their support of our larger data
collection and reporting agendas on school crime
and safety.

From BJS, we wish to thank Cathy Maston of the
Victimization Statistics Branch for her work in
preparing and verifying data from the NCVS.

From NCES, we wish to thank Bruce Taylor,
Shelley Burns, Arnold Goldstein, Aurora D'Amico,
and Ellen Bradburn, who served as reviewers.
They each provided input that substantially
improved the publication.

Outside of NCES and BJS, others who reviewed the
report were Richard Lawrence of St. Cloud
University; Meg Small, of the OESE/Safe and Drug
Free Schools; Mary Schifferli, of the Office for
Civil Rights of the 

U. S. Department of Education; and Joanne
Wiggins of the Planning and Evaluation Service
of the U. S. Department of Education. Their
advice was gratefully accepted. We particularly
appreciated their willingness to review the
report under very strict time constraints.

Without the assistance of the following staff at
MPR Associates this report could not have been
produced: Barbara Kridl (overall production and
proofreading), Francesca Tussing (production,
proofreading, layout, and editing), Andrea
Livingston (editing), and Leslie Retallick
(figure design and text layout). They provided
invaluable editorial, graphic, and production
assistance.

Violent Deaths at School

1. Violent deaths at school and away from
school*

Violent deaths are tragic events that affect not
only the individuals and their families directly
involved but also everyone in the schools where
they occur. Violent deaths at school receive
national attention; accurate data on the
magnitude of this problem are important.

*The data reported here are new. 

From July 1, 1997 through June 30, 1998, there
were 60 school-associated violent deaths in the
United States. Forty-seven of these violent
deaths were homicides, 12 were suicides, and one
was a teenager killed by a law enforcement
officer in the line of duty.

Thirty-five of the 47 school-associated
homicides were of school age children. There
were a total of 2,752 homicides of children ages
5 through 19 occurring from July 1, 1997 through
June 30, 1998.

Seven of the 12 school-associated suicides
occurring between July 1, 1997 through June 30,
1998 were of school age children. There were a
total of 2,061 suicides of children ages 5
through 19 occurring that calendar year.

Nonfatal Student Victimization-Student Reports

2. Victimization of students at school and away
from school*

The amount of crime committed in the nation's
schools continues to be a concern. While crime
has decreased in recent years, theft and
violence at school and to and from school can
lead to disruptive and threatening environments
reducing student performance.

*This indicator has been updated to include 1998
data.

Students ages 12 through 18 experienced fewer
nonfatal serious violent crimes (that is, rape,
sexual assault, robbery, and aggravated assault)
when they were at school than away from school.
In 1998, students in this age group were victims
of about 253,000 such crimes at school, and
about 550,000 away from school (tables 2.1 and
2.3). The victimization rate for serious violent
crime was about the same at school from 1992 to
1998 and declined from 1992 to 1998 away from
school (figure 2.1 and tables 2.2 and 2.4).

Students ages 12 through 18 were victims of
about 1.2 million nonfatal violent crimes (that
is, serious violent crime plus simple assault)
at school, and about 1.3 million away from
school in 1998 (tables 2.1 and 2.3). There was a
decline in the victimization rate between 1992
and 1998 at school as well as away from school
(from 48 to 43 and from 71 to 48 per 1,000
students ages 12 through 18, respectively)
(figure 2.1 and tables 2.2 and 2.4). During most
of this period, the victimization rates for
nonfatal violent crime were generally lower at
school than away from school.

Students ages 12 through 18 were more likely to
be victims of theft at school than away from
school each year between 1992 and 1998, except
for 1997. In that year, about the same number of
thefts occurred at and away from school. In
1998, about 1.6 million thefts occurred at
school (58 percent of all crimes at school), and
about 1.2 million away from school (49 percent
of all crimes away from school) (tables 2.1 and
2.3). The victimization rate declined for thefts
at school between 1992 and 1998 as it did for
thefts away from school during this period
(figure 2.1 and tables 2.2 and 2.4).

Considering total nonfatal crime (theft plus
violent crime), 12- through 18-year-old students
were victims of about 2.7 million crimes while
they were at school in 1998, and about 2.5
million away from school (tables 2.1 and 2.3).
These represent victimization rates of 101
crimes per 1,000 students at school, and 95
crimes per 1,000 students away from school
(figure 2.1 and tables 2.2 and 2.4).

In 1998, the rates for serious violent crimes
and theft were about the same for males and
females at school, but higher for males than
females away from school (figures 2.2 and 2.3
and tables 2.2 and 2.4).

In 1998, 12- through 18-year-old students living
outside urban areas were just as vulnerable to
serious violent crime and theft at school as
were urban students (figure 2.2 and table 2.2).
Away from school, urban and suburban students
were more vulnerable to serious violent crime
and theft than were rural students (figure 2.3
and table 2.4).

Younger students (ages 12 through 14) were more
likely than older students (ages 15 through 18)
to be victims of crime at school. However, older
students were more likely than younger students
to be victimized away from school (figures 2.2
and 2.3 and tables 2.2 and 2.4).

3. Prevalence of students being victimized at
school*

Some of the crimes committed against students
involve violence, while others involve their
property. Presenting information on the
prevalence of victimization for students helps
clarify what percentage of students are affected
by different types of crime.

*The data reported here are new.

In 1999, a smaller percentage of students ages
12 through 18 reported being victims of nonfatal
crimes (including either theft or violent
crimes) at school during the previous 6 months
than in 1995 (10 percent and 8 percent,
respectively)(figure 3.1 and table 3.1). About 7
percent in 1995 were victims of theft compared
with 6 percent in 1999. Also, 3 percent of
students in 1995 reported being victims of
violence at school compared with 2 percent in
1999.

The decline in the prevalence of victimization
between 1995 and 1999 was due in part to a
decline for students in grades 7 through 9
(figure 3.1 and table 3.1). Between 1995 and
1999, the prevalence of reported victimization
dropped from 11 percent to 8 percent for 7th
graders, from 11 percent to 8 percent for 8th
graders, and from 12 percent to 9 percent for
9th graders. During the same period, the
prevalence of victimization remained relatively
constant for 6th, 10th, 11th, and 12th graders.

In both 1995 and 1999, public school students
were more likely to report having been victims
of violent crime during the previous 6 months
than were private school students (table 3.1).
Public school students were also more likely
than private school students to report being
victims of theft at school in 1995, but equally
likely to experience theft in 1999. 

4. Prevalence of students being threatened or
injured with a weapon on school property*

Every year, some students are threatened or
injured with a weapon while they are on school
property. The percentages of students victimized
in this way provide an important measure of how
safe our schools are and how this is changing
over time.

*This indicator repeats information from the
1999 Indicators of School Crime and Safety
report.

The percentage of students in grades 9 through
12 who were threatened or injured with a weapon
on school property in the 12 months before the
survey has remained constant in recent years. In
1993, 1995, and 1997, about 7 to 8 percent of
students reported being threatened or injured
with a weapon such as a gun, knife, or club on
school property in the past 12 months (figure
4.1 and table 4.1). 

In each survey year, males were more likely than
females to report being threatened or injured
with a weapon on school property (figure 4.1 and
table 4.1). For example, in 1997, 10 percent of
males reported being threatened or injured in
the past year, compared with 4 percent of
females. Moreover, the percentage of females who
reported being threatened or injured declined
slightly over the period-from about 5 percent in
1993 to 4 percent in 1997.

Of 9th through 12th graders, those students in
lower grades were more likely to be threatened
or injured with a weapon on school property than
were students in higher grades (figure 4.2 and
table 4.1). For example, in 1993, 9 percent of
9th graders reported being threatened or
injured, compared with 6 percent of 12th
graders. The comparable percentages in 1997 were
10 percent for 9th graders and 6 percent for
12th graders.

There were few racial/ethnic differences in the
percentages of students being threatened or
injured with a weapon on school property in the
12 months in each year (figure 4.3 and table
4.1). About the same percentage of students from
each racial/ethnic group reported being
threatened or injured.

5. Prevalence of students involved in physical
fights on school property*

Schools where there are numerous physical fights
may not be able to maintain a focused learning
environment. Students who are constantly
involved in fights on school property cannot be
ready to learn.

*This indicator repeats information from the
1999 Indicators of School Crime and Safety
report.

In 1997, about 15 percent of all students in
grades 9 through 12 said that they had been in a
physical fight on school property in the last 12
months (figure 5.1 and table 5.1). In that same
year, 37 percent reported that they had been in
a physical fight in any location (including on
school property).

The percentage of students who reported being in
a fight anywhere declined slightly from 1993 to
1997-from 42 percent in 1993 to 37 percent in
1997 (figure 5.1 and table 5.1). However, the
percentages of students who reported fighting on
school property across these years were similar. 

Males were more likely than females to have been
in a fight anywhere and on school property
(figure 5.1 and table 5.1). In 1997, 46 percent
of males said they had been in a fight in the
last 12 months, and 20 percent said they had
been in a fight on school property. In that same
year, about 26 percent of females reported they
had been in a fight, and 9 percent said they had
been in a fight on school property.

Of 9th through 12th graders, those students in
lower grades reported being in more fights than
students in higher grades anywhere and on school
property (figure 5.2 and table 5.1). For
example, in 1997, 21 percent of 9th graders
reported that they were in a fight on school
property in the last 12 months; in contrast, 10
percent of 12th graders were in fights on school
property. 

6. Prevalence of students being bullied at
school*

Bullying contributes to a climate of fear and
intimidation in schools. Students ages 12
through 18 were asked if they had been bullied
(that is, picked on or made to do things they
did not want to do) at school.

*The data reported here are from a different
source than the data presented for this
indicator in earlier editions.

In 1999, about 5 percent of students ages 12
through 18 reported that they had been bullied
at school in the last 6 months (table 6.1). In
general, females were as likely as males to
report being bullied.

Males were more likely to be bullied in grades 6
and 7 than were females (12 percent versus 7
percent respectively), while there was little
difference in the percentage of males and
females being bullied in the other two grade
levels (table 6.1 and figure 6.1).

There were few differences among racial/ethnic
groups in the percentage of students who
reported being bullied (table 6.1). The
exception was that white and black students were
more likely to report being victimized by
bullies than were students of other,
non-Hispanic origin. About 2 percent in this
group, which includes Asians, Pacific Islanders,
American Indians, and Alaskan Natives, reported
being bullied, compared with about 5 percent of
white and 6 percent of black students.

Students in lower grades were more likely to be
bullied than students in higher grades (table
6.1 and figure 6.1). About 10 percent of
students in grades 6 and 7 reported being
bullied, compared with about 5 percent of
students in grades 8 and 9 and about 2 percent
in grades 10 through 12.

7. Prevalence of students having property stolen
or deliberately damaged on school property*

One way that students are victimized at school
is by having their personal property stolen or
deliberately damaged. While less harmful than
attacks on students themselves, such crimes have
financial consequences and can divert students'
attention from their studies as well as
contribute to perceptions of schools as unsafe
places.

*This indicator repeats information from the
1999 Indicators of School Crime and Safety
report.

It is relatively common for students to have
something stolen or damaged on school property.
In 1997, about one-third of all students in
grades 9 through 12 said that someone stole or
deliberately damaged their property, such as
their car, clothing, or books, on school
property during the last 12 months (figure 7.1
and table 7.1). This proportion was similar in
1993 and 1995.

Generally, males were more likely than females
to report being victims of theft or deliberate
property damage on school property. In 1993,
1995, and 1997, about 28 percent of females
reported being victimized, compared with 37
percent of males in 1993, 41 percent in 1995,
and 36 percent in 1997 (table 7.1). 

Students in lower grades were more likely than
students in higher grades to report having
something stolen or deliberately damaged at
school (figure 7.2 and table 7.1). For example,
in 1997, 37 percent of 9th graders had something
of theirs damaged or stolen, compared with 28
percent of 12th graders. 

Violence and Crime at School-Public School
Principal/Disciplinarian Reports

8. Crimes reported to the police*

The number of crimes that principals indicated
they reported to police or other law enforcement
representatives is a useful measure of the
occurrences of serious crimes in the nation's
schools. The percentage of schools reporting
crimes provides an indication of how widespread
crime is, while the number of crimes reported
provides information on the magnitude of the
problem.

*This indicator repeats information from the
1999 Indicators of School Crime and Safety
report.

In 1996-97, 10 percent of all public schools
reported at least one serious violent crime to a
law enforcement representative (figure 8.1 and
table 8.1). Another 47 percent of public schools
reported a less serious violent or nonviolent
crime (but not a serious violent one). The
remaining 43 percent of public schools did not
report any of these crimes to the police.

The vast majority of crimes reported by public
schools were of the less serious violent or
nonviolent type in 1996-97 (402,000 out of the
424,000 total crimes reported to the police)
(table 8.3).

The percentage of schools reporting crimes was
similar at the middle and high school levels
(figure 8.2 and table 8.1). At each level, about
20 percent of the schools reported at least one
serious violent crime, and about 55 percent
reported at least one less serious violent or
nonviolent crime, but no serious violent crime
in 1996-97.

The numbers of reported incidents per 1,000
students were similar for middle and high
schools for both serious violent and less
serious violent and nonviolent crimes (figure
8.2 and table 8.4). For both types of crimes,
there was a lower rate at the elementary level
than at the middle or high school levels. 

The percentage of schools reporting at least one
serious violent crime was much higher in cities
(17 percent) than in towns (5 percent) or rural
areas (8 percent) during 1996-97 (figure 8.2 and
table 8.1).

9. Specific crimes reported to the police*

Data on the prevalence of specific types of
crimes add detail to the more general discussion
of serious violent crimes and less serious
violent and nonviolent crimes. Each type of
crime affects students and schools differently.

*This indicator repeats information from the
1999 Indicators of School Crime and Safety
report.

About one-half (44 to 55 percent) of all public
middle and high schools reported incidents of
vandalism, theft or larceny, and physical
attacks or fights without weapons to the police
or other law enforcement representatives in the
1996-97 school year (figure 9.1 and table 9.2).
Considerably smaller percentages of public
middle and high schools reported the more
serious violent crimes of rape or other type of
sexual battery (5 and 8 percent, respectively);
robbery (5 and 8 percent); or physical attack or
fight with a weapon (12 and 13 percent) (table
9.1).

Elementary schools were much less likely than
either middle or high schools to report any of
the types of crime described here in 1996-97
(figure 9.1 and tables 9.1 and 9.2). They were
much more likely to report vandalism (31
percent) than any other crime (19 percent or
less).

In 1996-97, physical attack or fight without a
weapon was generally the most commonly reported
crime at the middle and high school levels (9
and 8 per 1,000 public school students,
respectively) (figure 9.2 and table 9.8). Theft
or larceny was more common at the high school
than the middle school level (6 versus 4 per
1,000 students).

Overall, there was relatively little variation
by urbanicity in the crime rates at school
discussed here during the 1996-97 school year
(as measured by the number of crimes reported
per 1,000 public school students) (figure 9.2
and tables 9.7 and 9.8).

Nonfatal Teacher Victimization at School-Teacher
Reports

10. Nonfatal teacher victimization at school*

Students are not the only ones who are victims
of crime at school. Teachers in school can also
be the targets of violence and theft. In
addition to the personal toll such violence
takes on teachers, those who worry about their
safety may have difficulty teaching and may
leave the profession altogether. Information on
the number of crimes against teachers at school
can help show how severe and widespread the
problem is.

*The data reported here are new. 

Over the 5-year period from 1994 through 1998,
teachers were the victims of approximately
1,755,000 nonfatal crimes at school, including
1,087,000 thefts and 668,000 violent crimes
(rape or sexual assault, robbery, aggravated
assault, and simple assault) (table 10.1). On
average, this translates into 351,000 nonfatal
crimes per year, or 83 crimes per 1,000 teachers
per year. Among the violent crimes against
teachers during this 5-year period, there were
about 80,000 serious violent crimes (12 percent
of the violent crimes), including rape or sexual
assault, robbery, and aggravated assault. On
average, this translates into 16,000 serious
violent crimes per year.

During the 1994-98 period, the average annual
rate of serious violent crime was similar for
teachers (on average, 4 per 1,000 teachers),
regardless of their instructional level, gender,
race/ethnicity, and the urbanicity of the
schools where they taught (figure 10.1 and table
10.1).

In the period from 1994 through 1998, senior
high school and middle/junior high school
teachers were more likely to be victims of
violent crimes (most of which were simple
assaults) than elementary school teachers (38
and 60, respectively, versus 18 crimes per 1,000
teachers) (figure 10.1 and table 10.1).

During the 1994-98 period, senior high and
middle/junior high school teachers were more
likely to be targets of theft than elementary
school teachers (63 and 67, respectively, versus
39 thefts per 1,000 teachers) (figure 10.1 and
table 10.1).

The average annual violent crime rate for
teachers at school varied by gender. Over the
5-year period from 1994 through 1998, male
teachers were more likely to be victims of
violent crimes than female teachers (53 versus
25 crimes per 1,000 teachers) (figure 10.1 and
table 10.1).

Teachers were differentially victimized by
crimes at school according to where they taught.
For example, over the 5-year period from 1994
through 1998, urban teachers were more likely to
be victims of violent crimes than rural and
suburban teachers (40 versus 24 and 24,
respectively, per 1,000 teachers). Urban
teachers were also more likely to experience
theft than suburban and rural teachers (63
versus 46 and 31 per 1,000 teachers,
respectively) (figure 10.1 and table 10.1).

11. Prevalence of teachers being threatened with
injury or attacked by students*

Some of the offenses against teachers are
committed by students. Data on physical attacks
and threats against elementary and secondary
teachers by students can provide a snapshot of
the prevalence of this problem.

*This indicator repeats information from the
1999 Indicators of School Crime and Safety
report.

In the 1993-94 school year, 12 percent of all
elementary and secondary school teachers
(341,000) were threatened with injury by a
student from their school, and 4 percent
(119,000) were physically attacked by a student
(table 11.1).

Teachers in central city schools were more
likely to be victims than were teachers in urban
fringe or rural schools in 1993-94 (table 11.1).
About 15 percent of teachers in central city
schools had been threatened with injury by
students, compared with 11 and 10 percent of
teachers in urban fringe and rural schools.
About 6 percent of teachers in central city
schools had been attacked by students, compared
with 4 and 3 percent of teachers in urban fringe
and rural schools.

Public school teachers were more likely than
private school teachers to be victimized by
students in school in 1993-94 (figure 11.1 and
table 11.1). Almost 13 percent of public school
teachers had been threatened with injury by
students, compared with 4 percent of private
school teachers, and 4 percent of public school
teachers had been physically attacked by
students, compared with 2 percent of private
school teachers. Teachers in public central city
schools were about five times more likely to be
targets of threats of injury and about three
times more likely to be targets of attacks than
their colleagues in private central city
schools.

In 1993-94, secondary school teachers were more
likely than elementary school teachers to have
been threatened with injury by a student from
their school (15 percent versus 9 percent)
(table 11.1). However, elementary school
teachers were more likely than secondary school
teachers to have been physically attacked by a
student (5 percent versus 3 percent). The
prevalence of teacher victimization by students
did not vary according to the racial/ethnic
backgrounds of teachers.

School Environment

12. Prevalence of students carrying weapons on
school property*

The presence of weapons at school can create an
intimidating and threatening atmosphere, making
teaching and learning difficult. The percentages
of students who report that they carry a gun or
other weapon on school property is an indicator
of how widespread the problem of weapons at
school is.

*This indicator repeats information from the
1999 Indicators of School Crime and Safety
report.

In 1997, 18 percent of students reported
carrying a weapon such as a gun, knife, or club
at any time in the past 30 days. About 9 percent
reported they had carried a weapon on school
property in the past 30 days (figures 12.1 and
12.2 and tables 12.1 and 12.2).

Between 1993 and 1997, the percentage of
students in grades 9 through 12 who reported
carrying a weapon on school property at least 1
day within 30 days before the survey fell from
12 percent to 9 percent (a 25 percent reduction)
(figure 12.1 and table 12.1). 

There was also a decline in the percentage of
students in grades 9 through 12 who carried a
weapon at any time during the past 30 days-from
22 percent in 1993 to 18 percent in 1997 (figure
12.2 and table 12.2). 

Males were about three times more likely than
females to carry a weapon on school property.
For example, in 1997, 13 percent of males
carried a weapon on school property, compared
with 4 percent of females (figure 12.1 and table
12.1). 

Students in lower grades were more likely to
have carried a weapon anywhere in the previous
30 days than were students in higher grades
(figure 12.2 and table 12.2). For example, in
1997, 23 percent of 9th graders had carried a
weapon compared with 15 percent of 12th graders.

Generally, students in lower grades were no more
likely to carry a weapon to school than other
students (figure 12.2 and table 12.1). The one
exception to this general trend was in 1995, in
which 12th graders were less likely to carry a
weapon to school than were 10th or 9th grade
students.

13. Students' perceptions of personal safety at
school and when traveling to and from school*

One consequence of school violence is the fear
that it can instill in students. Students who
fear for their own safety may not be able or
ready to learn. Concerns about vulnerability to
attacks by others at school and on the way to
and from school may also have a detrimental
effect on the school environment and learning.

*The 1999 data reported here are new.
Comparisons between the 1989 data and the 1995
and 1999 data should be made with caution due to
changes in the questionnaire. See appendix B for
details.

Between 1995 and 1999, there were decreases in
the percentages of students feeling unsafe while
they were at school and while they were going to
and from school (figures 13.1 and 13.2 and table
13.1). In 1995, 9 percent of students ages 12
through 18 sometimes or most of the time feared
they were going to be attacked or harmed at
school, while in 1999 this percentage fell to 5
percent. Between these years, the percentage of
students fearing they would be attacked while
traveling to and from school fell from 7 percent
to 4 percent.

Between 1995 and 1999, there was a decline in
fear of attacks at school and when traveling to
and from school among all racial/ethnic groups.
However, in both years, larger percentages of
black and Hispanic students than white students
feared such attacks (figures 13.1 and 13.2 and
table 13.1).

In both 1995 and 1999, students in lower grades
were more likely to fear for their safety at
school than were students in higher grades
(table 13.1). For example, in 1999, 9 percent of
students in grade 6 feared for their safety
while at school, compared with 3 percent of
students in grade 12.

Between 1995 and 1999 there was a decline in
fear of attacks at school and to and from school
within almost all grades. However, in both 1995
and 1999, students in lower grades were also
more likely than students in higher grades to
fear being attacked on the way to and from
school (table 13.1).

Between 1995 and 1999 there was a decline in
fear of attacks at school and to and from school
for students in all areas-urban, suburban and
rural. However, in 1999, as in 1995, students in
urban schools were more likely than students in
suburban or rural schools to fear being attacked
at school and when travelling to and from school
(table 13.1).

14. Students' reports of avoiding places in
school*

One consequence of crime in school is that
students begin to perceive specific areas in
school as unsafe. In trying to ensure their own
safety, they begin to avoid these areas. Changes
in the percentage of students avoiding areas in
school may be a good barometer of how safe
schools are?at least in the minds of those who
attend these schools.

*The 1999 data reported here are new.
Comparisons between the 1989 data and the 1995
and 1999 data should be made with caution due to
changes in the questionnaire. See appendix B for
details.

Between 1995 and 1999, there was a decrease in
the percentage of students ages 12 through 18
who avoided one or more places in school-from 9
percent in 1995 to 5 percent in 1999 (figure
14.1 and table 14.1). Despite this decline, this
percentage still represented 1.1 million
students in 1999 who reported avoiding some
areas in school out of fear for their own
safety.

The percentage of students of all racial/ethnic
groups avoiding specific areas in school fell
between 1995 and 1999 (figure 14.1 and table
14.1). In both 1995 and 1999, black and Hispanic
students were more likely to avoid areas in
school than were white students.

Between 1995 and 1999, there was a decrease in
the percentage of students reporting avoiding
areas in school among students of almost all
grade levels (table 14.1). However, in both
years, students in lower grades were more likely
than students in higher grades to report
avoiding areas in school.

While in 1995, students in urban areas were more
likely than suburban students to avoid areas in
school (12 percent versus 8 percent,
respectively), by 1999 urban and suburban
students were equally as likely to avoid areas
in school (figure 14.2 and table 14.1).

15. Students' reports of being called
hate-related words and seeing hate-related
graffiti*

A student's exposure to hate-related words or
symbols at school can increase his or her
feeling of vulnerability. An environment in
which students are confronted with
discriminatory behavior is not conducive to
learning and creates a climate of hostility.

*This is a new indicator.

In 1999, about 13 percent of students ages 12
through 18 reported that someone at school had
used hate-related words against them (figure
15.1 and table 15.1). That is, in the prior 6
months someone at school called them a
derogatory word having to do with
race/ethnicity, religion, disability, gender, or
sexual orientation. In addition, about 36
percent of students saw hate-related graffiti at
school.

There was very little variation in these
percentages based on the location of the
students' households (table 15.1). Students in
urban, suburban, and rural households were
equally as likely to report being called
hate-related words and to see hate-related
graffiti.

Females were more likely than males to report
being targets of derogatory words and were also
more likely to report seeing hate-related
graffiti at their school (figure 15.1 and table
15.1). About 14 percent of females reported
being called hate words in 1999, compared with
12 percent of males. About 39 percent of females
had seen hate-related graffiti, compared with 34
percent of males.

Black students were more likely than white or
Hispanic students to report being called hate
words (table 15.1). About 17 percent of black
students ages 12 through 18 reported being
targets of derogatory words, compared with 13
percent of white students and 12 percent of
Hispanic students. Students of all racial/ethnic
groups were equally likely to report
hate-related graffiti at school.

16. Students' reports of gangs at school*

Street gangs are organized groups that are often
involved in drugs, weapons trafficking, and
violence. The presence of street gangs in school
can be very disruptive to the school
environment. Street gangs may not only create
fear among students but also increase the level
of violence in school. The percentage of
students who report the presence of street gangs
in their schools indicates the existence and
severity of the gang problem in schools.

*The 1999 data reported here are new.
Comparisons between the 1989 data and the 1995
and 1999 data should be made with caution due to
changes in the questionnaire. See appendix B for
details.

Between 1995 and 1999, the percentage of
students who reported that street gangs were
present at their schools decreased (figure 16.1
and table 16.1). In 1995, 29 percent of students
reported street gangs being present in their
schools. By 1999, this percentage had fallen to
17 percent.

Gangs were more likely to be reported in public
schools than in private schools (figure 16.1 and
table 16.1). In 1999, 19 percent of students in
public schools reported that street gangs were
present in their schools, compared with 4
percent in private schools. A similar pattern of
results was reported in 1995. However, between
these two years, the percentage of public school
students reporting that gangs were present in
their schools decreased by about 40 percent
(from 31 percent in 1995 to 19 percent in 1999)
as did the percentage of private school students
reporting gang presence (from 7 percent to 4
percent).

In 1999, urban students were more likely to
report that there were street gangs at their
schools (25 percent) than were suburban and
rural students (16 percent and 11 percent,
respectively) (figure 16.2 and table 16.1).
Between 1995 and 1999, reports of gang presence
decreased regardless of students' place of
residence.

In both years, Hispanic and black students were
more likely than white students to report the
existence of street gangs in their schools. In
1995, Hispanic students were more likely than
black students to do so (figure 16.3 and table
16.1), while in 1999 they were equally as
likely. Between 1995 and 1999, reports of gang
presence decreased for whites, blacks,
Hispanics, and students of other
race/ethnicities.

17. Public school principals' reports of
discipline problems at school*

Discipline problems in a school may contribute
to an overall climate in which violence may
occur. Schools that suffer from student drug or
alcohol use, racial tensions, or verbal and
physical abuse of teachers may be filled with
pressures that result in school violence.

*This indicator repeats information from the
1999 Indicators of School Crime and Safety
report.

During the 1996-97 school year, 16 percent of
all public school principals reported that one
or more discipline issues had been a serious
problem in their school (figure 17.1 and table
17.1). About the same percentage of principals
in city, urban fringe, town, and rural settings
reported one or more serious discipline
problems.

Public elementary schools were the least likely
to report any serious discipline issues,
followed by middle schools and then high schools
(figure 17.1 and table 17.1). About 8 percent of
elementary school principals reported one or
more of these issues as a serious problem, while
18 percent of principals in middle schools and
37 percent of those in high schools did so.

While overall there were no significant
differences in reported serious problems by
urbanicity, a greater percentage of principals
in public city high schools than in rural high
schools reported having serious discipline
problems?47 percent compared with 28 percent
(figure 17.1 and table 17.1).

18. Prevalence of students using alcohol*

The consumption of alcohol by students on school
property, a crime in itself, may also lead to
other crimes and misbehavior. It can lead to a
school environment that is harmful to students,
teachers, and staff.

*This indicator repeats information from the
1999 Indicators of School Crime and Safety
report.

In 1997, 51 percent of students in grades 9
through 12 had at least one drink of alcohol in
the 30 days before being surveyed (figure 18.1
and table 18.1). A much smaller percentage (6
percent) had at least one drink on school
property during the same period. 

Approximately the same percentage of students
had drunk alcohol in 1997 as in 1993 and
1995-both in general and on school property. 

Males were more likely than females to have used
alcohol in 1993 and 1997 (figure 18.1 and table
18.1). Furthermore, males were more likely than
females to use alcohol on school property. For
example, in 1997, 7 percent of males had used
alcohol on school property compared with 4
percent of females.

Of 9th through 12th graders, in every survey
year, students in higher grades were more likely
to report drinking alcohol anywhere than were
students in lower grades (figure 18.2 and table
18.1). However, there were no differences by
grade among students who said they had drunk
alcohol on school property during 1993, 1995, or
1997.

19. Prevalence of students using marijuana*

The use of other drugs such as marijuana on
school property may also cause disruptions in
the learning environment. The consumption of
these substances leads to a school environment
that is harmful to students, teachers, and
school administrators.

*This indicator repeats information from the
1999 Indicators of School Crime and Safety
report.

Between 1993 and 1997, 6 to 9 percent of
students in grades 9 through 12 reported using
marijuana on school property during the last 30
days. About 18 to 26 percent reported using
marijuana anywhere during the last 30 days
(figure 19.1 and table 19.1).

There was an increase in the use of marijuana
among students between 1993 and 1995. In 1995,
about 25 percent of all students in grades 9
through 12 had used marijuana in the last 30
days, compared with 18 percent in 1993 (figure
19.1 and table 19.1). Marijuana use in 1997, at
26 percent, was similar to that in 1995.
However, marijuana use on school property did
not increase significantly between 1993 and
1995, or between 1995 and 1997. 

Males were more likely than females to have used
marijuana in every survey year (figure 19.1 and
table 19.1), both in general and on school
property. 

Both males and females increased their overall
use of marijuana from 1993 to 1997 (figure 19.1
and table 19.1). The percentage of males who
reported using marijuana in the 30 days before
the survey increased from 21 percent in 1993 to
30 percent in 1997. The percentage of females
increased from 15 percent to 21 percent. 

Students' grade in school was not associated
with their use of marijuana on school property
(figure 19.2 and table 19.1). However, in 1993
and 1995, students in lower grades were less
likely than students in higher grades to report
using marijuana at any time during the last 30
days. In 1997, this difference by grade was not
apparent, with students in lower grades about as
likely to report using marijuana as students in
higher grades. This pattern occurred because the
overall use of marijuana in 9th, 10th, and 11th
grades increased from 1993 to 1997, while its
use by 12th graders remained relatively
constant. 

20. Prevalence of students reporting drugs were
made available to them on school property*

Schools can be places where young people are
offered or can purchase illegal drugs. The
availability of drugs on school property is a
disruptive and corrupting influence in the
school environment.

*This indicator repeats information from the
1999 Indicators of School Crime and Safety
report.

In 1995 and 1997, almost one-third of all
students in grades 9 through 12 (32 percent)
reported that someone had offered, sold, or
given them an illegal drug on school property
(figure 20.1 and table 20.1). This was an
increase from 1993 when 24 percent of such
students reported that illegal drugs were
available to them on school property. 

The percentages of both males and females
reporting that illegal drugs were made available
to them on school property increased between
1993 and 1995. However, in each survey year,
males were more likely than females to report
that drugs were offered, sold, or given to them
on school property. For example, in 1997, 37
percent of males reported the availability of
drugs, while 25 percent of females did so. 

Students' grade level in school did not appear
to be associated with whether they had been
offered, sold, or given drugs on school property
(figure 20.2 and table 20.1). Generally, in each
survey year, about the same percentage of
students in each grade level reported the
availability of illegal drugs.

The racial/ethnic background of students was
associated with whether they reported having
illegal drugs offered, sold, or given to them on
school property (figure 20.3 and table 20.1). In
general, Hispanics were more likely than
students from other racial/ethnic groups to
report having drugs available to them on school
property.

Supplemental Tables

Standard Error Tables may be obtained by
contacting ASK_BJS@ojp.usdoj.gov


APPENDIX A. SCHOOL PRACTICES AND POLICIES
RELATED TO SAFETY AND DISCIPLINE*

*This appendix repeats information from the 1999
Indicators of School Crime and Safety report.

Concern over school crime and violence has
prompted many public schools to take various
measures to reduce and prevent violence and
ensure safety in schools. Such measures include
adopting zero tolerance policies; requiring
students to wear uniforms; employing various
security measures such as requiring visitor
sign-in and using metal detectors; having police
or other law enforcement representatives
stationed at the school; and offering students
various types of violence prevention programs.
Presented in this appendix are data on the
implementation of such safety measures in public
schools. This report does not evaluate the
effectiveness of any of these efforts or
strategies, and the inclusion of a strategy does
not suggest that it is endorsed by the National
Center for Education Statistics (NCES) or the
Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS) as an
effective means of reducing or preventing
violence. Likewise, the omission of a possible
strategy does not suggest it is rejected by NCES
or BJS as a policy to reduce or prevent
violence. This information, along with
supporting tables, was drawn from a recent NCES
report titled Violence and Discipline Problems
in U.S. Public Schools: 1996-97 (NCES 98-030).
The report was based on data from the 1996-97
Fast Response Survey System (FRSS)
Principal/School Disciplinarian Survey on School
Violence. Readers should consult that report for
more detailed findings on variation by school
characteristics.


Zero Tolerance Policies

Most public schools reported having zero
tolerance policies toward serious student
offenses (table A1). A "zero tolerance policy"
was defined as a school or district policy that
mandates predetermined consequences or
punishments for specific offenses. At least 9
out of 10 schools reported zero tolerance
policies for firearms (94 percent) and weapons
other than firearms (91 percent). Eighty-seven
percent of schools had policies of zero
tolerance for alcohol and 88 percent had zero
tolerance policies for drugs. Most schools also
had zero tolerance policies for violence and
tobacco (79 percent each).


School Uniforms

Requiring students to wear school uniforms was
not common. Three percent of all public schools
required students to wear uniforms during the
1996-97 school year (table A2). 


Security Measures

Schools took a number of measures to secure
their schools. For example, 96 percent of public
schools reported that visitors were required to
sign in before entering the school building
(table A3); 80 percent of public schools
reported having a closed campus policy that
prohibited most students from leaving the campus
for lunch; 53 percent of public schools
controlled access to their school building; and
24 percent of public schools controlled access
to their school grounds. In addition, 19 percent
of public schools reported conducting drug
sweeps, with middle schools and high schools
being more likely to use drug sweeps than
elementary schools (36 and 45 percent,
respectively, versus 5 percent). While 4 percent
of public schools reported that they performed
random metal detector checks on students, daily
use of metal detectors as a security measure was
not common: only 1 percent of public schools
reported taking this measure.


Presence of Police or Other Law Enforcement
Representatives in Schools

In addition to the security measures described
above, 6 percent of public schools reported
having police or other law enforcement
representatives stationed 30 hours or more at
the school in a typical week during the 1996-97
school year; 1 percent of schools had them
stationed from 10 to 29 hours; and 3 percent had
them stationed from 1 to 9 hours. Twelve percent
of schools did not have police or other law
enforcement representatives stationed during a
typical week but made them available as needed,
and 78 percent of schools did not have any such
persons stationed at their schools (table A4).


Violence Prevention or Reduction Programs

A majority of public schools (78 percent)
reported having some type of formal school
violence prevention or reduction program (table
A5). The percentage of schools with both 1-day
and ongoing programs (43 percent) was higher
than schools with only ongoing programs (24
percent) and schools with only 1-day programs
(11 percent).


Policies to Prevent Firearms in School

In the 1996-97 school year, there were over
5,000 student expulsions for possession or use
of a firearm (table A6). An additional 3,300
students were transferred to alternative schools
for possession or use of a firearm, while 8,144
were placed in out-of-school suspensions lasting
5 or more days. About 5 percent of all public
schools (or 4,170) took one or more of these
actions.


APPENDIX B. TECHNICAL NOTES

General Information

The information presented in this report was
obtained from many data sources, including
databases from the National Center for Education
Statistics (NCES), the Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention (CDC), and the Bureau of
Justice Statistics (BJS). While some of the data
were collected from universe surveys, most were
gathered by sample surveys. Some questions from
different surveys may appear the same, but they
were actually asked of different populations of
students (e.g., high school seniors or students
in grades 9 through 12); in different years;
about experiences that occurred within different
periods of time (e.g., in the past 4 weeks or
during the past 12 months); and at different
locations (e.g., in school or at home). Readers
of this report should take particular care when
comparing data from the different data sources.
Because of the variation in collection
procedures, timing, phrasing of questions, and
so forth, the results from the different sources
may not be strictly comparable. After
introducing the data sources used for this
report, the next section discusses the accuracy
of estimates and describes the statistical
procedures used.


Sources of Data

Table B1 presents some key information for each
of the data sets used in the report, including
the survey year, target population, response
rates, and sample sizes. The remainder of the
section briefly describes each data set and
provides directions for obtaining more
information. The exact wording of the interview
questions used to construct the indicators are
presented in table B2.


Schools and Staffing Survey (SASS)

This report draws upon data on teacher
victimization from the 1993-94 Schools and
Staffing Survey (SASS:93-94), which provides
national- and state-level data on public and
private schools, principals, school districts,
and teachers. The 1993-94 survey was the third
in a series of cross-sectional, school-focused
surveys, following ones conducted in 1990-91 and
1987-88. It consisted of four sets of linked
questionnaires, including surveys of schools,
the principals of each selected school, a
subsample of teachers within each school, and
public school districts. Data were collected by
multistage sampling. Stratified by state,
control, type, association membership, and grade
level (for private schools), schools were
sampled first. Approximately 9,900 public
schools and 3,300 private schools were selected
to participate in the 1993-94 SASS. Within each
school, teachers were further stratified into
one of five teacher types in the following
hierarchy: 1) Asian or Pacific Islander; 2)
American Indian, Aleut, or Eskimo; 3)
bilingual/ESL; 4) new teachers (those with 1 to
3 years of experience); and 5) experienced
teachers (those with more than 3 years of
experience). Within each teacher stratum,
teachers were selected systematically with equal
probability. Approximately 56,700 public school
teachers and 11,500 private school teachers were
sampled.

This report focuses on teachers' responses. The
overall weighted response rates were 84 percent
for public school teachers and 73 percent for
private school teachers. In the Public School
Teacher Questionnaire, 91 percent of the items
had a response rate of 90 percent or more, and
in the Private School Teacher Questionnaire, 89
percent of the items had this level of response.
Values were imputed for questionnaire items that
should have been answered but were not. For
additional information about SASS, refer to R.
Abramson, C. Cole, S. Fondelier, B. Jackson, R.
Parmer, and S. Kaufman, 1996, 1993-94 Schools
and Staffing Survey: Sample Design and
Estimation (NCES 96-089), or contact:

Kerry Gruber
National Center for Education Statistics
1990 K Street NW
Washington, DC 20006
Telephone: (202) 502-7349
E-mail: Kerry_Gruber@ed.gov 


National School-Based Youth Risk Behavior Survey
(YRBS)

The National School-Based Youth Risk Behavior
Survey (YRBS) is one component of the Youth Risk
Behavior Surveillance System (YRBSS), an
epidemiological surveillance system that was
developed by the Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention (CDC) to monitor the prevalence of
youth behaviors that most influence health. The
YRBS focuses on priority health-risk behaviors
established during youth that result in the most
significant mortality, morbidity, disability,
and social problems during both youth and
adulthood. This report uses 1993, 1995, and 1997
YRBS data.

The YRBS used a three-stage cluster sampling
design to produce a nationally representative
sample of students in grades 9 through 12 in the
United States. The target population consisted
of all public and private school students in
grades 9 through 12 in the 50 states and the
District of Columbia. The first-stage sampling
frame included selecting primary sampling units
(PSUs) from strata formed on the basis of
urbanization and the relative percentage of
black and Hispanic students in the PSU. These
PSUs are either large counties or groups of
smaller, adjacent counties. At the second stage,
schools were selected with probability
proportional to school enrollment size. Schools
with substantial numbers of black and Hispanic
students were sampled at relatively higher rates
than all other schools. The final stage of
sampling consisted of randomly selecting within
each chosen school at each grade 9 through 12
one or two intact classes of a required subject,
such as English or social studies. All students
in selected classes were eligible to
participate. Approximately 16,300, 10,900, and
16,300 students were selected to participate in
the 1993 survey, the1995 survey, and the 1997
survey, respectively.

The overall response rate was 70 percent for the
1993 survey, 60 percent for the 1995 survey, and
69 percent for the 1997 survey. NCES standards
call for response rates of 70 percent or better
and bias analyses are called for by NCES when
that percentage is not achieved. For the YRBS
data, a full nonresponse bias analysis has not
been done to date. The weights were developed to
adjust for nonresponse and the oversampling of
black and Hispanic students in the sample. The
final weights were normalized so that only
weighted proportions of students (not weighted
counts of students) in each grade matched
national population projections. For additional
information about the YRBS, contact:

Laura Kann
Division of Adolescent and School Health
National Center for Chronic Disease Prevention
and Health Promotion
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention,
Mailstop K-33
4770 Buford Highway NE
Atlanta, Georgia 30341
Telephone: (404) 488-5330
E-mail: lkk1@cdc.gov


Fast Response Survey System: Principal/School
Disciplinarian Survey on School Violence

The Principal/School Disciplinarian Survey was
conducted through the NCES Fast Response Survey
System (FRSS) during the spring and summer of
1997. The FRSS is a survey system designed to
collect small amounts of issue-oriented data
with minimal burden on respondents and within a
relatively short time frame. The FRSS
Principal/School Disciplinarian Survey focused
on incidents of specific crimes/offenses and a
variety of specific discipline issues in public
schools. The survey was conducted with a
nationally representative sample of regular
public elementary, middle, and high schools in
the 50 states and the District of Columbia.
Special education, alternative and vocational
schools, schools in the territories, and schools
that taught only prekindergarten, kindergarten,
or adult education were not included in the
sample.

The sample of public schools was selected from
the 1993-94 NCES Common Core of Data (CCD)
Public School Universe File. The sample was
stratified by instructional level, locale, and
school size. Within the primary strata, schools
were also sorted by geographic region and by
percent minority enrollment. The sample sizes
were then allocated to the primary strata in
rough proportion to the aggregate square root of
the size of enrollment of schools in the
stratum. A total of 1,415 schools were selected.
Among them, 11 schools were found no longer to
be in existence, and 1,234 schools completed the
survey. In April 1997, questionnaires were
mailed to school principals, who were asked to
complete the survey or to have it completed by
the person most knowledgeable about discipline
issues at the school. The raw response rate was
88 percent (1,234 schools divided by the 1,404
eligible schools in the sample). The weighted
overall response rate was 89 percent, and item
nonresponse rates ranged from 0 percent to 0.9
percent. The weights were developed to adjust
for the variable probabilities of selection and
differential nonresponse and can be used to
produce national estimates for regular public
schools in the 1996-97 school year. For more
information about the FRSS: Principal/School
Disciplinarian Survey on School Violence,
contact:

Shelley Burns
National Center for Education Statistics
1990 K Street NW
Washington, DC 20006
Telephone: (202) 502-7319
E-mail: Shelley_Burns@ed.gov


National Crime Victimization Survey (NCVS)

The National Crime Victimization Survey (NCVS),
administered for the U.S. Bureau of Justice
Statistics by the Bureau of the Census, is the
nation's primary source of information on crime
victimization and the victims of crime.
Initiated in 1972 and redesigned in 1992, the
NCVS collects detailed information on the
frequency and nature of the crimes of rape,
sexual assault, robbery, aggravated and simple
assault, theft, household burglary, and motor
vehicle theft experienced by Americans and their
households each year. The survey measures crimes
reported as well as those not reported to
police.

The NCVS sample consists of about 55,000
households selected using a stratified,
multi-stage cluster design. In the first stage,
the primary sampling units (PSUs), consisting of
counties or groups of counties, are selected. In
the second stage, smaller areas, called
Enumeration Districts (EDs), were selected from
each sampled PSU. Finally, from selected EDs,
clusters of four households, called segments,
were selected for interview. At each stage, the
selection was done proportionate to population
size in order to create a self-weighting sample.
The final sample was augmented to account for
housing units constructed after the decennial
Census. Within each sampled household, Census
Bureau personnel interviewed all household
members ages 12 and older to determine whether
they had been victimized by the measured crimes
during the 6 months preceding the interview.
About 90,000 persons ages 12 and older are
interviewed each 6 months. Households remain in
sample for 3 years and are interviewed 7 times
at 6-month intervals. The initial interview at
each sample unit is used only to bound future
interviews to establish a time frame to avoid
duplication of crimes uncovered in these
subsequent interviews. After their seventh
interview, households are replaced by new sample
households. The NCVS has consistently obtained a
response rate of about 95 percent at the
household level. During the study period, the
completion rates for persons within households
were about 91 percent. Thus, final response
rates were about 86 percent. Weights were
developed to permit estimates for the total U.S.
population 12 years and older. For more
information about the NCVS, contact:

Michael Planty
Victimization Statistics
U.S. Bureau of Justice Statistics
810 7th Street NW
Washington, DC 20531
Telephone: (202) 514-3214
E-mail: Michael.Planty@usdoj.gov
Internet: www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/


School Crime Supplement (SCS)

Created as a supplement to the NCVS and
co-designed by the National Center for Education
Statistics and Bureau of Justice Statistics, the
School Crime Supplement (SCS) survey was
conducted in 1989, 1995, and 1999 to collect
additional information about school-related
victimizations on a national level. The survey
was designed to assist policymakers as well as
academic researchers and practitioners at the
federal, state, and local levels so that they
can make informed decisions concerning crime in
schools. The SCS asks students a number of key
questions about their experiences with and
perceptions of crime and violence that occurred
inside their school, on school grounds, or on
the way to or from school. Additional questions
not included in the NCVS were also added to the
SCS, such as those concerning preventive
measures used by the school, students'
participation in afterschool activities,
students' perceptions of school rules, the
presence of weapons and street gangs in school,
the presence of hate-related words and graffiti
in school, student reports of bullying at
school, and the availability of drugs and
alcohol in school, as well as attitudinal
questions relating to fear of victimization and
avoidance behavior in school.

In 1989, 1995, and 1999, the SCS was conducted
for a 6-month period from January through June
in all households selected for the NCVS (see
discussion above for information about the
sampling design). It should be noted that the
initial interview is included in the SCS data
analysis. Within these households, the eligible
respondents for the SCS were those household
members who had attended school at any time
during the 6 months preceding the interview, and
were enrolled in grades 6 through 12 in a school
that would help them advance toward eventually
receiving a high school diploma. Eligible
respondents were asked the supplemental
questions in the SCS only after completing their
entire NCVS interview. For the 1989 and the 1995
SCS, 19-year-old household members also were
considered eligible for the SCS interview. This
upper age range was lowered to 18 for
eligibility in the 1999 SCS because it was
determined that most 19-year-olds did not meet
the other eligibility requirement of being
currently enrolled in a secondary school. In
this report, 19-year-olds were excluded from the
analysis of the 1995 data in order to meet the
eligibility requirements and to allow for
comparisons to the 1999 SCS. However, the
19-year-olds were not dropped from the analysis
of the 1989 data. 

Comparisons between the 1989 data and the 1995
and 1999 data should be made with caution due to
the redesign of the NCVS in 1992. A new
victimization screening procedure, put in place
in 1992, was meant to elicit a more complete
tally of victimization incidents than did the
one used in prior NCVS collections. Therefore,
NCVS item-based cross-year changes in reported
victimization rates, or lack thereof, may only
be the result of changes in how the questions
were asked and not of actual changes in the
incidence of victimization. Because NCVS
questionnaires were completed before students
were given the SCS, it is likely that these
changes to the NCVS victimization screening
procedures differentially affected responses to
the 1989 and 1995 SCS victimization items. Other
items in this report, such as fear at school,
avoidance of places at school, and reports of
gangs at school, followed the victimization
items on the SCS survey. 

Unlike prior Indicators reports, the prevalence
of victimization for 1995 and 1999 was
calculated by using NCVS incident variables
appended to the 1995 and 1999 SCS data files.
The NCVS type of crime variable was used to
classify victimizations of students in the SCS
as serious violent, violent, or theft. The NCVS
variables asking where the incident happened and
what the victim was doing when it happened were
used to ascertain whether the incident happened
at school. For prevalence of victimization, the
NCVS definition of at school includes in the
school building, on school property, or on the
way to or from school. 

Total victimization is a combination of violent
victimization and theft. If the student reported
an incident of either, he or she is counted as
having experienced "total" victimization. If the
student reported having experienced both, he or
she is counted once under "total victimization."
Serious violent crimes include rape, sexual
assault, robbery, and aggravated assault.
Violent crimes include serious violent crimes
and simple assault. A total of 10,449 students
participated in the 1989 SCS, 9,728 in the 1995
SCS and 8,398 in 1999. In the 1999 SCS, the
household completion rate was 94 percent. In the
1989 and 1995 SCS, the household completion
rates were 97 percent and 95 percent,
respectively, and the student completion rates
were 86 percent and 78 percent, respectively.
For the 1999 SCS, the student completion rate
was 78 percent. Thus, the overall SCS response
rate (calculated by multiplying the household
completion rate by the student completion rate)
was 84 percent in 1989, 74 percent in 1995 and
73 percent in 1999. Response rates for most
survey items were high-mostly over 95 percent of
all eligible respondents. The weights were
developed to compensate for differential
probabilities of selection and nonresponse. The
weighted data permit inferences about the
eligible student population who were enrolled in
schools in 1989, 1995 and 1999. For more
information about SCS, contact:

Kathryn A. Chandler
National Center for Education Statistics
1990 K Street NW
Washington, DC 20006
Telephone: (202) 502-7326
E-mail: Kathryn_Chandler@ed.gov 


School Associated Violent Death Study (SAVD)

The School Associated Violent Death Study (SAVD)
is an epidemiological study developed by the
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention in
conjunction with the U.S. Department of
Education and the U.S. Department of Justice.
SAVD seeks to describe the epidemiology of
school-associated violent deaths, identify
common features of these deaths, estimate the
rate of school-associated violent death in the
United States, and identify potential risk
factors for these deaths. The study includes
descriptive data on all school-associated
violent deaths in the United States including
all homicides, suicides and firearm-related
deaths where the fatal injury occurred on the
campus of a functioning elementary or secondary
school, while the victim was on the way to or
from regular sessions at such a school, or while
attending or on the way to or from an official
school-sponsored event. Victims of such events
include nonstudents as well as students and
staff members. SAVD includes descriptive
information about the school, event, victim(s)
and offender(s). The first SAVD study collected
data for July 1, 1992-June 30, 1994 and the
follow-up study includes July 1, 1994-June 30,
1999. The follow-up study is nearing completion,
and data presented in this report include
preliminary findings for the 1997-1998 school
year. 

SAVD uses a four step process to identify and
collect data on school-associated violent
deaths. Cases were initially identified through
a search of the Lexis/Nexis and Dialog newspaper
and media databases. Then police officials are
contacted to confirm the details of the case to
determine if the event meets the case
definition. Once a case is confirmed, a police
official and a school official are interviewed
in regards to details about the school, event,
victim(s), and offender(s).  If police officials
are unwilling or unable to complete the
interview, a copy of the full police report is
obtained. The information obtained about schools
includes school demographics,
attendance/absentee rates, suspension/expulsions
and mobility, school history of weapon carrying,
security measures, violence prevention
activities, school response to the event and
school policies about weapon carrying. Event
information includes the location of injury, the
context of injury (while classes held, during
break etc.), motives for injury, method of
injury, and school and community events
happening around the time-period. Information
obtained on victim(s) and offender(s) includes
demographics, circumstances of the event
(date/time, alcohol or drug use, number of
persons involved), types and origins of weapons,
criminal history, psychological risk factors,
school related problems, extracurricular
activities, and family history including
structure and stressors.

One-hundred and five school-associated violent
deaths were identified from July 1, 1992-June
30, 1994 (See Kachur et al. June 12, 1996. JAMA.
275:22: 1729-1733). While the current study is
still ongoing, over 250 school-associated
violent deaths have been identified for July 1,
1994-June 30, 1999. The first study achieved a
response rate of 85% for police officials and
81% for school officials. To date, the current
study has achieved 96% for police officials and
79% for school officials. For additional
information about SAVD, contact:

Mark Anderson
Division of Violence Prevention
National Center for Injury Prevention and
Control
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention,
Mailstop K60
4770 Buford Highway NE
Atlanta, GA 30341
Telephone: (404) 488-4762
E-mail: mea6@cdc.gov


Accuracy of Estimates

The accuracy of any statistic is determined by
the joint effects of "nonsampling" and
"sampling" errors. Both types of error affect
the estimates presented in this report. Several
sources can contribute to nonsampling errors.
For example, members of the population of
interest are inadvertently excluded from the
sampling frame; sampled members refuse to answer
some of the survey questions (item nonresponse)
or all of the survey questions (questionnaire
nonresponse); mistakes are made during data
editing, coding, or entry; the responses that
respondents provide differ from the "true"
responses; or measurement instruments such as
tests or questionnaires fail to measure the
characteristics they are intended to measure.
Although nonsampling errors due to questionnaire
and item nonresponse can be reduced somewhat by
the adjustment of sample weights and imputation
procedures, correcting nonsampling errors or
gauging the effects of these errors is usually
difficult.

Sampling errors occur because observations are
made on samples rather than on entire
populations. Surveys of population universes are
not subject to sampling errors. Estimates based
on a sample will differ somewhat from those that
would have been obtained by a complete census of
the relevant population using the same survey
instruments, instructions, and procedures. The
standard error of a statistic is a measure of
the variation due to sampling; it indicates the
precision of the statistic obtained in a
particular sample. In addition, the standard
errors for two sample statistics can be used to
estimate the precision of the difference between
the two statistics and to help determine whether
the difference based on the sample is large
enough so that it represents the population
difference.

Most of the data used in this report were
obtained from complex sampling designs rather
than a simple random design. In these sampling
designs, data were collected through
stratification, clustering, unequal selection
probabilities, or multistage sampling. These
features of the sampling usually result in
estimated statistics that are more variable
(that is, have larger standard errors) than they
would have been if they had been based on data
from a simple random sample of the same size.
Therefore, calculation of standard errors
requires procedures that are markedly different
from the ones used when the data are from a
simple random sample. The Taylor series
approximation technique or the balanced repeated
replication (BRR) method was used to estimate
most of the statistics and their standard errors
in this report. Table B3 lists the various
methods used to compute standard errors for
different data sets.

Standard error calculation for data from the
National Crime Victimization Survey and the
School Crime Supplement relied on a combination
of procedures. For statistics based on the 1995
and 1999 SCS data, the Taylor series
approximation method using PSU and strata
variables available from the data set was
employed. For statistics based on all years of
NCVS data and the 1989 SCS data, standard errors
were derived from a formula developed by the
Census Bureau, which consists of three
generalized variance function (gvf) constant
parameters that represent the curve fitted to
the individual standard errors calculated using
the Jackknife Repeated Replication technique.
The formulas used to compute the adjusted
standard errors associated with percentages or
population counts can be found in table B3. 


Statistical Procedures

The comparisons in the text have been tested for
statistical significance to ensure that the
differences are larger than might be expected
due to sampling variations. Unless otherwise
noted, all statements cited in the report are
statistically significant at the .05 level.
Several test procedures were used, depending
upon the type of data being analyzed and the
nature of the statement being tested. The
primary test procedure used in this report was
the Student's t statistic, which tests the
difference between two sample estimates, for
example, between males and females. The formula
used to compute the t statistic is as follows:

(1)

where E1 and E2 are the estimates to be compared
and se1 and se2 are their corresponding standard
errors. Note that this formula is valid only for
independent estimates. When the estimates are
not independent (for example, when comparing a
total percentage with that for a subgroup
included in the total), a covariance term (i.e.,
2*se1*se2) must be added to the denominator of
the formula:

(2)

Once the t value was computed, it was compared
with the published tables of values at certain
critical levels, called alpha levels. For this
report, an alpha value of 0.05 was used, which
has a t value of 1.96. If the t value was larger
than 1.96, then the difference between the two
estimates was statistically significant at the
95 percent level. 

When multiple comparisons among more than two
groups were made, for example, among
racial/ethnic groups, a Bonferroni adjustment to
the significance level was used to ensure that
the significance level for the tests as a group
was at the .05 level. Generally, when multiple
statistical comparisons are made, it becomes
increasingly likely that an indication of a
population difference is erroneous. Even when
there is no difference in the population, at an
alpha of .05, there is still a 5 percent chance
of concluding that an observed t value
representing one comparison in the sample is
large enough to be statistically significant. As
the number of comparisons increase, the risk of
making such an erroneous inference also
increases. The Bonferroni procedure corrects the
significance (or alpha) level for the total
number of comparisons made within a particular
classification variable. For each classification
variable, there are (K*(K-1)/2) possible
comparisons (or nonredundant pairwise
combinations), where K is the number of
categories. The Bonferroni procedure divides the
alpha level for a single t test by the number of
possible pairwise comparisons in order to
produce a new alpha level that is corrected for
the fact that multiple contrasts are being made.
As a result, the t value for a certain alpha
level (e.g., .05) increases, which makes it more
difficult to claim that the difference observed
is statistically significant.

Finally, a linear trend test was used when a
statement describing a linear trend, rather than
the differences between two discrete categories,
was made. This test allows one to examine
whether, for example, the percentage of students
using drugs increased (or decreased) over time
or whether the percentage of students who
reported being physically attacked in school
increased (or decreased) with their age. Based
on a regression with, for example, student's age
as the independent variable and whether a
student was physically attacked as the dependent
variable, the test involves computing the
regression coefficient (b) and its corresponding
standard error (se). The ratio of these two
(b/se) is the test statistic t. If t is greater
than 1.96, the critical value for one comparison
at the .05 alpha level, the hypothesis that
there is a linear relationship between student's
age and being physically attacked is not
rejected. 


APPENDIX C. GLOSSARY OF TERMS

General Terms

Cluster sampling - Cluster sampling is a
technique in which the sampling of respondents
or subjects occurs within clusters or groups.
For example, selecting students by sampling
schools and the students that attend that
school. 

Crime - Any violation of a statute or regulation
or any act that the government has determined is
injurious to the public, including felonies and
misdemeanors. Such violation may or may not
involve violence, and it may affect individuals
or property.

Incident - A specific criminal act or offense
involving one or more victims and one or more
offenders.

Multi-stage sampling - A survey sampling
technique in which there is more than one wave
of sampling. That is, one sample of units is
drawn, and then another sample is drawn within
that sample. For example, at the first stage, a
number of Census blocks may be sampled out of
all the Census blocks in the United States. At
the second stage, households are sampled within
the previously sampled Census blocks. 

Prevalence - The percentage of the population
directly affected by crime in a given period.
This rate is based upon specific information
elicited directly from the respondent regarding
crimes committed against his or her person,
against his or her property, or against an
individual bearing a unique relationship to him
or her. It is not based upon perceptions and
beliefs about, or reactions to, criminal acts.

School - An education institution consisting of
one or more of grades K through 12.

School crime - Any criminal activity that is
committed on school property.

School year - The 12-month period of time
denoting the beginning and ending dates for
school accounting purposes, usually from July 1
through June 30.

Stratification - Stratification is a survey
sampling technique in which the target
population is divided into mutually exclusive
groups or strata based on some variable or
variables (e.g. metropolitan area) and sampling
of units occurs separately within each stratum. 

Unequal probabilities - A survey sampling
technique in which sampled units do not have the
same probability of selection into the sample.
For example, the investigator may over-sample
minority students in order to increase the
sample sizes of minority students. Minority
students would then be more likely than
non-minority students to be sampled. 

Specific Terms Used in Various Surveys

National Crime Victimization Survey

At school (students) - Inside the school
building, on school property (school parking
area, play area, school bus, etc.), or on the
way to or from school.

At school (teachers) - Inside the school
building, on school property (school parking
area, play area, school bus, etc.), at work
site, or while working.  For thefts, "while
working" was not considered, since thefts of
teachers' property kept at school can occur when
teachers are not present.

Aggravated assault - Attack or attempted attack
with a weapon, regardless of whether or not an
injury occurs, and attack without a weapon when
serious injury results.

Rape - Forced sexual intercourse including both
psychological coercion as well as physical
force. Forced sexual intercourse means vaginal,
anal, or oral penetration by the offender(s).
This category also includes incidents where the
penetration is from a foreign object such as a
bottle.

Robbery - Completed or attempted theft, directly
from a person, of property or cash by force or
threat of force, with or without a weapon, and
with or without injury.

Rural - A place not located inside the
Metropolitan Statistical Area (MSA). This
category includes a variety of localities,
ranging from sparsely populated rural areas to
cities with populations of less than 50,000.

Serious violent crime - Rape, sexual assault,
robbery, or aggravated assault.

Sexual assault - A wide range of victimizations,
separate from rape or attempted rape. These
crimes include attacks or attempted attacks
generally involving unwanted sexual contact
between the victim and offender. Sexual assault
may or may not involve force and includes such
things as grabbing or fondling. Sexual assault
also includes verbal threats.

Simple assault - Attack without a weapon
resulting either in no injury, minor injury, or
in undetermined injury requiring less than 2
days of hospitalization. Also includes attempted
assault without a weapon.

Suburban - A county or counties containing a
central city, plus any contiguous counties that
are linked socially and economically to the
central city. On the data tables, suburban areas
are categorized as those portions of
metropolitan areas situated "outside central
cities."

Theft - Completed or attempted theft of property
or cash without personal contact.

Victimization - A crime as it affects one
individual person or household. For personal
crimes, the number of victimizations is equal to
the number of victims involved. The number of
victimizations may be greater than the number of
incidents because more than one person may be
victimized during an incident.

Victimization rate - A measure of the occurrence
of victimizations among a specific population
group.

Violent crime - Rape, sexual assault, robbery,
or assault.

Urban - The largest city (or grouping of cities)
in an MSA.

School Crime Supplement

At school - In the school building, on the
school grounds, or on a school bus.

Any victimization - Combination of violent and
property victimization.  If a student reported
an incident of either, he or she is counted as
having experienced any victimization.  If the
student reported having experienced both, he or
she is counted once under "any victimization."

Property victimization - Theft of property from
a student's desk, locker, or other locations at
school.

Violent victimization - Physical attacks or
taking property from the student directly by
force, weapons, or threats.

Youth Risk Behavior Survey

On school property - On school property is
included in the question wording but was not
defined for respondents.

Weapon    Any instrument or object used with
the intent to threaten, injure, or kill.
Examples of weapons appearing in the
questionnaire include guns, knives, and clubs.

Illegal drugs - Examples of illegal drugs were
marijuana, cocaine, inhalants, steroids, or
prescription drugs without a doctor's
permission, LSD, PCP, ecstasy, mushrooms, speed,
ice, and heroin.

FRSS Principal/School Disciplinarian Survey

At school - In school buildings, on school
buses, on school grounds, or at places that hold
school-sponsored events or activities, but are
not officially on school grounds.

Central region - Illinois, Indiana, Iowa,
Kansas, Michigan, Minnesota, Missouri, Nebraska,
North Dakota, Ohio, South Dakota, and Wisconsin.

City - A central city of a Metropolitan
Statistical Area (MSA).

Elementary school - A school that has a low
grade of 3 or less and a high grade of 1 through
8.

Free/reduced-price lunch - The percent of
students enrolled in the school who are eligible
for the federally funded free or reduced-price
lunch program.

High school/combined - A school that has a low
grade of 9 through 12 and a high grade of 10
through 12. Schools that do not precisely meet
these qualifications, and are not elementary and
middle schools, are classified as "combined" and
are included in the analyses with high schools.

Less serious or nonviolent crime - Physical
attack or fight without a weapon, theft or
larceny, or vandalism.

Minority enrollment - The percent of students
enrolled in the school whose race or ethnicity
is classified as one of the following: American
Indian or Alaskan Native, Asian or Pacific
Islander, black, or Hispanic, based on data in
the 1993-94 Common Core of Data (CCD) file.

Middle school - A school that has a low grade of
4 through 9 and a high grade of 4 through 9.

Northeast region - Connecticut, Delaware,
District of Columbia, Maine, Maryland,
Massachusetts, New Hampshire, New Jersey, New
York, Pennsylvania, Rhode Island, and Vermont.

Robbery - The taking or attempting to take
anything of value that is owned by another
person or organization, under confrontational
circumstances by force or threat of force or
violence and/or by putting the victim in fear.

Physical attack or fight - An actual and
intentional touching or striking of another
person against his or her will, or the
intentional causing of bodily harm to an
individual. This category should be used only
when the attack is serious enough to warrant
calling the police or other law enforcement
representative.

Rural - A place with a population less than
2,500 and defined as rural by the U.S. Bureau of
the Census.

School enrollment - Total number of students
enrolled as defined by the 1993-94 CCD.

Serious violent crime - Murder, suicide, rape or
sexual battery, physical attack or fight with a
weapon, or robbery.

Sexual battery - An incident that includes rape,
fondling, indecent liberties, child molestation,
or sodomy.

Southeast region - Alabama, Arkansas, Florida,
Georgia, Kentucky, Louisiana, Mississippi, North
Carolina, South Carolina, Tennessee, Virginia,
and West Virginia.

Theft or larceny - The unlawful taking of
another person's property without personal
confrontation, threat, violence, or bodily harm.

Town - A place not within an MSA, but with a
population greater than or equal to 2,500 and
defined as urban by the U.S. Bureau of the
Census.

Urban fringe - A place within an MSA of a
central city, but not primarily its central
city.

Vandalism - The damage or destruction of school
property.

West region - Alaska, Arizona, California,
Colorado, Hawaii, Idaho, Montana, Nevada, New
Mexico, Oklahoma, Oregon, Texas, Utah,
Washington, and Wyoming.
Schools and Staffing Survey

Central city - A large central city (a central
city of a Metropolitan Statistical Area [MSA]
with population greater than or equal to
400,000, or a population density greater than or
equal to 6,000 per square mile) or a mid-size
central city (a central city of an MSA, but not
designated as a large central city).

Elementary school teachers - An elementary
school teacher is one who, when asked for the
grades taught, checked: 1) only "ungraded" and
was designated as an elementary teacher on the
list of teachers provided by the school; 2) 6th
grade or lower, or "ungraded," and no grade
higher than 6th; 3) 6th grade or lower and 7th
grade or higher, and reported a primary
assignment of prekindergarten, kindergarten, or
general elementary; 4) 7th and 8th grades only,
and reported a primary assignment of
prekindergarten, kindergarten, or general
elementary; 5) 6th grade or lower and 7th grade
or higher, and reported a primary assignment of
special education and was designated as an
elementary teacher on the list of teachers
provided by the school; or 6) 7th and 8th grades
only, and reported a primary assignment of
special education and was designated as an
elementary teacher on the list of teachers
provided by the school. A teacher at school that
has grade 6 or lower, or one that is "ungraded"
with no grade higher than the 8th.

Rural or small town - Rural area (a place with a
population of less than 2,500 and defined as
rural by the U.S. Bureau of the Census) or a
small town (a place not within an MSA, with a
population of less than 25,000, but greater than
or equal to 2,500, and defined as nonurban by
the U.S. Bureau of the Census).
     
Secondary school teachers - A secondary school
teacher is one who, when asked for the grades
taught, checked: 1) "ungraded" and was
designated as a secondary teacher on the list of
teachers provided by the school; 2) 6th grade or
lower and 7th grade or higher, and reported a
primary assignment other than prekindergarten,
kindergarten, or general elementary; 3) 9th
grade or higher, or 9th grade or higher and
"ungraded"; 4) 7th and 8th grades only, and
reported a primary assignment other than
prekindergarten, kindergarten, general
elementary, or special education; 5) 7th and 8th
grades only, and reported a primary assignment
of special education and was designated as a
secondary teacher on the list of teachers
provided by the school; or 6) 6th grade or lower
and 7th grade or higher, or 7th and 8th grades
only, and was not categorized above as either
elementary or secondary.

Urban fringe or large town - Urban fringe of a
large or mid-size city (a place within an MSA of
a mid-size central city and defined as urban by
the U.S. Bureau of the Census) or a large town
(a place not within an MSA, but with a
population greater or equal to 25,000 and
defined as urban by the U.S. Bureau of the
Census).

S. Patrick Kachur et al., "School-Associated
Violent Deaths in the United States, 1992 to
1994"

Homicide - An act involving a killing of one
person by another resulting from interpersonal
violence.

School-associated violent death - A homicide or
suicide in which the fatal injury occurred on
the campus of a functioning elementary or
secondary school in the United States, while the
victim was on the way to or from regular
sessions at such a school, or while the victim
was attending or traveling to or from an
official school-sponsored event. Victims
included nonstudents as well as students and
staff members.

Suicide - An act of taking one's own life
voluntarily and intentionally.
