Indicators of School Crime and Safety: 2002


U.S. Department of Justice Office of Justice
Programs Bureau of Justice Statistics


November 2002, NCJ 196753

  ----------------------------------------------------
  This file is text only without graphics and many of
  the tables.  A Zip archive of the tables in this
  report in spreadsheet format (.wk1) and the full
  report including tables and graphics in .pdf format
  are available from:
  http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/abstract/iscs02.htm
  
  This report is one in a series. More recent editions
  may be available. To view a list of all in the series
  go to http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/pubalp2.htm#indicators.
  -----------------------------------------------------

Katharin Peter
Phillip Kaufman MPR
Associates, Inc.

Jill F. DeVoe
Sally A. Ruddy
Amanda K. Miller
Mike Planty
Education Statistics Services Institute

Thomas D. Snyder
National Center for Education Statistics

Detis T. Duhart
Michael R. Rand
Bureau of Justice Statistics

U.S. Department of Education
Rod Paige, Secretary

Office of Educational Research and 
Improvement
Grover J. Whitehurst, Assistant Secretary

National Center for Education Statistics
Gary W. Phillips, Deputy Commissioner

U.S. Department of Justice 
John Ashcroft, Attorney General

Office of Justice Programs 
Deborah J.Daniels, Assistant Attorney General

Bureau of Justice Statistics 
Lawrence A. Greenfeld, Director

The National Center for Education Statistics
(NCES) is the primary federal entity for
collecting, analyzing, and reporting data
related to education in the United States
and other nations. It fulfills a
congressional mandate to collect, collate,
analyze, and report full and complete
statistics on the condition of education in
the United States; conduct and publish
reports and specialized analyses of the
meaning and significance of such statistics;
assist state and local education agencies in
improving their statistical systems; and
review and report on education activities in
other countries.

The Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS) is
the primary federal entity for collecting,
analyzing, publishing, and disseminating
statistical information about crime, its
perpetrators and victims, and the operation
of the justice system at all levels of
government. These data are critical to
federal, state, and local policymakers in
combating crime and ensuring that justice is
both efficient and evenhanded.

November 2002

Suggested Citation

DeVoe, J.F., Peter, K., Kaufman, P., Ruddy,
S.A., Miller, A.K., Planty, M., Snyder,
T.D., Duhart, D.T., and Rand, M.R.
Indicators of School Crime and Safety: 2002.
U.S. Departments of Education and Justice.
NCES 2003-009/NCJ 196753. Washington, DC:
2002.

This publication can be downloaded from the
World Wide Web at http://nces.ed.gov or
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/. Single hard
copies can be ordered through ED Pubs at
1-877-4ED-PUBS (NCES 2003-009) (TTY/TDD
1-877-576-7734), and the Bureau of Justice
Statistics Clearinghouse at 1-800-732-3277
(NCJ 196753).

Contact at NCES: Thomas D. Snyder (202)
502-7452 E-mail: Tom.Snyder@ed.gov

Contact at BJS: Detis T. Duhart (202)
307-6116 E-mail: duhartd@ojp.usdoj.gov

FOREWORD

The safety of our students, teachers, and
staff at our nation's schools continues to
be an issue of paramount importance. While
the most recent national indicators
demonstrate that important gains have been
made in recent years, crime and safety
issues remain substantial problems in our
nation's schools. Between 1992 and 2000,
there was a 46 percent decrease in the
violent crime victimization rate at school.
Despite this decline, students ages 12
through 18 were victims of about 700,000
violent crimes and 1.2 million crimes of
theft at school in the year 2000. Violence,
theft, bullying, drugs, and firearms remain
problems in many schools throughout the
country indicating that more remains to be
done to make our schools safer.

Accurate information about the nature,
extent, and scope of the problem being
addressed is essential in developing
effective programs and policies. The
information contained in this report is
intended to serve as a foundation for
policy- makers and practitioners in the
development of effective programs and
policies to prevent and cope with violence
and crime in schools.

This is the fifth edition of Indicators of
School Crime and Safety, a joint effort by
the Bureau of Justice Statistics and the
National Center for Education Statistics.
The report provides detailed statistical
information to inform the nation on the
current nature of crime in schools. This
edition of Indicators includes the most
recent available data, including data from
2001.

The data in this report were compiled from a
number of statistical series supported by
the federal government. Sources include
results from a study of violent deaths in
schools, sponsored by the U.S. Department of
Education and the Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention; the National Crime
Victimization Survey and School Crime
Supplement to the survey, sponsored by the
Bureau of Justice Statistics; the Youth Risk
Behavior Survey, sponsored by the Centers
for Disease Control and Prevention; and the
Schools and Staffing Survey, sponsored by
the National Center for Education
Statistics.

This report is available on the Internet in
its entirety. The Bureau of Justice
Statistics and the National Center for
Education Statistics continue to work toward
providing more timely and complete data on
the issue of school-related violence and
safety.

Gary W. Phillips Deputy Commissioner of
Education Statistics

Lawrence A. Greenfeld Director of the Bureau
of Justice Statistics

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

Schools should be safe and secure places for
all students, teachers, and staff members.
Without a safe learning environment,
teachers may have difficulty teaching and
students may find their environment a
difficult one in which to learn. Priorities
set by schools, local authorities, and state
and federal government have prompted the
nation to focus on improving the safety of
American schools. The effort toward
providing safer schools requires
establishing good indicators of the current
state of school crime and safety, and
periodically monitoring and updating these
indicators. Student safety is of concern
outside of school as well. In fact, as the
data in this report show, a larger number of
serious violent victimizations happen away
from school than at school. ***Footnote
1:These data are not adjusted by the number
of hours that students spend on school
property and the number of hours they spend
elsewhere.*** In 2000, students were more
than twice as likely to be victims of
serious violent crime away from school than
at school (Indicator 2). ***Footnote 2:For
this indicator, "students" refers to persons
12 through 18 years of age regardless of
whether they attended school during the
survey reference period.***

In 2000, students ages 12 through 18 were
victims of about 1.9 million total crimes of
violence or theft at school (Indicator 2).
In that same year, students in this age
range were victims of about 128,000 serious
violent crimes at school (i.e., rape, sexual
assault, robbery, and aggravated assault).
There were also 47 school- associated
violent deaths in the United States between
July 1, 1998 and June 30, 1999, including 38
homicides, 33 of which involved school-aged
children (Indicator 1).

The total nonfatal victimization rate for
students ages 12 through 18 generally
declined between 1992 and 2000, from 144 per
1,000 students in 1992 to 72 per 1,000
students in 2000 (Indicator 2). The
percentage of students being victimized at
school also has declined over the last few
years. Between 1995 and 2001, the percentage
of students who reported being victims of
crime at school decreased from 10 percent to
6 percent (Indicator 3). This decline was
due in large part to the decrease in the
percentage of students reporting being
victims of theft at school, which declined
from 7 percent in 1995 to 4 percent in 2001.

However, the prevalence of other problem
behavior at school has increased. For
example, in 2001, 8 percent of students
reported that they had been bullied at
school in the last 6 months, up from 5
percent in 1999 (Indicator 6).

For some other types of crime at school, the
prevalence has not changed. Between 1993 and
2001, the percentage of students in grades 9
through 12 who were threatened or injured
with a weapon on school property in the past
12 months remained relatively constant--
between 7 and 9 percent (Indicator 4).

As the rates of criminal victimization in
schools have declined or remained constant,
students also seem to feel more secure at
school now than just a few years ago. The
percentage of students ages 12 through 18
who reported avoiding one or more places at
school for their own safety decreased from 9
percent in 1995 to 5 percent in 1999 and
2001 (Indicator 13).

The data shown in this report present a
mixed picture of school safety. While
overall victimization rates have declined,
more work needs to be done to address the
issues related to school violence and
safety.

ORGANIZATION OF THIS REPORT

This report, the fifth in a series of annual
reports on school crime and safety from the
Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS) and the
National Center for Education Statistics
(NCES), presents the latest available data
on school crime and student safety. The
report repeats many indicators from the 2001
report and also provides updated data on
fatal and nonfatal student victimization;
nonfatal teacher victimization and threats
against teachers; and student reports of
being threatened or injured with a weapon at
school, being in fights at school, and being
bullied at school; and students' perceptions
of personal safety. This report also
includes updated data on students' reports
of avoiding places at school, being called
hate-related words, seeing hate-related
graffiti, gangs at school, carrying weapons
to school, using alcohol and marijuana, and
drug availability on school property.

The report is organized as a series of
indicators, with each indicator presenting
data on a different aspect of school crime
and safety. It starts with the most serious
violence. There are five sections to the
report: Violent Deaths at School; Nonfatal
Student Victimization--Student Reports;
Violence and Crime at School-- Public School
Principal/Disciplinarian Reports; Nonfatal
Teacher Victimization at School-- Teacher
Reports; and School Environment. Each
section contains a set of indicators that,
taken together, describe a distinct aspect
of school crime and safety.

Rather than relying on data from a large
omnibus survey of school crime and safety,
this report uses a variety of independent
data sources from federal departments and
agencies including the BJS, NCES, and the
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
Each data source has an independent sample
design, data collection method, and
questionnaire design, all of which may be
influenced by the unique perspective of the
primary funding agency. By combining
multiple and independent sources of data, it
is hoped that this report will present a
more complete portrait of school crime and
safety than would be possible with any
single source of information.

However, because the report relies on so
many different data sets, the age groups,
the time periods, and the types of
respondents analyzed can vary from indicator
to indicator. Readers should keep this in
mind as they compare data from different
indicators. Furthermore, while every effort
has been made to keep key definitions
consistent across indicators, different
surveys sometimes use different definitions,
such as those for specific crimes and "at
school." ***Footnote 3: See appendix C,
Glossary of Terms, for specific definitions
used in each survey.*** Therefore, caution
should be used in making comparisons between
results from different data sets.
Descriptions of these data sets are located
in appendix B of this report.

KEY FINDINGS

All of the comparisons described in this
report are statistically significant at the
0.05 level. ***Footnote 4: See appendix B
for details on the statistical
methodology.*** Following are key findings
from the various sections of the report:

VIOLENT DEATHS AT SCHOOL

From July 1, 1998 through June 30, 1999,
there were 47 school-associated violent
deaths in the United States (Indicator 1).
Thirty-eight of these violent deaths were
homicides, six were suicides, two involved
suspects killed by a law enforcement officer
in the line of duty, and one was
unintentional. Thirty-three of the 38
school- associated homicides were of school-
aged children. These 33 homicides are
relatively few (1 percent of all homicides
of youth) compared to a total of 2,391
children ages 5 to 19 who were victims of
homicide in the United States from July 1,
1998 through June 30, 1999. Four of the six
school-associated suicides occurring from
July 1, 1998 through June 30, 1999 were of
school-aged children. Away from school,
there were a total of 1,855 suicides of
children ages 5 to 19 during the 1999
calendar year.

NONFATAL STUDENT VICTIMIZATION--STUDENT
REPORTS

Students ages 12 through 18 were more likely
to be victims of nonfatal serious violent
crime--including rape, sexual assault,
robbery, and aggravated assault-- away from
school than when they were at school
(Indicator 2). In 2000, students in this age
range were victims of about 373,000 serious
violent crimes away from school, compared
with about 128,000 at school. This
translates into a rate of 14 per 1,000
students away from school and 5 per 1,000
students at school.

* The percentage of students in grades 9
through 12 who have been threatened or
injured with a weapon on school property
***Footnote 5: Definitions for "on school
property" and "at school" may differ. See
appendix C for specific definitions.*** has
not changed significantly in recent years
(Indicator 4). In 1993, 1995, 1997, 1999,
and 2001, between 7 and 9 percent of
students reported being threatened or
injured with a weapon such as a gun, knife,
or club on school property in the past 12
months.

* The percentage of students who reported
being in a fight anywhere declined from 1993
to 2001--from 42 percent to 33 percent
(Indicator 5). Similarly, the percentage of
students who reported fighting on school
property also declined over this period,
from 16 percent to 13 percent.

* Both males and females were more likely to
be bullied in 2001 than in 1999 (Indicator
6). In 2001, males were more likely than
females to be bullied (9 and 7 percent,
respectively); however, in 1999, no such
difference could be detected (5 percent
each).

* Between 1992 and 2000, there was a 46
percent decrease in the violent crime
victimization rate at school and a 52
percent decrease away from school (from 48
to 26 and from 71 to 34 per 1,000 students
ages 12 through 18, respectively) (Indicator
2). In 2000, younger students (ages 12
through 14) were not victimized at a
different rate than older students (ages 15
through 18) either at or away from school
(Indicator 2).

* In 2001, 8 percent of 12- through 18-
year- old students reported being bullied at
school in the last 6 months (Indicator 6),
up from 5 percent in 1999.

VIOLENCE AND CRIME AT SCHOOL--PUBLIC SCHOOL
PRINCIPAL/DISCIPLINARIAN REPORTS

In 1996-97, 10 percent of all public schools
reported at least one serious violent crime
to the police or a law enforcement
representative (Indicator 7). Principals'
reports of serious violent crimes included
murder, rape or other type of sexual
battery, suicide, physical attack or fight
with a weapon, or robbery. Another 47
percent of public schools reported at least
one less serious violent or nonviolent crime
(but not a serious violent one). Crimes in
this category include physical attack or
fight without a weapon, theft/larceny, and
vandalism. The remaining 43 percent of
public schools did not report any of these
crimes to the police.

* Elementary schools were less likely than
either middle or high schools to report any
type of crime in 1996-97. Elementary schools
were more likely to report vandalism (31
percent) than any other crime (19 percent or
less) (Indicator 8).

* At the middle and high school levels,
physical attack or fight without a weapon
was generally the most commonly reported
crime in 1996-97 (9 and 8 per 1,000
students, respectively) (Indicator 8). Theft
or larceny was more common at the high
school level than at the middle school level
(6 vs. 4 incidents per 1,000 students).

NONFATAL TEACHER VICTIMIZATION AT SCHOOL--
TEACHER REPORTS

Over the 5-year period from 1996 through
2000, teachers were victims of approximately
1,603,000 nonfatal crimes at school,
including 1,004,000 thefts and 599,000
violent crimes (rape or sexual assault,
robbery, and aggravated and simple assault)
(Indicator 9). On average, this translates
into 74 crimes per 1,000 teachers per year.

* During the 1996 through 2000 period,
senior high school and middle/junior high
school teachers were more likely to be
victims of violent crimes (most of which
were simple assaults) than elementary school
teachers (35 and 49, respectively, vs. 15
crimes per 1,000 teachers) (Indicator 9).

* Teachers were differentially victimized by
violent crimes at school according to where
they taught (Indicator 9). Over the 5-year
period from 1996 through 2000, urban
teachers were more likely to be victims of
violent crimes than suburban and rural
teachers (36 vs. 21 and 17, respectively,
per 1,000 teachers).

* In the 1999-2000 school year, 9 percent of
all elementary and secondary school teachers
were threatened with injury by a student,
and 4 percent were physically attacked by a
student (Indicator 10). This represented
about 305,000 teachers who were victims of
threats of injury by students that year and
135,000 teachers who were victims of attacks
by students.

SCHOOL ENVIRONMENT

Between 1995 and 1999, there was a decrease
in the percentage of students ages 12
through 18 feeling unsafe while they were at
school (Indicator 12). However, between 1999
and 2001, there was no significant change in
the percentage of students feeling unsafe.
In both 1999 and 2001, students were more
likely to be afraid of being attacked at
school than away from school.

* Between 1993 and 2001, the percentage of
students in grades 9 through 12 who reported
carrying a weapon such as a gun, knife, or
club on school property within the previous
30 days declined from 12 percent to 6
percent (Indicator 11).

* Between 1995 and 1999, there was a
decrease in the percentage of students ages
12 through 18 who avoided one or more places
at school-- from 9 percent to 5 percent
(Indicator 13). However, between 1999 and
2001, the percentage remained stable at 5
percent.

* In 2001, 12 percent of students ages 12
through 18 reported that someone at school
had used hate-related words against them
(Indicator 14). That is, in the prior 6
months, someone at school had called them a
derogatory word having to do with race,
religion, ethnicity, disability, gender, or
sexual orientation. During the same period,
about 36 percent of students saw hate-
related graffiti at school.

* In 2001, 20 percent of students reported
that street gangs were present at their
schools (Indicator 15). Students in urban
schools were more likely to report that
there were street gangs at their schools (29
percent) than were suburban and rural
students (18 percent and 13 percent,
respectively).

* In 1999-2000, student tardiness and
absenteeism were reported as serious or
moderate problems by about 30 percent of
public school principals (32 percent and 29
percent, respectively) (Indicator 16).
Vandalism of school property and robbery or
theft were considered to be serious or
moderate problems in 6 percent and 4 percent
of public schools, respectively, and student
possession of weapons was reported as a
serious or moderate problem by 1 percent of
public school principals.

* In 2001, 5 percent of students in grades 9
through 12 had at least one drink of alcohol
on school property in the 30 days prior to
the survey (Indicator 17). Forty- seven
percent of students had at least one drink
anywhere during the same period.

* Between 1993 and 2001, there were no
consistent patterns of increase or decrease
found in the percentage of students who had
used marijuana--both anywhere and on school
property (Indicator 18). In 2001, 24 percent
of students reported using marijuana
anywhere in the last 30 days, and 5 percent
reported using marijuana on school property.

* In 2001, 29 percent of students in grades
9 through 12 reported that someone had
offered, sold, or given them an illegal drug
on school property in the 12 months prior to
the survey (Indicator 19).

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

The authors wish to thank the heads of their
respective agencies, Gary W. Phillips of the
National Center for Education Statistics
(NCES) and Lawrence Greenfeld of the Bureau
of Justice Statistics (BJS), for supporting
this report.

From BJS, we wish to thank Callie Rennison
of the Victimization Statistics Branch for
her work in verifying data from the NCVS.

From NCES, we wish to thank Bruce Taylor,
Shelley Burns, Kathryn Chandler, and Ghedam
Bairu, who served as reviewers. The Office
of the Deputy Secretary conducted an agency
review as well. They all provided input that
substantially improved the publication.

Outside of NCES and BJS, Mark Anderson and
Steve James of the Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention generously provided
data and performed reviews of data
documentation.

In addition, school crime experts who
reviewed the report were Wayne Welsh of
Temple University and Richard Lawrence of
St. Cloud State University. Margaret
Burchinal of the University of North
Carolina also provided valuable input. Their
advice was gratefully accepted. We
particularly appreciated their willingness
to review the report under very strict time
constraints. We also value the review of
this report and the continued support
provided by Bill Modzeleski of the Safe and
Drug-free Schools program.

Without the assistance of the following
staff at MPR Associates, this report could
not have been produced: Barbara Kridl
(overall production), Francesca Tussing
(production, proofreading, layout, and
editing), and Andrea Livingston (editing).
They provided invaluable editorial, graphic,
and production assistance.

TABLE OF CONTENTS

Foreword

Executive Summary

Acknowledgments

List of Tables

List of Figures

Violent Deaths at School

	1. Violent deaths at school and away
	from school

Nonfatal Student Victimization--Student
Reports

	2. Victimization of students at
	school and away from school

	3. Prevalence of students being
	victimized at school

	4. Prevalence of students being
	threatened or injured with a weapon
	on school property

	5. Prevalence of students involved
	in physical fights on school
	property

	6. Prevalence of students being
	bullied at school

Violence and Crime at School--Public School
Principal/Disciplinarian Reports

	7. Crimes reported to the police

	8. Specific crimes reported to the
	police

Nonfatal Teacher Victimization at School--
Teacher Reports

	9. Nonfatal teacher victimization at
	school

10. Prevalence of teachers being threatened
with injury or attacked by students

School Environment

11. Prevalence of students carrying weapons
on school property

12. Students' perceptions of personal safety
at school or on the way to or from school
and away from school

13. Students' reports of avoiding places in
school

14. Students' reports of being called hate-
related words and seeing hate-related
graffiti

15. Students' reports of gangs at school

16. Public school principals' perceptions of
discipline issues at school

17. Prevalence of students using alcohol

18. Prevalence of students using marijuana

19. Prevalence of students reporting drugs
were made available to them on school
property

Supplemental Tables

Standard Error Tables

Appendix A. School Practices and Policies
Related to Safety and Discipline

Appendix B. Technical Notes

Appendix C. Glossary of Terms

LIST OF TABLES

1.1. Number of school-associated violent
deaths occurring at school and away from
school: 1992-93 to 1998-99

2.1. Number of nonfatal crimes against
students ages 12 through 18 occurring at
school or on the way to or from school, by
type of crime and selected student
characteristics: 1992 to 2000

2.2. Number of nonfatal crimes against
students ages 12 through 18 occurring at
school or on the way to or from school per
1,000 students, by type of crime and
selected student characteristics: 1992 to
2000

2.3. Number of nonfatal crimes against
students ages 12 through 18 occurring away
from school, by type of crime and selected
student characteristics: 1992 to 2000

2.4. Number of nonfatal crimes against
students ages 12 through 18 occurring away
from school per 1,000 students, by type of
crime and selected student characteristics:
1992 to 2000

3.1. Percentage of students ages 12 through
18 who reported criminal victimization at
school during the previous 6 months, by type
of victimization and selected student
characteristics: 1995, 1999, and 2001

4.1. Percentage of students in grades 9
through 12 who reported being threatened or
injured with a weapon on school property
during the last 12 months, by selected
student characteristics: 1993, 1995, 1997,
1999, and 2001

5.1. Percentage of students in grades 9
through 12 who reported having been in a
physical fight in the last 12 months, by
selected student characteristics: 1993,
1995, 1997, 1999, and 2001

6.1. Percentage of students ages 12 through
18 who reported being bullied at school
during the previous 6 months, by selected
student characteristics: 1999 and 2001

7.1. Percentage of public schools that
reported one or more criminal incidents to
police, by seriousness of the incident,
urbanicity, and selected school
characteristics: 1996-97

7.2. Number of public schools that reported
one or more criminal incidents to police, by
seriousness of the incident, urbanicity, and
selected school characteristics: 1996-97

7.3. Number of criminal incidents occurring
in public schools reported to police, by
seriousness of the incident, urbanicity, and
selected school characteristics: 1996-97

7.4. Number of criminal incidents reported
to police per 1,000 public school students,
by seriousness of the incident, urbanicity,
and selected school characteristics: 1996-97

8.1. Percentage of public schools that
reported one or more incidents of serious
violent crime to police, by type of
incident, urbanicity, and selected school
characteristics: 1996-97

8.2. Percentage of public schools that
reported one or more less serious violent or
nonviolent criminal incidents to police, by
type of incident, urbanicity, and selected
school characteristics: 1996-97

8.3. Number of public schools that reported
one or more incidents of serious violent
crime to police, by type of incident,
urbanicity, and selected school
characteristics: 1996-97

8.4. Number of public schools that reported
one or more less serious violent or
nonviolent criminal incidents to police, by
type of incident, urbanicity, and selected
school characteristics: 1996-97

8.5. Number of serious violent criminal
incidents occurring in public schools
reported to police, by type of incident,
urbanicity, and selected school
characteristics: 1996-97

8.6. Number of less serious violent or
nonviolent criminal incidents occurring in
public schools reported to police, by type
of incident, urbanicity, and selected school
characteristics: 1996-97

8.7. Number of serious violent criminal
incidents reported to police per 1,000
public school students, by type of incident,
urbanicity, and selected school
characteristics: 1996-97

8.8. Number of less serious violent or
nonviolent criminal incidents reported to
police per 1,000 public school students, by
type of incident, urbanicity, and selected
school characteristics: 1996-97

9.1. Number of nonfatal crimes against
teachers and average annual number of crimes
per 1,000 teachers at school, by type of
crime and selected teacher characteristics:
Aggregated from 1996 through 2000

10.1. Percentage and number of teachers who
reported that they were threatened with
injury by a student during the past 12
months, by urbanicity and selected teacher
and school characteristics: 1993-94 and
1999-2000

10.2. Percentage and number of teachers who
reported that they were physically attacked
by a student during the past 12 months, by
urbanicity and selected teacher and school
characteristics: 1993-94 and 1999-2000

11.1. Percentage of students in grades 9
through 12 who reported carrying a weapon on
school property at least 1 day in the past
30 days, by selected student
characteristics: 1993, 1995, 1997, 1999, and
2001

11.2. Percentage of students in grades 9
through 12 who reported carrying a weapon
anywhere at least 1 day in the past 30 days,
by selected student characteristics: 1993,
1995, 1997, 1999, and 2001

12.1. Percentage of students ages 12 through
18 who reported fear at school or on the way
to and from school and away from school
during the previous 6 months, by selected
student characteristics: 1995, 1999, and
2001

13.1. Percentage of students ages 12 through
18 who reported that they avoided one or
more places in school during the previous 6
months, by selected student characteristics:
1995, 1999, 2001

14.1. Percentage of students ages 12 through
18 who reported being targets of hate-
related words at school during the previous
6 months, by selected student
characteristics: 2001

14.2. Percentage of students ages 12 through
18 who saw hate-related graffiti at school
during the previous 6 months, by selected
student characteristics: 1999 and 2001

15.1. Percentage of students ages 12 through
18 who reported that street gangs were
present at school during the previous 6
months, by urbanicity and selected student
characteristics: 2001

16.1 Percentage of public school principals
who reported that selected discipline issues
were a serious or moderate problem in their
school, by school level and urbanicity:
1993-94 and 1999-2000

17.1. Percentage of students in grades 9
through 12 who reported using alcohol in the
last 30 days, by selected student
characteristics: 1993, 1995, 1997, 1999, and
2001

18.1. Percentage of students in grades 9
through 12 who reported using marijuana in
the last 30 days, by selected student
characteristics: 1993, 1995, 1997, 1999, and
2001

19.1. Percentage of students in grades 9
through 12 who reported that drugs were made
available to them on school property during
the last 12 months, by selected student
characteristics: 1993, 1995, 1997, 1999, and
2001

Standard Error Tables

S2.1. Standard errors for table 2.1: Number
of nonfatal crimes against students ages 12
through 18 occurring at school or on the way
to or from school, by type of crime and
selected student characteristics: 1992 to
2000

S2.2. Standard errors for table 2.2: Number
of nonfatal crimes against students ages 12
through 18 occurring at school or on the way
to or from school per 1,000 students, by
type of crime and selected student
characteristics: 1992 to 2000

S2.3. Standard errors for table 2.3: Number
of nonfatal crimes against students ages 12
through 18 occurring away from school, by
type of crime and selected student
characteristics: 1992 to 2000

S2.4. Standard errors for table 2.4: Number
of nonfatal crimes against students ages 12
through 18 occurring away from school per
1,000 students, by type of crime and
selected student characteristics: 1992 to
2000

S3.1. Standard errors for table 3.1:
Percentage of students ages 12 through 18
who reported criminal victimization at
school during the previous 6 months, by type
of victimization and selected student
characteristics: 1995, 1999, and 2001

S4.1. Standard errors for table 4.1:
Percentage of students in grades 9 through
12 who reported being threatened or injured
with a weapon on school property during the
last 12 months, by selected student
characteristics: 1993, 1995, 1997, 1999, and
2001

S5.1. Standard errors for table 5.1:
Percentage of students in grades 9 through
12 who reported having been in a physical
fight in the last 12 months, by selected
student characteristics: 1993, 1995, 1997,
1999, and 2001

S6.1. Standard errors for table 6.1:
Percentage of students ages 12 through 18
who reported being bullied at school during
the previous 6 months, by selected student
characteristics: 1999 and 2001

S7.1. Standard errors for table 7.1:
Percentage of public schools that reported
one or more criminal incidents to police, by
seriousness of the incident, urbanicity, and
selected school characteristics: 1996-97

S7.2. Standard errors for table 7.2: Number
of public schools that reported one or more
criminal incidents to police, by seriousness
of the incident, urbanicity, and selected
school characteristics: 1996-97

S7.3. Standard errors for table 7.3: Number
of criminal incidents occurring in public
schools reported to police, by seriousness
of the incident, urbanicity, and selected
school characteristics: 1996-97

S7.4. Standard errors for table 7.4: Number
of criminal incidents reported to police per
1,000 public school students, by seriousness
of the incident, urbanicity, and selected
school characteristics: 1996-97

S8.1. Standard errors for table 8.1:
Percentage of public schools that reported
one or more incidents of serious violent
crime to police, by type of incident,
urbanicity, and selected school
characteristics: 1996-97

S8.2. Standard errors for table 8.2:
Percentage of public schools that reported
one or more less serious violent or
nonviolent criminal incidents to police, by
type of incident, urbanicity, and selected
school characteristics: 1996-97

S8.3. Standard errors for table 8.3: Number
of public schools that reported one or more
incidents of serious violent crime to
police, by type of incident, urbanicity, and
selected school characteristics: 1996-97

S8.4. Standard errors for table 8.4: Number
of public schools that reported one or more
less serious violent or nonviolent criminal
incidents to police, by type of incident,
urbanicity, and selected school
characteristics: 1996-97

S8.5. Standard errors for table 8.5: Number
of serious violent criminal incidents
occurring in public schools reported to
police, by type of incident, urbanicity, and
selected school characteristics: 1996-97

S8.6. Standard errors for table 8.6: Number
of less serious violent or nonviolent
criminal incidents occurring in public
schools reported to police, by type of
incident, urbanicity, and selected school
characteristics: 1996-97

S8.7. Standard errors for table 8.7: Number
of serious violent criminal incidents
reported to police per 1,000 public school
students, by type of incident, urbanicity,
and selected school characteristics: 1996-97

S8.8. Standard errors for table 8.8: Number
of less serious violent or nonviolent
criminal incidents reported to police per
1,000 public school students, by type of
incident, urbanicity, and selected school
characteristics: 1996-97

S9.1. Standard errors for table 9.1: Number
of nonfatal crimes against teachers and
average annual number of crimes per 1,000
teachers at school, by type of crime and
selected teacher characteristics: Aggregated
from 1996 through 2000

S10.1. Standard errors for table 10.1:
Percentage and number of teachers who
reported that they were threatened with
injury by a student during the past 12
months, by urbanicity and selected teacher
and school characteristics: 1993-94 and
1999-2000

S10.2. Standard errors for table 10.2:
Percentage and number of teachers who
reported that they were physically attacked
by a student during the past 12 months, by
urbanicity and selected teacher and school
characteristics: 1993-94 and 1999-2000

S11.1. Standard errors for table 11.1:
Percentage of students in grades 9 through
12 who reported carrying a weapon on school
property at least 1 day in the past 30 days,
by selected student characteristics: 1993,
1995, 1997, 1999, and 2001

S11.2. Standard errors for table 11.2:
Percentage of students in grades 9 through
12 who reported carrying a weapon anywhere
at least 1 day in the past 30 days, by
selected student characteristics: 1993,
1995, 1997, 1999, and 2001

S12.1. Standard errors for table 12.1:
Percentage of students ages 12 through 18
who reported fear at school or on the way to
and from school and away from school during
the previous 6 months, by selected student
characteristics: 1995, 1999, and 2001

S13.1. Standard errors for table 13.1:
Percentage of students ages 12 through 18
who reported that they avoided one or more
places in school during the previous 6
months, by selected student characteristics:
1995, 1999, and 2001

S14.1 Standard errors for table 14.1:
Percentage of students ages 12 through 18
who reported being targets of hate-related
words at school during the previous 6
months, by selected student characteristics:
2001

S14.2 Standard errors for table 14.2:
Percentage of students ages 12 through 18
who saw hate-related graffiti at school
during the previous 6 months, by selected
student characteristics: 1999 and 2001

S15.1. Standard errors for table 15.1:
Percentage of students ages 12 through 18
who reported that street gangs were present
at school during the previous 6 months, by
urbanicity and selected student
characteristics: 2001

S16.1. Standard errors for table 16.1:
Percentage of public school principals who
reported that selected discipline issues
were a serious or moderate problem in their
school, by school level and urbanicity:
1993-94 and 1999-2000

S17.1. Standard errors for table 17.1:
Percentage of students in grades 9 through
12 who reported using alcohol in the last 30
days, by selected student characteristics:
1993, 1995, 1997, 1999, and 2001

S18.1. Standard errors for table 18.1:
Percentage of students in grades 9 through
12 who reported using marijuana in the last
30 days, by selected student
characteristics: 1993, 1995, 1997, 1999, and
2001

S19.1. Standard errors for table 19.1:
Percentage of students in grades 9 through
12 who reported that drugs were made
available to them on school property during
the last 12 months, by selected student
characteristics: 1993, 1995, 1997, 1999, and
2001

Appendix Tables

A1. Percentage of public schools that
reported that they have a zero tolerance
policy for various specified student
offenses, by selected school
characteristics: 1996-97

A2. Percentage of public schools that
reported that students were required to wear
school uniforms, by selected school
characteristics: 1996-97

A3. Percentage of public schools that
reported that they use various types of
security measures at their schools, by
selected school characteristics: 1999-2000

A4. Percentage of public schools that
reported various levels of police or other
law enforcement representatives' presence
during a typical week, by selected school
characteristics: 1996-97

A5. Percentage of public schools that
reported school violence prevention programs
in their schools, by selected school
characteristics: 1999-2000

A6. Number and percentage of schools in
which specified disciplinary actions were
taken against students, total number of
actions taken, and percentage of specific
disciplinary actions taken against students,
by type of infraction: 1996-97

SA1. Standard errors for table A1:
Percentage of public schools that reported
that they have a zero tolerance policy for
various specified student offenses, by
selected school characteristics: 1996-97

SA2. Standard errors for table A2:
Percentage of public schools that reported
that students were required to wear school
uniforms, by selected school
characteristics: 1996-97

SA3. Standard errors for table A3:
Percentage of public schools that reported
that they use various types of security
measures at their schools, by selected
school characteristics: 1999-2000

SA4. Standard errors for table A4:
Percentage of public schools that reported
various levels of police or other law
enforcement representatives' presence during
a typical week, by selected school
characteristics: 1996-97

SA5. Standard errors for table A5:
Percentage of public schools that reported
school violence prevention programs in their
schools, by selected school characteristics:
1999-2000

SA6. Standard errors for table A6: Number
and percentage of schools in which specified
disciplinary actions were taken against
students, total number of actions taken, and
percentage of specific disciplinary actions
taken against students, by type of
infraction: 1996-97

B1. Descriptions of data sources and samples
used in the report

B2. Wording of survey questions used to
construct indicators

B3. Methods used to calculate standard
errors of statistics for different surveys

LIST OF FIGURES

1.1. Number of homicides and suicides of
students at school: 1992-93 to 1998-99

1.2. Number of homicides and suicides of
students at school and of youth ages 5 to 19
away from school: 1998-99

2.1. Number of nonfatal crimes against
students ages 12 through 18 per 1,000
students, by type of crime and location:
1992 to 2000

2.2. Number of nonfatal crimes against
students ages 12 through 18 occurring at
school or going to or from school per 1,000
students, by type of crime and selected
student characteristics: 2000

2.3. Number of nonfatal crimes against
students ages 12 through 18 occurring away
from school per 1,000 students, by type of
crime and selected student characteristics:
2000

3.1. Percentage of students ages 12 through
18 who reported nonfatal criminal
victimization at school during the previous
6 months, by grade level: 1995, 1999, and
20010

4.1. Percentage of students in grades 9
through 12 who reported being threatened or
injured with a weapon on school property
during the last 12 months, by gender: 1993,
1995, 1997, 1999, and 2001

4.2. Percentage of students in grades 9
through 12 who reported being threatened or
injured with a weapon on school property
during the last 12 months, by grade: 1993,
1995, 1997, 1999, and 2001

5.1. Percentage of students in grades 9
through 12 who reported having been in a
physical fight in the last 12 months, by
gender: 1993, 1995, 1997, 1999, and 2001

5.2. Percentage of students in grades 9
through 12 who reported having been in a
physical fight in the last 12 months, by
grade: 1993, 1995, 1997, 1999, and 2001

6.1. Percentage of students ages 12 through
18 who reported being bullied at school
during the previous 6 months, by gender:
1999 and 2001

7.1. Percentage distribution of public
schools according to types of crimes
reported to police: 1996-97

7.2. Percentage of public schools that
reported one or more criminal incidents to
police and number of incidents reported per
1,000 students, by seriousness of crimes,
instructional level, and urbanicity: 1996-97

8.1. Percentage of public schools that
reported one or more criminal incidents to
police, by type of crime and instructional
level: 1996-97

8.2. Number of crimes per 1,000 public
school students, by type of crime,
instructional level, and urbanicity: 1996-97

9.1. Average annual number of nonfatal
crimes against teachers at school per 1,000
teachers, by type of crime and selected
characteristics: Aggregated from 1996
through 2000

10.1. Percentage of teachers who reported
that they were threatened with injury or
that they were physically attacked by a
student from school during the past 12
months, by urbanicity: 1993-94 and 1999-2000

10.2. Percentage of teachers who reported
that they were threatened with injury or
that they were physically attacked by a
student from school during the past 12
months, by urbanicity and control: 1999-2000

11.1. Percentage of students in grades 9
through 12 who reported carrying a weapon at
least 1 day in the past 30 days, by gender:
1993, 1995, 1997, 1999, and 2001

11.2. Percentage of students in grades 9
through 12 who reported carrying a weapon at
least 1 day in the past 30 days, by grade:
1993, 1995, 1997, 1999, and 2001

12.1. Percentage of students ages 12 through
18 who reported fear at school or on the way
to and from school during the previous 6
months, by race/ethnicity: 1995, 1999, and
2001

12.2. Percentage of students ages 12 through
18 who reported fear away from school during
the previous 6 months, by race/ethnicity:
1999 and 2001

13.1. Percentage of students ages 12 through
18 who reported that they avoided one or
more places in school during the previous 6
months, by race/ethnicity: 1995, 1999, and
2001

13.2. Percentage of students ages 12 through
18 who reported that they avoided one or
more places in school during the previous 6
months, by urbanicity: 1995, 1999, and 2001

14.1. Percentage of students ages 12 through
18 who reported being targets of hate-
related words or who saw hate-related
graffiti at school during the previous 6
months, by gender and race/ethnicity: 2001

15.1. Percentage of students ages 12 through
18 who reported that street gangs were
present at school during the previous 6
months, by urbanicity and control: 2001

16.1. Percentage of public school principals
who reported that selected discipline issues
were a serious or moderate problem in their
school, by school level: 1999-2000

17.1. Percentage of students in grades 9
through 12 who reported using alcohol in the
last 30 days, by gender: 1993, 1995, 1997,
1999, and 2001

17.2. Percentage of students in grades 9
through 12 who reported using alcohol in the
last 30 days, by grade: 1993, 1995, 1997,
1999, and 2001

18.1. Percentage of students in grades 9
through 12 who reported using marijuana in
the last 30 days, by gender: 1993, 1995,
1997, 1999, and 2001

18.2. Percentage of students in grades 9
through 12 who reported using marijuana in
the last 30 days, by grade: 1993, 1995,
1997, 1999, and 2001

19.1. Percentage of students in grades 9
through 12 who reported that drugs were made
available to them on school property during
the last 12 months, by gender: 1993, 1995,
1997, 1999, and 2001

19.2. Percentage of students in grades 9
through 12 who reported that drugs were made
available to them on school property during
the last 12 months, by race/ethnicity: 1999
and 2001

VIOLENT DEATHS AT SCHOOL

1. Violent deaths at school and away from
school**NOTE: This indicator has been
updated to include 1992 through 1999 data
and revised from previously published
estimates.**

Violent deaths are tragic events that affect
not only the individuals and their families
directly involved, but also everyone in the
schools where they occur.

* From July 1, 1992 through June 30, 1999,
there were 358 school-associated violent
deaths ***Footnote 1: A school-associated
violent death is a homicide, suicide, legal
intervention, or unintentional firearm-
related death in which the fatal injury
occurred on the campus of a functioning
elementary or secondary school in the United
States, while the victim was on the way to
or from regular sessions at such a school,
or while the victim was attending or
traveling to or from an official school-
sponsored event. Victims included
nonstudents as well as students and staff
members.*** in the United States, including
255 deaths of school- aged children (ages 5
to 19) (table 1.1). In each survey year,
school-aged children were at least 70 times
more likely to be murdered away from school
than they were to be murdered at school.

* In the most recent school year for which
data are available, from July 1, 1998 to
June 30, 1999, there were 47 school-
associated violent deaths (table 1.1).
Thirty-eight of these violent deaths were
homicides, six were suicides, a law
enforcement officer in the line of duty
killed two, and one was unintentional.

* There was no consistent pattern of
increase or decrease in the number of
homicides or suicides of school-aged
children at school between July 1, 1992 and
June 30, 1999 (figure 1.1 and table 1.1).

* Of the 358 total school-associated violent
deaths that occurred between July 1, 1992
and June 30, 1999, 218 were homicides of
school- aged children and 37 were suicides
of school- aged children (table 1.1). Away
from school, during the same period, there
were a total of 22,323 homicides of children
ages 5 to 19. During the 1993 to 1999
calendar years, there were 14,813 suicides
of children in this age group away from
school.

* In the most recent year, from July 1, 1998
through June 30, 1999, 33 of the 38 school-
associated homicides were of school-aged
children (figure 1.2 and table 1.1). During
this same time frame, there were 2,358
homicides of children ages 5 to 19 away from
school.

* Four of the six school-associated
suicides, which occurred from July 1, 1998
to June 30, 1999, were of school-aged
children (figure 1.2 and table 1.1). Away
from school, there were 1,855 suicides of
children ages 5 to 19 during the 1999
calendar year.

NONFATAL STUDENT VICTIMIZATION--STUDENT
REPORTS

2. Victimization of students at school and
away from school**NOTE: This indicator has
been updated to include 2000 data.**

The number of crimes committed in the
nation's schools continues to be a concern.
Even though crime has decreased in recent
years, theft and violence at school and
while going to and from school still can
lead to disruptive and threatening
environments, physical injury, and emotional
stress, and can be an obstacle to student
achievement.

* Students ages 12 through 18 experienced
fewer nonfatal serious violent crimes (that
is, rape, sexual assault, robbery, and
aggravated assault) when they were at school
than away from school (tables 2.1 and 2.3).
***Footnote 2: "Students" refers to persons
12 though 18 years of age who have attended
any grade equal to or less than high school.
An uncertain percentage of these persons may
not have attended school during the survey
reference period. These data do not take
into account the number of hours that
students spend at school and the number of
hours they spend away from school.*** In
2000, students in this age group were
victims of about 128,000 such crimes at
school, and about 373,000 away from school.
The victimization rate for serious violent
crime at school and away from school
generally declined from 1992 to 2000 (figure
2.1 and tables 2.2 and 2.4).

* Students were victims of about 700,000
nonfatal violent crimes (that is, serious
violent crime plus simple assault) at
school, and about 921,000 away from school
in 2000 (tables 2.1 and 2.3). Between 1992
and 2000, there was a 46 percent decrease in
the violent crime victimization rate at
school and a 52 percent decrease away from
school (from 48 to 26 and from 71 to 34 per
1,000 students ages 12 through 18,
respectively) (figure 2.1 and tables 2.2 and
2.4). Between 1992 and 2000, the
victimization rates for nonfatal violent
crime were generally lower at school than
away from school, except in 1998 and 1999.
In these years, no differences were detected
between nonfatal victimizations at school
and away from school.

* Students were more likely to be victims of
theft at school than away from school for
all years between 1992 and 2000, except for
1997 and 2000. In these years, no
differences were detected between
victimization rates due to thefts occurring
at and away from school. In 2000, about 1.2
million thefts occurred at school (64
percent of all crimes at school), and about
1.1 million away from school (54 percent of
all crimes away from school) (tables 2.1 and
2.3).

* Regarding nonfatal crime (theft plus
violent crime), students were victims of
about 1.9 million crimes while they were in
school in 2000, and about 2.0 million away
from school (tables 2.1 and 2.3).

* In 2000, the rate of serious violent crime
at school and away from school was higher
for males than for females (figures 2.2 and
2.3 and tables 2.2 and 2.4).

* In 2000, no difference was found in the
rates of serious violent crime at school
among students living in urban, suburban,
and rural areas (figure 2.2 and table 2.2).
Away from school, suburban students were
more vulnerable to serious violent crime
than rural students. But there were no
differences between urban and suburban
students' vulnerability to such
victimization (figure 2.3 and table 2.4).

* In 2000, younger students (ages 12 through
14) were victimized by serious violent crime
at a rate not different than older students
(ages 15 through 18) either at school or
away from school (figures 2.2 and 2.3 and
tables 2.2 and 2.4).

3. Prevalence of students being victimized
at school**NOTE: This indicator has been
updated to include 2001 data.**

Some of the crimes committed against
students involve violence, while others
involve their property. Presenting
information on the prevalence of
victimization for students helps clarify
what percentage of students are affected by
different types of crime.

* The percentage of students ages 12 through
18 who reported being victims of nonfatal
crimes (including theft or violent crime) at
school during the previous 6 months was
smaller in 2001 than in 1999 or 1995 (6, 8,
and 10 percent, respectively) (table 3.1).
Student reports of theft at school decreased
from 7 percent in 1995 to 4 percent in 2001.
Student reports of violence at school also
decreased from 1995 to 1999 and then showed
no difference between 1999 and 2001 (3
percent in 1995 and 2 percent in 1999 and
2001).

* Between 1995 and 2001, the percentage of
students in each grade level who reported
being victims of nonfatal crimes declined
(figure 3.1 and table 3.1). For example,
between 1995 and 2001, the prevalence of
reported victimization dropped from 10
percent to 6 percent for 6th-graders and
from 6 percent to 3 percent for 12th-
graders.

* In each survey year, public school
students were more likely to report having
been victims of violent crime than were
private school students (table 3.1). Public
school students were also more likely than
private school students to report being
victims of theft in 1995 and 2001, but no
such differences were detected in 1999.

4. Prevalence of students being threatened
or injured with a weapon on school
property**NOTE: This indicator has been
updated to include 2001 data.**

Every year, some students are threatened or
injured with a weapon while they are on
school property. The percentages of students
victimized in this way provide an important
measure of how safe our schools are and how
this is changing over time.

* The percentage of students in grades 9
through 12 who were threatened or injured
with a weapon on school property in the 12
months before the survey has fluctuated in
recent years, but without a clear trend
(table 4.1). In all survey years from 1993
to 2001, between 7 and 9 percent of students
reported being threatened or injured with a
weapon, such as a gun, knife, or club on
school property.

* In each survey year, males were more
likely than females to report being
threatened or injured with a weapon on
school property (figure 4.1 and table 4.1).
For example, in 2001, 12 percent of males
reported being threatened or injured in the
past year, compared with 7 percent of
females.

* Among 9th- through 12th-grade students,
those students in lower grades were more
likely to be threatened or injured with a
weapon on school property than were students
in higher grades in all survey years (figure
4.2 and table 4.1).

* No differences could be detected in the
race/ethnicity of students being threatened
or injured with a weapon on school property
in 1999 or 2001 (table 4.1). ***Footnote 3:
While there appear to be large differences
among racial/ethnic groups, these
differences are associated with large
standard errors and should be interpreted
with caution.***

5. Prevalence of students involved in
physical fights on school property**NOTE:
This indicator has been updated to include
2001 data.**

Schools where there are numerous physical
fights may not be able to maintain a focused
learning environment. Students who are
involved in fights on school property may
have difficulty being successful in school.

* In 2001, 33 percent of students in grades
9 through 12 reported that they had been in
a physical fight anywhere ***Footnote 4: The
term "anywhere" is not used in the YRBS
questionnaire. Rather, students are simply
asked how many times in the last 12 months
they had been in a physical fight.*** in the
last 12 months (table 5.1). In that same
year, about 13 percent of all students said
that they had been in a physical fight on
school property.

* The percentage of students who reported
being in a fight anywhere declined from 1993
to 2001--from 42 percent in 1993 to 33
percent in 2001 (figure 5.1 and table 5.1).
Similarly, the percentages of students who
reported fighting on school property for
these years also declined, from 16 percent
in 1993 to 13 percent in 2001.

* In all survey years, males were more
likely than females to have been in a fight
anywhere and on school property (figure 5.1
and table 5.1). In 2001, 43 percent of males
said they had been in a fight anywhere, and
18 percent said they had been in a fight on
school property. In that same year, about 24
percent of females reported they had been in
a fight anywhere, and 7 percent said they
had been in a fight on school property.

* Of 9th- through 12th-grade students, those
in lower grades reported being in more
fights than students in higher grades
anywhere and on school property in all
survey years (figure 5.2 and table 5.1).

* In 2001, Asian students were less likely
than students from other racial/ethnic
backgrounds to report being in a fight
anywhere (22 percent for Asian students
compared to 32 to 52 percent for all other
students) (table 5.1). However, in 2001, no
difference could be detected in the
percentage of students who reported being in
fights on school property by race/ethnicity.
***Footnote 5: While there appear to be
large differences among racial/ethnic
groups, these differences are associated
with large standard errors and should be
interpreted with caution.***

6. Prevalence of students being bullied at
school**NOTE: This indicator has been
updated to include 2001 data.**

Bullying can contribute to a climate of fear
and intimidation in schools. Students ages
12 through 18 were asked if they had been
bullied (that is, picked on or made to do
things they did not want to do) at school.

* In 2001, 8 percent of students reported
that they had been bullied at school in the
last 6 months, up from 5 percent in 1999
(table 6.1).

* Both males and females were more likely to
be bullied in 2001 than in 1999 (figure 6.1
and table 6.1). In 2001, males were more
likely than females to be bullied (9 and 7
percent, respectively); however, in 1999 no
such difference could be detected (5 percent
each).

* The percentage of students who reported
that they had been bullied increased between
1999 and 2001 for each racial/ethnic group
except Black students (table 6.1). About 6
percent of Black students in both years
reported they had been bullied. Between 1999
and 2001, the percentage of students bullied
increased from 5 percent to 9 percent for
White students, from 4 percent to 8 percent
for Hispanic students, and from 3 percent to
7 percent for other, non-Hispanic students.

* In 2001, there were few differences
detected among racial/ethnic groups in the
percentage of students who reported being
bullied (table 6.1). The exception was that
White students were more likely to report
being victimized by bullies than were Black
students (9 percent and 6 percent,
respectively).

* In 2001, students in lower grades were
generally more likely to be bullied than
students in higher grades (table 6.1). For
example, 14 percent of students in 6th grade
reported being bullied, compared with 2
percent of students in grade 12.

VIOLENCE AND CRIME AT SCHOOL--PUBLIC SCHOOL
PRINCIPAL/DISCIPLINARIAN REPORTS

7. Crimes reported to the police**NOTE: This
indicator repeats information from the 2000
Indicators of School Crime and Safety
report.**

The number of crimes that principals
indicated they reported to police or other
law enforcement representatives is a useful
measure of the occurrences of serious crimes
in the nation's schools. The percentage of
schools reporting crimes provides an
indication of how widespread crime is, while
the number of crimes reported provides
information on the magnitude of the problem.

* In 1996-97, 10 percent of all public
schools reported at least one serious
violent crime to a law enforcement
representative (figure 7.1 and table 7.1).
Another 47 percent of public schools
reported a less serious violent or
nonviolent crime (but not a serious violent
one). The remaining 43 percent of public
schools did not report any of these crimes
to the police.

* The vast majority of crimes reported by
public schools were of the less serious
violent or nonviolent type in 1996-97
(402,000 out of the 424,000 total crimes
reported to the police) (table 7.3).

* No differences were found between the
percentage of schools reporting crimes at
the middle and high school levels (figure
7.2 and table 7.1). At each level, about 20
percent of the schools reported at least one
serious violent crime, and about 55 percent
reported at least one less serious violent
or nonviolent crime, but no serious violent
crime in 1996-97.

* The numbers of reported incidents per
1,000 students did not differ for middle and
high schools for both serious violent and
less serious violent and nonviolent crimes
(figure 7.2 and table 7.4). For both types
of crimes, there was a lower rate at the
elementary level than at the middle or high
school levels.

* The percentage of schools reporting at
least one serious violent crime was much
higher in cities (17 percent) than in towns
(5 percent) or rural areas (8 percent)
during 1996-97 (figure 7.2 and table 7.1).

8. Specific crimes reported to the
police**NOTE: This indicator repeats
information from the 2000 Indicators of
School Crime and Safety report.**

Data on the prevalence of specific types of
crimes add detail to the more general
discussion of serious violent crimes and
less serious violent and nonviolent crimes.

* Forty-four to 55 percent of all public
middle and high schools reported incidents
of vandalism, theft or larceny, and physical
attacks or fights without weapons to the
police or other law enforcement
representatives in the 1996-97 school year
(figure 8.1 and table 8.2). Considerably
smaller percentages of public middle and
high schools reported the more serious
violent crimes of rape or other type of
sexual battery (5 and 8 percent,
respectively); robbery (5 and 8 percent); or
physical attack or fight with a weapon (12
and 13 percent) (table 8.1).

* Elementary schools were much less likely
than either middle or high schools to report
any of the types of crime described here in
1996-97 (figure 8.1 and tables 8.1 and 8.2).
They were much more likely to report
vandalism (31 percent) than any other crime
(19 percent or less).

* In 1996-97, physical attack or fight
without a weapon was generally the most
commonly reported crime at the middle and
high school levels (9 and 8 per 1,000 public
school students, respectively) (figure 8.2
and table 8.8). Theft or larceny was more
common at the high school level than at the
middle school level (6 vs. 4 per 1,000
students).

* Overall, there was relatively little
variation by urbanicity in the crime rates
at school discussed here during the 1996-97
school year (as measured by the number of
crimes reported per 1,000 public school
students) (figure 8.2 and tables 8.7 and
8.8).

NONFATAL TEACHER VICTIMIZATION AT SCHOOL--
TEACHER REPORTS

9. Nonfatal teacher victimization at
school**NOTE: This indicator has been
updated to include 2000 data.**

Students are not the only ones who are
victims of crime at school. Teachers are
also targets of violence and theft in
schools. In addition to the personal toll
that violence may take on teachers, those
who worry about their safety may have
difficulty teaching and may leave the
profession altogether. Information on the
number of crimes against teachers at school
can help show the nature and prevalence of
the problem.

* Over the 5-year period from 1996 through
2000, teachers were the victims of
approximately 1,603,000 nonfatal crimes at
school, including 1,004,000 thefts and
599,000 violent crimes (rape or sexual
assault, robbery, aggravated assault, and
simple assault) (table 9.1). On average,
this translates into 321,000 nonfatal crimes
per year, or 74 crimes per 1,000 teachers
per year. Among the violent crimes against
teachers during this 5-year period, there
were about 69,000 serious violent crimes (11
percent of the violent crimes), including
rape or sexual assault, robbery, and
aggravated assault. On average, this
translates into 14,000 serious violent
crimes per year.

* The average annual violent crime rate for
teachers at school varied by gender (figure
9.1 and table 9.1). Over the 5- year period
from 1996 through 2000, male teachers were
more likely to be victims of violent crimes
than female teachers (50 vs. 20 crimes per
1,000 teachers).

* During the 1996-2000 period, senior high
school and middle/junior high school
teachers were more likely to be victims of
violent crimes (most of which were simple
assaults) than elementary school teachers
(35 and 49, respectively, vs. 15 crimes per
1,000 teachers) (figure 9.1 and table 9.1).
Senior high school and middle/junior high
school teachers also were more likely to
experience theft at school than elementary
school teachers (56 and 59, respectively,
vs. 36 thefts per 1,000 teachers).

* Teachers were differentially victimized by
violent crimes at school according to the
location of where they taught (figure 9.1
and table 9.1). For example, over the 5-year
period from 1996 through 2000, urban
teachers were more likely to be victims of
violent crimes than suburban and rural
teachers (36 vs. 21 and 17, respectively,
per 1,000 teachers). Teachers in urban areas
were more likely to experience theft at
school than those in rural areas (53 and 31
respectively, per 1,000 teachers), but no
differences were detected when urban
teachers' experiences of theft were compared
to suburban teachers (53 and 46, per 1,000
teachers).

10. Prevalence of teachers being threatened
with injury or attacked by students**NOTE:
This indicator has been updated to include
1999-2000 data.**

Some of the offenses against teachers are
committed by students. Data on threats and
physical attacks against elementary and
secondary teachers by students can provide a
snapshot of the prevalence of this problem.

* A smaller percentage of elementary and
secondary school teachers were threatened
with injury by a student from their school
in the 1999-2000 school year than in the
1993-1994 school year (9 percent vs. 12
percent, respectively) (table 10.1). In both
years, 4 percent of teachers were physically
attacked by a student (table 10.2).

* In both survey years, teachers in central
city schools were more likely to be
threatened with injury or physically
attacked than were teachers in urban fringe
or rural schools (figure 10.1 and tables
10.1 and 10.2). In 1999-2000, 11 percent of
teachers in central city schools had been
threatened with injury by students, compared
with 8 percent in both urban fringe and
rural schools. Five percent of teachers in
central city schools had been attacked by
students, compared with 3 percent in both
urban fringe and rural schools. No
differences were detected in the percentage
of teachers being threatened or attacked
when urban fringe and rural schools were
compared.

* Black teachers were more likely to be
threatened than White teachers in 1999-2000
(12 percent vs. 9 percent); however, the
prevalence of teachers being attacked by
students did not vary according to the
racial/ethnic backgrounds of teachers
(tables 10.1 and 10.2).

* In 1999-2000, secondary school teachers
were more likely than elementary school
teachers to have been threatened with injury
by a student from their school (10 percent
vs. 8 percent) (table 10.1). However, they
were less likely than elementary school
teachers to have been physically attacked by
a student (2 percent vs. 6 percent) (table
10.2).

* Public school teachers were more likely
than private school teachers to be
victimized by students in school in
1999-2000 (figure 10.2 and tables 10.1 and
10.2). Ten percent of public school teachers
had been threatened with injury by students,
compared with 4 percent of private school
teachers. Four percent of public school
teachers had been physically attacked by
students, compared with 2 percent of private
school teachers.

* Teachers in public central city schools
were four times more likely to be targets of
threats of injury and about three times more
likely to be targets of attacks than their
colleagues in private central city schools
in 1999-2000 (figure 10.2 and tables 10.1
and 10.2).

SCHOOL ENVIRONMENT

11. Prevalence of students carrying weapons
on school property**NOTE: This indicator has
been updated to include 2001 data.**

The presence of weapons at school can create
an intimidating and threatening atmosphere,
making teaching and learning difficult. The
percentage of students who report that they
carry a gun or other weapon on school
property is an indicator of the breadth of
the problem of weapons at school.

* In 2001, 17 percent of students in grades
9 through 12 reported carrying a weapon such
as a gun, knife, or club anywhere
***Footnote 6: The term "anywhere" is not
used in the YRBS questionnaire. Rather,
students are simply asked during the past 30
days, on how many days they carried a
weapon.*** in the past 30 days (table 11.2).
About 6 percent reported they had carried a
weapon on school property (table 11.1).

* Between 1993 and 2001, the percentage of
students who reported carrying a weapon
anywhere generally declined from 22 percent
to 17 percent (table 11.2). There was also a
decline in the percentage of students who
carried a weapon at school-- from 12 percent
in 1993 to 6 percent in 2001 (table 11.1).

* In all years, males were at least three
times more likely than females to carry a
weapon--both anywhere and on school property
(figure 11.1 and tables 11.1 and 11.2). For
example, in 2001, 10 percent of males
carried a weapon on school property,
compared with 3 percent of females.

* Students in lower grades were generally
more likely to have carried a weapon
anywhere than were students in higher grades
in all survey years except 1999 (figure 11.2
and table 11.2). However, at school, no
differences were found among grade levels
for students carrying a weapon at school in
all years except 1995 (table 11.1).

* In 2001, few differences could be detected
by race/ethnicity in the percentages of
students carrying weapons anywhere and on
school property (tables 11.1 and 11.2).
***Footnote 7: While there appear to be
large differences among racial/ethnic
groups, these differences are associated
with large standard errors and should be
interpreted with caution.***

12. Students' perceptions of personal safety
at school or on the way to and from school
and away from school**NOTE: This indicator
has been updated to include 2001 data. See
appendix B for details on changes to the
questionnaire among survey years.**

One consequence of school violence is the
fear that it can instill in students.
Students who fear for their own safety may
not be able or ready to learn. Concerns
about vulnerability to attacks by others at
school and away from school may also have a
detrimental effect on the school environment
and learning.

* Between 1995 and 1999, there was a
decrease in the percentage of students
feeling unsafe while they were at school or
on the way to and from school (table 12.1).
However, between 1999 and 2001, there was no
significant change in the percentage of
students feeling unsafe at school or on the
way to or from school. In 1995, 12 percent
of students ages 12 through 18 reported that
they sometimes or most of the time were
fearful at school, compared to 7 percent in
1999 and 6 percent in 2001.

* In both 1999 and 2001, students were more
likely to be afraid of being attacked at
school or on the way to and from school than
away from school (table 12.1). For example,
in 2001, 6 percent feared being attacked at
school, while 5 percent feared being
attacked away from school.

* In both 1999 and 2001, Black and Hispanic
students were more likely than White
students to fear for their safety both at
school or on the way to and from school and
away from school (figures 12.1 and 12.2 and
table 12.1).

* For all survey years, students in lower
grades were more likely than students in
higher grades to fear attacks at school or
on the way to and from school. For example,
in 2001, 11 percent of students in grade 6
feared for their safety while at school,
compared with 3 percent of students in grade
12.

* Students in urban schools were more likely
than students in suburban and rural schools
to fear being attacked when at school or on
the way to and from school in all three
survey years (table 12.1). In 2001, 10
percent of students in urban schools feared
being attacked when at school, compared with
5 percent of students in suburban schools
and 6 percent of students in rural schools.

13. Students' reports of avoiding places in
school**NOTE: This indicator has been
updated to include 2001 data. See appendix B
for details on changes to the questionnaire
among survey years.**

Crime in school may lead students to
perceive specific areas in school as unsafe.
In trying to ensure their own safety, they
begin to avoid these areas. Changes in the
percentage of students avoiding areas in
school may be a good barometer of how safe
schools are?at least in the minds of those
who attend these schools.

* Between 1995 and 1999, the percentage of
students ages 12 through 18 who avoided one
or more places in school decreased from 9
percent in 1995 to 5 percent in 1999 (figure
13.1 and table 13.1). However, between 1999
and 2001, the percentage remained stable at
5 percent.

* In 1995 and 1999, both Black and Hispanic
students were more likely than White
students to report avoiding places (figure
13.1 and table 13.1). In 2001, Black
students were more likely than White
students to report avoiding places in
school. No differences were detected between
students of other racial/ethnic backgrounds
in this year.

* In 2001, students in lower grades were
more likely than students in higher grades
to report avoiding areas in school (table
13.1). For example, 7 percent of 6th-
graders avoided areas in school, compared
with 3 percent of 12th-graders.

* In both 1995 and 2001, students in urban
areas were more likely than suburban
students to avoid places in school (6
percent vs. 4 percent, respectively, in
2001) (figure 13.2 and table 13.1). However,
in 1999, there were no such differences
between urban and suburban students.

14. Students' reports of being called hate-
related words and seeing hate-related
graffiti**NOTE: This indicator has been
updated to include 2001 data.**

A student's exposure to hate-related words
or symbols at school may increase his or her
feeling of vulnerability. An environment in
which students are confronted with
discriminatory behavior creates a climate of
hostility that is not conducive to learning.

* In 2001, 12 percent of students ages 12
through 18 reported that someone at school
had used hate-related words against them
(table 14.1). That is, in the 6 months prior
to the survey, someone at school called them
a derogatory word having to do with race,
religion, ethnicity, disability, gender, or
sexual orientation. Over 4 percent of
respondents reported that the hate-related
words related to their race, about 3 percent
reported that the hate- related words
related to their ethnicity or gender, and
between 1 and 2 percent reported that the
hate-related words related to their
religion, disability, or sexual orientation.

* In both 1999 and 2001, 36 percent of
students saw hate-related graffiti at school
(table 14.2).

* In 2001, there were no differences
measured by race/ethnicity or gender in
students' likelihood of reporting either
being called hate-related words or seeing
hate-related graffiti at school (tables 14.1
and 14.2 and figure 14.1). However, there
were differences among these groups in terms
of exposure to specific types of hate-
related words. For example, females were
more likely to report gender-related hate
words than males, and Blacks were more
likely to report race- related hate words
than Whites (4 percent of females vs. 1
percent of males and 8 percent of Blacks vs.
3 percent of Whites).

* Students in public schools were more
likely than students in private schools to
report being called hate-related words or to
see hate-related graffiti in 2001 (tables
14.1 and 14.2).

15. Students' reports of gangs at
school**NOTE: This indicator has been
updated to include 2001 data. See appendix B
for details on questionnaire changes in
2001.**

Street gangs are organized groups that are
often involved in drugs, weapons
trafficking, and violence. The presence of
street gangs in school can be very
disruptive to the school environment. Street
gangs may not only create fear among
students but also increase the level of
violence in school. The percentage of
students who report the presence of street
gangs in their schools indicates the
existence and severity of the gang problem
in schools.

* In 2001, 20 percent of students reported
that street gangs were present at their
schools (figure 15.1 and table 15.1).
Students in urban schools were more likely
to report that there were street gangs at
their schools (29 percent) than were
suburban and rural students (18 percent and
13 percent, respectively).

* Hispanic and Black students were more
likely than White students to report the
existence of street gangs in their schools
in 2001 (32 percent and 29 percent,
respectively, vs. 16 percent) (table 15.1).
This was also true for students in urban
schools and suburban schools.

* Gangs were more likely to be reported in
public schools than in private schools
(figure 15.1 and table 15.1). In 2001, 22
percent of students in public schools
reported that street gangs were present in
their schools, compared with 5 percent in
private schools. Among public schools,
students in urban schools were more likely
than students in suburban or rural schools
to report street gangs. However, among
private schools, no differences were found
in students' reports of gangs irrespective
of where their schools were located.

16. Public school principals' perceptions of
discipline issues at school**NOTE: This
indicator has been updated to include
1999-2000 data.**

Discipline problems in a school may
contribute to an overall climate in which
violence may occur. Schools that suffer from
student drug or alcohol use, physical
conflicts, or student disrespect for
teachers may be filled with pressures that
result in school violence.

* Public school principals were more likely
to consider some discipline issues at their
schools serious or moderate problems than
other issues. ***Footnote 8: The issues were
student tardiness, student absenteeism,
student disrespect for teachers, student use
of alcohol, physical conflicts among
students, student drug abuse, students
cutting class, vandalism of school property,
robbery or theft, and student possession of
weapons.*** For example, in 1999-2000,
student tardiness and absenteeism were
reported as problems by about 30 percent of
principals (32 percent and 29 percent,
respectively) (table 16.1). However,
vandalism of school property and robbery or
theft were considered to be serious or
moderate problems in 6 percent and 4 percent
of public schools, respectively. Student
possession of weapons was reported as a
serious or moderate problem by 1 percent of
public school principals.

* With the exception of physical conflicts
among students, secondary school principals
were more likely than elementary school
principals to report disciplinary issues as
a serious or moderate problem in their
school in 1999-2000 (table 16.1 and figure
16.1).

* Reports of disciplinary issues from
secondary school principals varied between
1993-94 and 1999-2000. Reports of student
tardiness as a serious or moderate problem
increased from 43 percent to 48 percent, and
reports of student drug abuse also increased
from 30 percent to 39 percent (table 16.1).
On the other hand, secondary school
principal reports of physical conflicts,
vandalism, robbery or theft, and student
possession of weapons decreased during this
time period (from 20 to 12 percent, 10 to 7
percent, 11 to 7 percent, and 7 to 2
percent, respectively).

17. Prevalence of students using
alcohol**NOTE: This indicator has been
updated to include 2001 data.**

The consumption of alcohol by students on
school property, a crime in itself, may also
lead to other crimes and misbehavior. It can
lead to a school environment that is harmful
to students, teachers, and staff.

* In 2001, 47 percent of students in grades
9 through 12 had at least one drink of
alcohol anywhere ***Footnote 9: The term
"anywhere" is not used in the YRBS
questionnaire. Rather, students are simply
asked during the past 30 days, on how many
days did they have at least one drink of
alcohol.*** in the 30 days before being
surveyed (table 17.1). A small percentage (5
percent) had at least one drink on school
property during the same period.

* There were no consistent patterns of
increase or decrease found in the percentage
of students who had consumed alcohol between
1993 and 2001--both anywhere and on school
property (figure 17.1 and table 17.1).

* In every survey year except for 1995,
males were more likely than females to have
used alcohol anywhere (figure 17.1 and table
17.1). Furthermore, in every survey year,
males were more likely than females to use
alcohol on school property. For example, in
2001, 6 percent of males had used alcohol on
school property, compared with 4 percent of
females.

* In every survey year, students in higher
grades were more likely to report drinking
alcohol anywhere than were students in lower
grades (figure 17.2 and table 17.1).
However, no differences were found among
grade levels for students' reports of
drinking alcohol on school property in every
survey year.

* Asian students were less likely to use
alcohol anywhere than White, Hispanic or
Latino, and American Indian or Alaska Native
students in 2001 (28 percent compared to 50,
49, and 51 percent, respectively) (table
17.1). However, when comparing Asian
students' use of alcohol on school property
to these groups' use, no difference could be
detected (7 percent compared to 4, 7, and 8
percent, respectively). ***Footnote 10:
While there appear to be large differences
among racial/ethnic groups, these
differences are associated with large
standard errors and should be interpreted
with caution.***

18. Prevalence of students using
marijuana**NOTE: This indicator has been
updated to include 2001 data.**

The use of drugs at school may cause
disruptions in the learning environment. The
consumption of these substances, such as
marijuana, can lead to a school environment
that is harmful to students, teachers, and
school administrators.

* In 2001, 24 percent of students in grades
9 through 12 reported using marijuana
anywhere ***Footnote 11: The term "anywhere"
is not used in the YRBS questionnaire.
Rather, students are simply asked how many
times during the past 30 days they used
marijuana.*** during the last 30 days,
whereas 5 percent of students reported using
marijuana on school property (table 18.1).

* Overall, there were no consistent patterns
of increase or decrease found in the
percentage of students who had used
marijuana between 1993 and 2001--both
anywhere and on school property (table
18.1).

* Males were more likely than females to
have used marijuana in every survey year--
both anywhere and on school property (figure
18.1 and table 18.1). For example, in 2001,
8 percent of males and 3 percent of females
reported using marijuana on school property.

* In 2001, students in lower grades were
less likely than students in higher grades
to report using marijuana anywhere (figure
18.2 and table 18.1). However, students'
grade in school was not associated with
their use of marijuana on school property.

* In 2001, Asian students were less likely
than White, Black or African American,
Hispanic or Latino, and American Indian or
Alaska Native students to report using
marijuana anywhere (table 18.1). However,
regarding marijuana use at school among
these groups, no differences could be
detected. ***Footnote 12: While there appear
to be large differences among racial/ethnic
groups, these differences are associated
with large standard errors and should be
interpreted with caution.***

19. Prevalence of students reporting drugs
were made available to them on school
property**NOTE: This indicator has been
updated to include 2001 data.**

Schools can be places where young people are
offered or can purchase illegal drugs. The
availability of drugs on school property is
a disruptive and corrupting influence in the
school environment.

* In 2001, 29 percent of all students in
grades 9 through 12 reported that someone
had offered, sold, or given them an illegal
drug on school property in the 12 months
prior to the survey (table 19.1). There were
no consistent patterns of increase or
decrease found in the percentage of students
who had reported that drugs were made
available to them on school property between
1993 and 2001.

* In each survey year, males were more
likely than females to report that drugs
were offered, sold, or given to them on
school property (figure 19.1 and table
19.1). For example, in 2001, 35 percent of
males reported the availability of drugs,
while 23 percent of females did so.

* Students' grade level in school does not
appear to be associated with whether they
had been offered, sold, or given drugs on
school property (table 19.1). Generally, in
each survey year, the percentage of students
in each grade level who reported the
availability of illegal drugs did not
differ.

* In 1999 and 2001, there were few
differences by racial/ethnic background in
students' reports of having illegal drugs
offered, sold, or given to them on school
property (figure 19.2 and table 19.1).
***Footnote 13: While there appear to be
large differences among racial/ethnic
groups, these differences are associated
with large standard errors and should be
interpreted with caution.***

APPENDIX A. SCHOOL PRACTICES AND POLICIES
RELATED TO SAFETY AND DISCIPLINE **NOTE:
This appendix has been updated from the 2001
Indicators of School Crime and Safety
report.**

Concern over school crime and violence has
prompted many public schools to take various
measures to reduce and prevent violence and
ensure safety in schools. Such measures
include adopting zero tolerance policies;
requiring students to wear uniforms;
employing various security measures such as
requiring visitor sign-in and using metal
detectors; having police or other law
enforcement representatives stationed at the
school; and offering students various types
of violence prevention programs. Presented
in this appendix are data on the
implementation of such safety measures in
public schools. This report does not
evaluate the effectiveness of any of these
efforts or strategies, and the inclusion of
a strategy does not suggest that it is
endorsed by the National Center for
Education Statistics (NCES) or the Bureau of
Justice Statistics (BJS) as an effective
means of reducing or preventing violence.
Likewise, the omission of a possible
strategy does not suggest it is rejected by
NCES or BJS as a policy to reduce or prevent
violence. This information was drawn from
two sources. First, some information and
tables were drawn from an NCES report titled
Violence and Discipline Problems in U.S.
Public Schools: 1996-97 (NCES 98-030). The
report was based on data from the 1996-97
Fast Response Survey System (FRSS)
Principal/School Disciplinarian Survey on
School Violence. Readers should consult the
FRSS report for more detailed findings on
variation by school characteristics. Second,
data from the 1999-2000 Schools and Staffing
Survey were used to update existing
information with timely data on practices
and policies related to safety and
discipline.

Zero Tolerance Policies

* In 1996-97, most public schools reported
having zero tolerance policies toward
serious student offenses (table A1). A "zero
tolerance policy" was defined as a school or
district policy that mandates predetermined
consequences or punishments for specific
offenses. At least 9 out of 10 schools
reported zero tolerance policies for
firearms (94 percent) and weapons other than
firearms (91 percent). Eighty-seven percent
of schools had policies of zero tolerance
for alcohol and 88 percent had zero
tolerance policies for drugs. Most schools
also had zero tolerance policies for
violence and tobacco (79 percent each).

School Uniforms

* Requiring students to wear school uniforms
was not common. Three percent of all public
schools required students to wear uniforms
during the 1996-97 school year (table A2).

Security Measures

* Schools took a number of measures to
secure their schools. For example, in
1999-2000, 97 percent of public schools
reported that visitors were required to sign
in before entering the school building
(table A3); 90 percent of public schools
reported having a closed campus policy that
prohibited most students from leaving the
campus for lunch; 23 percent of schools
reported the daily presence of police or
security personnel; and 15 percent reported
using video surveillance to monitor students
and their school. In addition, 21 percent of
public schools reported conducting drug
sweeps, with secondary schools and combined
elementary/secondary schools being more
likely to use drug sweeps than elementary
schools (49 and 40 percent, respectively,
vs. 10 percent). While 8 percent of public
schools reported that they performed random
metal detector checks on students, daily use
of metal detectors as a security measure was
not as common: only 2 percent of public
schools reported taking this measure.

Presence of Police or Other Law Enforcement
Representatives in Schools

* In addition to the security measures
described above, in 1996-97, 6 percent of
public schools reported having police or
other law enforcement representatives
stationed 30 hours or more at the school in
a typical week during the 1996-97 school
year; 1 percent of schools had them
stationed from 10 to 29 hours; and 3 percent
had them stationed from 1 to 9 hours (table
A4). Twelve percent of schools did not have
police or other law enforcement
representatives stationed during a typical
week, but made them available as needed, and
78 percent of schools did not have any such
persons stationed at their schools.

Violence Prevention or Reduction Programs

*  A majority of public schools (59 percent)
reported having a school violence prevention
program in 1999-2000 (table A5). Of those
schools with a program, 58 percent employed
a formal procedure to assess the
effectiveness of the violence prevention
program.

Policies to Prevent Firearms in School

* In the 1996-97 school year, there were
over 5,000 student expulsions for possession
or use of a firearm (table A6). An
additional 3,300 students were transferred
to alternative schools for possession or use
of a firearm, while 8,144 were placed in
out-of-school suspensions lasting 5 or more
days. About 5 percent of all public schools
(or 4,170) took one or more of these
actions.

APPENDIX B. TECHNICAL NOTES

General Information

The information presented in this report was
obtained from many data sources, including
databases from the National Center for
Education Statistics (NCES), the Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), and
the Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS).
While some of the data were collected from
universe surveys, most were gathered by
sample surveys. Some questions from
different surveys may appear the same, but
they were actually asked of different
populations of students (e.g., high school
seniors or students in grades 9 through 12);
in different years; about experiences that
occurred within different periods of time
(e.g., in the past 4 weeks or during the
past 12 months); and at different locations
(e.g., in school or at home). Readers of
this report should take particular care when
comparing data from the different data
sources. Because of the variation in
collection procedures, timing, phrasing of
questions, and so forth, the results from
the different sources may not be strictly
comparable. After introducing the data
sources used for this report, the next
section discusses the accuracy of estimates
and describes the statistical procedures
used.

Sources of Data

Table B1 presents some key information for
each of the data sets used in the report,
including the survey year(s), target
population, response rate, and sample size.
The remainder of the section briefly
describes each data set and provides
directions for obtaining more information.
The exact wording of the interview questions
used to construct the indicators are
presented in table B2.

Schools and Staffing Survey (SASS)

This report draws upon data on teacher
victimization from the Schools and Staffing
Survey (SASS), which provides national- and
state-level data on public and national- and
affiliation-level on private schools,
principals, school districts, and teachers.
The 1993-94 and 1999-2000 SASS consists of
four sets of linked surveys, including
surveys of schools, the principals of each
selected school, a subsample of teachers
within each school, and public school
districts. Data were collected by multistage
sampling. Stratified by state, control
(public vs. private), type, association
membership (for example, in private school
associations), and grade level (for private
schools), schools were sampled first. This
report uses 1993-1994 and 1999-2000 SASS
data. Approximately 9,900 public schools and
3,300 private schools were selected to
participate in the 1993-1994 SASS and 9,900
public schools and 3,600 private schools
were selected to participate in the
1999-2000 SASS. Within each school, teachers
were further stratified into one of five
teacher types in the following hierarchy:
(1) Asian or Pacific Islander; (2) American
Indian, Aleut, or Eskimo; (3) bilingual/ESL;
(4) new teachers (those with 1 to 3 years of
experience); and (5) experienced teachers
(those with more than 3 years of
experience). Within each teacher stratum,
teachers were selected systematically with
equal probability. In 1993-1994,
approximately 53,000 public school teachers
and 10,400 private school teachers were
sampled. In 1999-2000, 56,400 public school
teachers and 10,800 private school teachers
were sampled.

This report focuses on responses from both
teachers and principals. The overall
weighted response rates were between 83 and
88 percent for public school teachers and
between 77 and 80 percent for private school
teachers. For public school principals, the
overall weighted response rates were between
90 and 97 percent. Values were imputed for
questionnaire items that should have been
answered but were not. For additional
information about SASS contact:

Kerry Gruber National Center for Education
Statistics 1990 K Street NW Washington, DC
20006 Telephone: (202) 502-7349 E-mail:
Kerry.Gruber@ed.gov

National School-Based Youth Risk Behavior
Survey (YRBS)

The National School-Based Youth Risk
Behavior Survey (YRBS) is one component of
the Youth Risk Behavior Surveillance System
(YRBSS), an epidemiological surveillance
system developed by the Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention (CDC) to monitor the
prevalence of youth behaviors that most
influence health. The YRBS focuses on
priority health-risk behaviors established
during youth that result in the most
significant mortality, morbidity,
disability, and social problems during both
youth and adulthood. This report uses 1993,
1995, 1997, 1999, and 2001 YRBS data.

The YRBS used a three-stage cluster sampling
design to produce a nationally
representative sample of students in grades
9 through 12 in the United States. The
target population consisted of all public
and private school students in grades 9
through 12 in the 50 states and the District
of Columbia. The first-stage sampling frame
included selecting primary sampling units
(PSUs) from strata formed on the basis of
urbanization and the relative percentage of
black and Hispanic students in the PSU.
These PSUs are either large counties or
groups of smaller, adjacent counties. At the
second stage, schools were selected with
probability proportional to school
enrollment size. Schools with substantial
numbers of black and Hispanic students were
sampled at relatively higher rates than all
other schools. The final stage of sampling
consisted of randomly selecting within each
chosen school at each grade 9 through 12 one
or two intact classes of a required subject,
such as English or social studies. All
students in selected classes were eligible
to participate. Approximately 16,300,
10,900, 16,300, 15,300, and 13,600 students
were selected to participate in the 1993,
1995, 1997, 1999, and 2001 surveys,
respectively.

The overall response rate was 70 percent for
the 1993 survey, 60 percent for the 1995
survey, 69 percent for the 1997 survey, 66
percent for the 1999 survey, and 63 percent
for the 2001 survey. NCES standards call for
response rates of 70 percent or better and
bias analyses are called for by NCES when
that percentage is not achieved. For the
YRBS data, a full nonresponse bias analysis
has not been done to date. The weights were
developed to adjust for nonresponse and the
oversampling of black and Hispanic students
in the sample. The final weights were
normalized so that only weighted proportions
of students (not weighted counts of
students) in each grade matched national
population projections. In 1999, in
accordance with changes to the Office of
Management and Budget's standards for the
classification of federal data on race and
ethnicity, the YRBS item on race/ethnicity
was modified. The version of the race and
ethnicity question used in 1993, 1995, and
1997 was:

How do you describe yourself?

1. White - not Hispanic 2. Black - not
Hispanic 3. Hispanic or Latino 4. Asian or
Pacific Islander 5. American Indian or
Alaskan Native 6. Other

The version used in 1999 and 2001 was:

How do you describe yourself? (Select one or
more responses.)

A. American Indian or Alaska Native B. Asian
C. Black or African American D. Hispanic or
Latino E. Native Hawaiian or Other Pacific
Islander F. White

This new version of the question used in
1999 and 2001 results in the possibility of
respondents marking more than one category.
While more accurately reflecting
respondents' racial and ethnic identity, the
new item cannot be directly compared to
responses to the old item. Thus, comparisons
of responses by race/ ethnicity of the 1999
and 2001 YRBS with prior years' YRBS are not
advisable. For additional information about
the YRBS contact:

Laura Kann Division of Adolescent and School
Health National Center for Chronic Disease
Prevention and Health Promotion Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention, Mailstop
K-33 4770 Buford Highway NE Atlanta, GA
30341-3717 Telephone: (404) 488-6181 E-mail:
LKK1@cdc.gov

Fast Response Survey System:
Principal/School Disciplinarian Survey on
School Violence

The Principal/School Disciplinarian Survey
was conducted through the NCES Fast Response
Survey System (FRSS) during the spring and
summer of 1997. The FRSS is a survey system
designed to collect small amounts of issue-
oriented data with minimal burden on
respondents and within a relatively short
time frame. The FRSS Principal/School
Disciplinarian Survey focused on incidents
of specific crimes/offenses and a variety of
specific discipline issues in public
schools. The survey was conducted with a
nationally representative sample of regular
public elementary, middle, and high schools
in the 50 states and the District of
Columbia. Special education, alternative and
vocational schools, schools in the
territories, and schools that taught only
prekindergarten, kindergarten, or adult
education were not included in the sample.

The sample of public schools was selected
from the 1993-94 NCES Common Core of Data
(CCD) Public School Universe File. The
sample was stratified by instructional
level, locale, and school size. Within the
primary strata, schools were also sorted by
geographic region and by percent minority
enrollment. The sample sizes were then
allocated to the primary strata in rough
proportion to the aggregate square root of
the size of enrollment of schools in the
stratum. A total of 1,415 schools were
selected. Among them, 11 schools were found
no longer to be in existence, and 1,234
schools completed the survey. In April 1997,
questionnaires were mailed to school
principals, who were asked to complete the
survey or to have it completed by the person
most knowledgeable about discipline issues
at the school. The raw response rate was 88
percent (1,234 schools divided by the 1,404
eligible schools in the sample). The
weighted overall response rate was 89
percent, and item nonresponse rates ranged
from 0 percent to 0.9 percent. The weights
were developed to adjust for the variable
probabilities of selection and differential
nonresponse and can be used to produce
national estimates for regular public
schools in the 1996-97 school year. For more
information about the FRSS: Principal/School
Disciplinarian Survey on School Violence,
contact:

Shelley Burns National Center for Education
Statistics 1990 K Street NW Washington, DC
20006 Telephone: (202) 502-7319 E-mail:
Shelley.Burns@ed.gov

National Crime Victimization Survey (NCVS)

The National Crime Victimization Survey
(NCVS), administered for the U.S. Bureau of
Justice Statistics by the Census Bureau, is
the nation's primary source of information
on crime victimization and the victims of
crime. Initiated in 1972 and redesigned in
1992, the NCVS collects detailed information
on the frequency and nature of the crimes of
rape, sexual assault, robbery, aggravated
and simple assault, theft, household
burglary, and motor vehicle theft
experienced by Americans and their
households each year. The survey measures
crimes reported as well as those not
reported to police.

The NCVS sample consists of about 53,730
households selected using a stratified,
multistage cluster design. In the first
stage, the primary sampling units (PSUs),
consisting of counties or groups of
counties, were selected. In the second
stage, smaller areas, called Enumeration
Districts (EDs), were selected from each
sampled PSU. Finally, from selected EDs,
clusters of four households, called
segments, were selected for interview. At
each stage, the selection was done
proportionate to population size in order to
create a self-weighting sample. The final
sample was augmented to account for housing
units constructed after the decennial
Census. Within each sampled household,
Census Bureau personnel interviewed all
household members ages 12 and older to
determine whether they had been victimized
by the measured crimes during the 6 months
preceding the interview. About 79,360
persons ages 12 and older are interviewed
each 6 months. Households remain in the
sample for 3 years and are interviewed 7
times at 6-month intervals. The initial
interview at each sample unit is used only
to bound future interviews to establish a
time frame to avoid duplication of crimes
uncovered in these subsequent interviews.
After their seventh interview, households
are replaced by new sample households. The
NCVS has consistently obtained a response
rate of about 93 percent at the household
level. During the study period, the
completion rates for persons within
households were about 90 percent. Thus,
final response rates were about 83 percent.
Weights were developed to permit estimates
for the total U.S. population 12 years and
older. For more information about the NCVS,
contact:

Detis Duhart Victimization Statistics U.S.
Bureau of Justice Statistics 810 7th Street
NW Washington, DC 20531 Telephone: (202)
307-6116 E-mail: duhartd@ojp.usdoj.gov
Internet: www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/

School Crime Supplement (SCS)

Created as a supplement to the NCVS and co-
designed by the National Center for
Education Statistics and Bureau of Justice
Statistics, the School Crime Supplement
(SCS) survey was conducted in 1989, 1995,
1999, and 2001 to collect additional
information about school-related
victimizations on a national level. This
report includes data from the 1995, 1999,
and 2001 collections. The 1989 data are not
included in this report as a result of
methodological changes to the NCVS and SCS.
The survey was designed to assist
policymakers as well as academic researchers
and practitioners at the federal, state, and
local levels so that they can make informed
decisions concerning crime in schools. The
SCS asks students a number of key questions
about their experiences with and perceptions
of crime and violence that occurred inside
their school, on school grounds, on a school
bus, or on the way to or from school.
Additional questions not included in the
NCVS were also added to the SCS, such as
those concerning preventive measures used by
the school, students' participation in
afterschool activities, students'
perceptions of school rules, the presence of
weapons and street gangs in school, the
presence of hate-related words and graffiti
in school, student reports of bullying and
reports of rejection at school, and the
availability of drugs and alcohol in school,
as well as attitudinal questions relating to
fear of victimization and avoidance behavior
at school.

In all SCS survey years, the SCS was
conducted for a 6-month period from January
through June in all households selected for
the NCVS (see discussion above for
information about the sampling design). It
should be noted that the initial NCVS
interview is included in the SCS data
analysis. Within these households, the
eligible respondents for the SCS were those
household members who had attended school at
any time during the 6 months preceding the
interview, and were enrolled in grades 6
through 12 in a school that would help them
advance toward eventually receiving a high
school diploma. The age range of students
covered in this report is 12 through 18
years of age. Eligible respondents were
asked the supplemental questions in the SCS
only after completing their entire NCVS
interview.

In 2001, the SCS survey instrument was
modified from previous collections in three
ways. First, in 1995 and 1999, "at school"
was defined for respondents as in the school
building, on the school grounds, or on a
school bus. In 2001, the definition for "at
school" was changed to mean in the school
building, on school property, on a school
bus, or going to and from school. This
change was made to the 2001 questionnaire in
order to be consistent with the definition
of "at school" as it is constructed in the
National Crime Victimization survey. Unlike
prior Indicators reports, the prevalence of
victimization for 1995, 1999, and 2001 was
calculated by using NCVS incident variables
appended to the 1995, 1999, and 2001 SCS
data files. The NCVS type of crime variable
was used to classify victimizations of
students in the SCS as serious violent,
violent, or theft. The NCVS variables asking
where the incident happened and what the
victim was doing when it happened were used
to ascertain whether the incident happened
at school. For prevalence of victimization,
the NCVS definition of "at school" includes
in the school building, on school property,
or on the way to or from school.

Second, the SCS questions pertaining to fear
and avoidance have changed between the 1995
and 1999 SCS and the 2001 SCS. In 1995 and
1999, students were asked if they avoided
places or were fearful because they thought
someone would "attack or harm" them. In
2001, students were asked if they avoided
places or were fearful because they thought
someone would "attack or threaten to attack
them." These changes should be considered
when making comparisons between the 1995 and
1999 data and the 2001 data. Readers should
also note that separate estimates were
provided in the Indicators of School Crime
and Safety 2001 report for the prevalence of
fear at school and on the way to and from
school. This year's report provides one
estimate that combines at school with on the
way to and from school and compares it to
those students who report fear away from
school.

Third, the SCS question pertaining to gangs
has changed in the 2001 SCS. The
introduction and definition of gangs as well
as the placement of the item in the
questionnaire changed in the 2001 SCS.
Because of these changes, the reader should
be cautioned not to compare results
presented in this report with those
estimates of gangs presented in previous
reports.

Total victimization is a combination of
violent victimization and theft. If the
student reported an incident of either
violent or theft victimization or both, he
or she is counted as having experienced
"total" victimization. Serious violent
crimes include rape, sexual assault,
robbery, and aggravated assault. Violent
crimes include serious violent crimes and
simple assault.

A total of 9,728 students participated in
the 1995 SCS, 8,398 in 1999, and 8,374 in
2001. In the 2001 SCS, the household
completion rate was 93 percent. In the 1995
and 1999 SCS, the household completion rates
were 95 percent and 94 percent,
respectively; and the student completion
rates were both 78 percent. For the 2001
SCS, the student completion rate was 77
percent. Thus, the overall SCS response rate
(calculated by multiplying the household
completion rate by the student completion
rate) was 74 percent in 1995, 73 percent in
1999 and 72 percent in 2001. Response rates
for most survey items were high-typically
over 95 percent of all eligible respondents.
The weights were developed to compensate for
differential probabilities of selection and
nonresponse. The weighted data permit
inferences about the eligible student
population who were enrolled in schools in
1995, 1999, and 2001. For more information
about SCS, contact:

Kathryn A. Chandler National Center for
Education Statistics 1990 K Street NW
Washington, DC 20006 Telephone: (202)
502-7326 E-mail: Kathryn.Chandler@ed.gov

School Associated Violent Death Study (SAVD)

The School Associated Violent Death Study
(SAVD) is an epidemiological study developed
by the Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention in conjunction with the U.S.
Department of Education and the U.S.
Department of Justice. SAVD seeks to
describe the epidemiology of school-
associated violent deaths, identify common
features of these deaths, estimate the rate
of school-associated violent death in the
United States, and identify potential risk
factors for these deaths. The study includes
descriptive data on all school-associated
violent deaths in the United States,
including all homicides, suicides, and
unintentional firearm-related deaths where
the fatal injury occurred on the campus of a
functioning elementary or secondary school,
while the victim was on the way to or from
regular sessions at such a school, or while
attending or on the way to or from an
official school-sponsored event. Victims of
such events include nonstudents as well as
students and staff members. SAVD includes
descriptive information about the school,
event, victim(s), and offender(s). The first
SAVD study collected data for July 1, 1992-
June 30, 1994 and the follow-up study
includes July 1, 1994-June 30, 1999.

SAVD uses a four-step process to identify
and collect data on school-associated
violent deaths. Cases were initially
identified through a search of the
Lexis/Nexis and Dialog newspaper and media
databases. Then police officials are
contacted to confirm the details of the case
to determine if the event meets the case
definition. Once a case is confirmed, a
police official and a school official are
interviewed regarding details about the
school, event, victim(s), and offender(s).
If police officials are unwilling or unable
to complete the interview, a copy of the
full police report is obtained. The
information obtained on schools includes
school demographics, attendance/absentee
rates, suspension/expulsions and mobility,
school history of weapon carrying, security
measures, violence prevention activities,
school response to the event, and school
policies about weapon carrying. Event
information includes the location of injury,
the context of injury (while classes held,
during break, etc.), motives for injury,
method of injury, and school and community
events happening around the time period.
Information obtained on victim(s) and
offender(s) includes demographics,
circumstances of the event (date/time,
alcohol or drug use, number of persons
involved), types and origins of weapons,
criminal history, psychological risk
factors, school-related problems,
extracurricular activities, and family
history, including structure and stressors.

One hundred and five school-associated
violent deaths were identified from July 1,
1992-June 30, 1994 (See Kachur et al. June
12, 1996. JAMA. 275:22: 1729-1733). The most
recent study identified 253 school-
associated violent deaths between July 1,
1994-June 30, 1999 (See Anderson et al.
December 5, 2001. JAMA. 286:21: 2695-2702).
The first study achieved a response rate of
85 percent for police officials and 81
percent for school officials. The current
study has achieved a response rate of 97
percent for police officials and 78 percent
for school officials. For additional
information about SAVD, contact:

Mark Anderson, MD, MPH Division of Violence
Prevention National Center for Injury
Prevention and Control Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention, Mailstop K60 4770
Buford Highway NE Atlanta, GA 30341
Telephone: (770) 488-4762 E-mail:
mea6@cdc.gov

Supplementary Homicide Reports (SHR)

The Supplementary Homicide Reports (SHR),
which is a part of the Uniform Crime
Reporting (UCR) program, provide incident-
level information on criminal homicides
including location, circumstances, and
method of offense, as well as demographic
characteristics of victims and perpetrators
and the relationship between the two. The
data are provided monthly to the Federal
Bureau of Investigation (FBI) by local law
enforcement agencies participating in the
FBI's UCR program. The data include murders
and non-negligent manslaughters in the
United States from January 1976 through
December 1999. That is, negligent
manslaughters and justifiable homicides have
been eliminated from the data. For the years
1976 through 1999, contributing agencies
provided homicide reports for 452,965 of the
estimated 497,030 murder victims, and for
500,946 of the estimated 549,874 offenders.

Although national coverage is quite high
(about 92% of homicides are included in the
SHR), missing reports can be corrected using
weights to match national and state
estimates prepared by the FBI's UCR. A
weight on the SHR data file reconciles the
counts of SHR homicide victims with those in
the UCR. The weight is the same for all
cases for a given year. The weight
represents the ratio of the number of
homicides reported in the UCR to the number
reported in the SHR. For additional
information about SHR, contact:

James Fox Principal Investigator Uniform
Crime Reports: Supplementary Homicide
Reports Northeastern University 360
Huntington Avenue Boston, MA 02115
Telephone: (617) 373-3296 E-mail:
jfox@neu.edu

Web-based Injury Statistics Query and
Reporting System Fatal (WISQARS(tm) Fatal)

WISQARS Fatal provides mortality data
related to injury. The mortality data
reported in WISQARS Fatal come from death
certificate data reported to the National
Center for Health Statistics (NCHS), Centers
for Disease Control and Prevention. Data
includes causes of death reported by
attending physicians, medical examiners, and
coroners. It also includes demographic
information about decedents reported by
funeral directors, who obtain that
information from family members and other
informants. NCHS collects, compiles,
verifies and prepares these data for release
to the public. The data provides information
about what types of injuries are leading
causes of deaths, how common they are, and
who they affect. This data is intended for a
broad audience-the public, the media, public
health practitioners and researchers, and
public health officials-to increase their
knowledge of injury.

WISQARS Fatal mortality reports provide
tables of the total numbers of injury-
related deaths and the death rates per
100,000 population. The reports list deaths
according to cause (mechanism) and intent
(manner) of injury by state, race, Hispanic
origin, sex, and age groupings. For more
information on WISQARS Fatal, contact:

National Center for Injury Prevention and
Control Mailstop K65 4770 Buford Highway NE
Atlanta, GA 30341-3724 Telephone: (770)
488-1506 E-mail: OHCINFO@cdc.gov

Accuracy of Estimates

The accuracy of any statistic is determined
by the joint effects of "nonsampling" and
"sampling" errors. Both types of error
affect the estimates presented in this
report. Several sources can contribute to
nonsampling errors. For example, members of
the population of interest are inadvertently
excluded from the sampling frame; sampled
members refuse to answer some of the survey
questions (item nonresponse) or all of the
survey questions (questionnaire
nonresponse); mistakes are made during data
editing, coding, or entry; the responses
that respondents provide differ from the
"true" responses; or measurement instruments
such as tests or questionnaires fail to
measure the characteristics they are
intended to measure. Although nonsampling
errors due to questionnaire and item
nonresponse can be reduced somewhat by the
adjustment of sample weights and imputation
procedures, correcting nonsampling errors or
gauging the effects of these errors is
usually difficult.

Sampling errors occur because observations
are made on samples rather than on entire
populations. Surveys of population universes
are not subject to sampling errors.
Estimates based on a sample will differ
somewhat from those that would have been
obtained by a complete census of the
relevant population using the same survey
instruments, instructions, and procedures.
The standard error of a statistic is a
measure of the variation due to sampling; it
indicates the precision of the statistic
obtained in a particular sample. In
addition, the standard errors for two sample
statistics can be used to estimate the
precision of the difference between the two
statistics and to help determine whether the
difference based on the sample is large
enough so that it represents the population
difference.

Most of the data used in this report were
obtained from complex sampling designs
rather than a simple random design. These
features of complex sampling require
different techniques to calculate standard
errors than are used for data collected with
a simple random sample. Therefore,
calculation of standard errors requires
procedures that are markedly different from
the ones used when the data are from a
simple random sample. The Taylor series
approximation technique or the balanced
repeated replication (BRR) method was used
to estimate most of the statistics and their
standard errors in this report. Table B3
lists the various methods used to compute
standard errors for different data sets.

Standard error calculation for data from the
National Crime Victimization Survey and the
School Crime Supplement were based on the
Taylor series approximation method using PSU
and strata variables available from the data
set was employed. For statistics based on
all years of NCVS data standard errors were
derived from a formula developed by the
Census Bureau, which consists of three
generalized variance function (gvf) constant
parameters that represent the curve fitted
to the individual standard errors calculated
using the Jackknife Repeated Replication
technique. The formulas used to compute the
adjusted standard errors associated with
percentages or population counts can be
found in table B3.

Statistical Procedures

The comparisons in the text have been tested
for statistical significance to ensure that
the differences are larger than might be
expected due to sampling variations. Unless
otherwise noted, all statements cited in the
report are statistically significant at the
.05 level. Several test procedures were
used, depending upon the type of data being
analyzed and the nature of the statement
being tested. The primary test procedure
used in this report was the Student's t
statistic, which tests the difference
between two sample estimates, for example,
between males and females. The formula used
to compute the t statistic is as follows:

(See equation in original report)

where E1 and E2 are the estimates to be
compared and se1 and se2 are their
corresponding standard errors. Note that
this formula is valid only for independent
estimates. When the estimates are not
independent (for example, when comparing a
total percentage with that for a subgroup
included in the total), a covariance term
(i.e., 2*se1*se2) must be added to the
denominator of the formula:

(See equation in original report)

Once the t value was computed, it was
compared with the published tables of values
at certain critical levels, called alpha
levels. For this report, an alpha value of
0.05 was used, which has a t value of 1.96.
If the t value was larger than 1.96, then
the difference between the two estimates was
statistically significant at the 95 percent
level.

When multiple comparisons among more than
two groups were made, for example, among
racial/ethnic groups, a Bonferroni
adjustment to the significance level was
used to ensure that the significance level
for the tests as a group was at the .05
level. Generally, when multiple statistical
comparisons are made, it becomes
increasingly likely that an indication of a
population difference is erroneous. Even
when there is no difference in the
population, at an alpha of .05, there is
still a 5 percent chance of concluding that
an observed t value representing one
comparison in the sample is large enough to
be statistically significant. As the number
of comparisons increase, the risk of making
such an erroneous inference also increases.
The Bonferroni procedure corrects the
significance (or alpha) level for the total
number of comparisons made within a
particular classification variable. For each
classification variable, there are (K*(K-1)
/2) possible comparisons (or nonredundant
pairwise combinations), where K is the
number of categories. The Bonferroni
procedure divides the alpha level for a
single t test by the number of possible
pairwise comparisons in order to produce a
new alpha level that is corrected for the
fact that multiple contrasts are being made.
As a result, the t value for a certain alpha
level (e.g., .05) increases, which makes it
more difficult to claim that the difference
observed is statistically significant.

Finally, a linear trend test was used when a
statement describing a linear trend, rather
than the differences between two discrete
categories, was made. This test allows one
to examine whether, for example, the
percentage of students using drugs increased
(or decreased) over time or whether the
percentage of students who reported being
physically attacked in school increased (or
decreased) with their age. Based on a
regression with, for example, student's age
as the independent variable and whether a
student was physically attacked as the
dependent variable, the test involves
computing the regression coefficient (b) and
its corresponding standard error (se). The
ratio of these two (b/se) is the test
statistic t. If t is greater than 1.96, the
critical value for one comparison at the .05
alpha level, the hypothesis that there is a
linear relationship between student's age
and being physically attacked is not
rejected.

While many descriptive comparisons in this
report were tested using t statistic or the
F-statistic, some comparisons among
categories of an ordered variable with three
or more levels involved a test for a linear
trend across all categories, rather than a
series of tests between pairs of categories.
In this report, when differences among
percentages were examined relative to a
variable with ordered categories, Analysis
of Variance (ANOVA) was used to test for a
linear relationship between the two
variables. To do this, ANOVA models included
orthogonal linear contrasts corresponding to
successive levels of the independent
variable. The squares of the Taylorized
standard errors (that is, standard errors
that were calculated by the Taylor series
method), the variance between the means, and
the unweighted sample sizes were used to
partition total sum of squares into within-
and between-group sums of squares. These
were used to create mean squares for the
within- and between-group variance
components and their corresponding F
statistics, which were then compared with
published values of F for a significance
level of .05. Significant values of both the
overall F and the F associated with the
linear contrast term were required as
evidence of a linear relationship between
the two variables.

APPENDIX C. GLOSSARY OF TERMS

General Terms

Cluster sampling

Cluster sampling is a technique in which the
sampling of respondents or subjects occurs
within clusters or groups. For example,
selecting students by sampling schools and
the students that attend that school.

Crime

Any violation of a statute or regulation or
any act that the government has determined
is injurious to the public, including
felonies and misdemeanors. Such violation
may or may not involve violence, and it may
affect individuals or property.

Incident

A specific criminal act or offense involving
one or more victims and one or more
offenders.

Multi-stage sampling

A survey sampling technique in which there
is more than one wave of sampling. That is,
one sample of units is drawn, and then
another sample is drawn within that sample.
For example, at the first stage, a number of
Census blocks may be sampled out of all the
Census blocks in the United States. At the
second stage, households are sampled within
the previously sampled Census blocks.

Prevalence

The percentage of the population directly
affected by crime in a given period. This
rate is based upon specific information
elicited directly from the respondent
regarding crimes committed against his or
her person, against his or her property, or
against an individual bearing a unique
relationship to him or her. It is not based
upon perceptions and beliefs about, or
reactions to, criminal acts.

School

An education institution consisting of one
or more of grades K through 12.

School crime

Any criminal activity that is committed on
school property.

School year

The 12-month period of time denoting the
beginning and ending dates for school
accounting purposes, usually from July 1
through June 30.

Stratification

Stratification is a survey sampling
technique in which the target population is
divided into mutually exclusive groups or
strata based on some variable or variables
(e.g., metropolitan area) and sampling of
units occurs separately within each stratum.

Unequal probabilities

A survey sampling technique in which sampled
units do not have the same probability of
selection into the sample. For example, the
investigator may over-sample minority
students in order to increase the sample
sizes of minority students. Minority
students would then be more likely than
other students to be sampled.

Specific Terms Used in Various Surveys

National Crime Victimization Survey

At school (students)

Inside the school building, on school
property (school parking area, play area,
school bus, etc.), or on the way to or from
school.

At school (teachers)

Inside the school building, on school
property (school parking area, play area,
school bus, etc.), at worksite, or while
working. For thefts, "while working" was not
considered, since thefts of teachers'
property kept at school can occur when
teachers are not present.

Aggravated assault

Attack or attempted attack with a weapon,
regardless of whether or not an injury
occurs, and attack without a weapon when
serious injury results.

Rape

Forced sexual intercourse including both
psychological coercion, as well as physical
force. Forced sexual intercourse means
vaginal, anal, or oral penetration by the
offender(s). This category also includes
incidents where the penetration is from a
foreign object such as a bottle.

Robbery

Completed or attempted theft, directly from
a person, of property or cash by force or
threat of force, with or without a weapon,
and with or without injury.

Rural

A place not located inside the Metropolitan
Statistical Area (MSA). This category
includes a variety of localities, ranging
from sparsely populated rural areas to
cities with populations of less than 50,000.

Serious violent crime

Rape, sexual assault, robbery, or aggravated
assault.

Sexual assault

A wide range of victimizations, separate
from rape or attempted rape. These crimes
include attacks or attempted attacks
generally involving unwanted sexual contact
between the victim and offender. Sexual
assault may or may not involve force and
includes such things as grabbing or
fondling. Sexual assault also includes
verbal threats.

Simple assault

Attack without a weapon resulting either in
no injury, minor injury, or in undetermined
injury requiring less than 2 days of
hospitalization. Also includes attempted
assault without a weapon.

Suburban

A county or counties containing a central
city, plus any contiguous counties that are
linked socially and economically to the
central city. On the data tables, suburban
areas are categorized as those portions of
metropolitan areas situated "outside central
cities."

Theft

Completed or attempted theft of property or
cash without personal contact.

Victimization

A crime as it affects one individual person
or household. For personal crimes, the
number of victimizations is equal to the
number of victims involved. The number of
victimizations may be greater than the
number of incidents because more than one
person may be victimized during an incident.

Victimization rate

A measure of the occurrence of
victimizations among a specific population
group.

Violent crime

Rape, sexual assault, robbery, or assault.

Urban

The largest city (or grouping of cities) in
an MSA.

School Crime Supplement

Any victimization

Combination of violent and property
victimization. If a student reported an
incident of either, he or she is counted as
having experienced any victimization. If the
student reported having experienced both, he
or she is counted once under "any
victimization."

At school

In the school building, on school property,
on a school bus, or going to or from school.

Property victimization

Theft of property from a student's desk,
locker, or other locations at school.

Violent victimization

Physical attacks or taking property from the
student directly by force, weapons, or
threats.

Youth Risk Behavior Survey

On school property

On school property is included in the
question wording, but was not defined for
respondents.

Weapon

Examples of weapons appearing in the
questionnaire include guns, knives, and
clubs.

Illegal drugs

Examples of illegal drugs were marijuana,
cocaine, inhalants, steroids, or
prescription drugs without a doctor's
permission, heroin, and methamphetamines.

FRSS Principal/School Disciplinarian Survey

At school

In school buildings, on school buses, on
school grounds, or at places that hold
school-sponsored events or activities, but
are not officially on school grounds.

Central region

Illinois, Indiana, Iowa, Kansas, Michigan,
Minnesota, Missouri, Nebraska, North Dakota,
Ohio, South Dakota, and Wisconsin.

City

A central city of a Metropolitan Statistical
Area (MSA).

Elementary school

A school that has a low grade of 3 or less
and a high grade of 1 through 8.

Free/reduced-price

The percent of students enrolled in the
school who are eligible for the federally
lunch	funded free or reduced-price lunch
program.

High school/combined

A school that has a low grade of 9 through
12 and a high grade of 10 through 12.
Schools that do not precisely meet these
qualifications, and are not elementary and
middle schools, are classified as "combined"
and are included in the analyses with high
schools.

Less serious or nonviolent crime

Physical attack or fight without a weapon,
theft or larceny, or vandalism.

Minority enrollment

The percentage of students enrolled in the
school whose race or ethnicity is classified
as one of the following: American Indian or
Alaskan Native, Asian or Pacific Islander,
black, or Hispanic, based on data in the
1993-94 Common Core of Data (CCD) file.

Middle school

A school that has a low grade of 4 through 9
and a high grade of 4 through 9.

Northeast region

Connecticut, Delaware, District of Columbia,
Maine, Maryland, Massachusetts, New
Hampshire, New Jersey, New York,
Pennsylvania, Rhode Island, and Vermont.

Robbery

The taking or attempting to take anything of
value that is owned by another person or
organization, under confrontational
circumstances by force or threat of force or
violence and/or by putting the victim in
fear.

Physical attack or fight

An actual and intentional touching or
striking of another person against his or
her will, or the intentional causing of
bodily harm to an individual. This category
should be used only when the attack is
serious enough to warrant calling the police
or other law enforcement representative.

Rural

A place with a population less than 2,500
and defined as rural by the U.S. Bureau of
the Census.

School enrollment

Total number of students enrolled as defined
by the 1993-94 CCD.

Serious violent crime

Murder, suicide, rape or sexual battery,
physical attack or fight with a weapon, or
robbery.

Sexual battery

An incident that includes rape, fondling,
indecent liberties, child molestation, or
sodomy.

Southeast region

Alabama, Arkansas, Florida, Georgia,
Kentucky, Louisiana, Mississippi, North
Carolina, South Carolina, Tennessee,
Virginia, and West Virginia.

Theft or larceny

The unlawful taking of another person's
property without personal confrontation,
threat, violence, or bodily harm.

Town

A place not within an MSA, but with a
population greater than or equal to 2,500
and defined as urban by the U.S. Bureau of
the Census.

Urban fringe

A place within an MSA of a central city, but
not primarily its central city.

Vandalism

The damage or destruction of school
property.

West region

Alaska, Arizona, California, Colorado,
Hawaii, Idaho, Montana, Nevada, New Mexico,
Oklahoma, Oregon, Texas, Utah, Washington,
and Wyoming.

Schools and Staffing Survey

Central city

A large central city (a central city of a
Metropolitan Statistical Area [MSA] with
population greater than or equal to 400,000,
or a population density greater than or
equal to 6,000 per square mile) or a mid-
size central city (a central city of an MSA,
but not designated as a large central city).

Elementary school

An elementary school teacher is one who,
when asked for the grades taught, teachers
checked: (1) only "ungraded" and was
designated as an elementary teacher on the
list of teachers provided by the school; (2)
6th grade or lower, or "ungraded," and no
grade higher than 6th; (3) 6th grade or
lower and 7th grade or higher, and reported
a primary assignment of prekindergarten,
kindergarten, or general elementary; (4) 7th
and 8th grades only, and reported a primary
assignment of prekindergarten, kindergarten,
or general elementary; (5) 6th grade or
lower and 7th grade or higher, and reported
a primary assignment of special education
and was designated as an elementary teacher
on the list of teachers provided by the
school; or (6) 7th and 8th grades only, and
reported a primary assignment of special
education and was designated as an
elementary teacher on the list of teachers
provided by the school. A teacher at school
that has grade 6 or lower, or one that is
"ungraded" with no grade higher than the
8th.

Rural or small town

Rural area (a place with a population of
less than 2,500 and defined as rural by the
U.S. Bureau of the Census) or a small town
(a place not within an MSA, with a
population of less than 25,000, but greater
than or equal to 2,500, and defined as
nonurban by the U.S. Bureau of the Census).

Secondary school teachers

A secondary school teacher is one who, when
asked for the grades taught, checked: (1)
"ungraded" and was designated as a secondary
teacher on the list of teachers provided by
the school; (2) 6th grade or lower and 7th
grade or higher, and reported a primary
assignment other than prekindergarten,
kindergarten, or general elementary; (3) 9th
grade or higher, or 9th grade or higher and
"ungraded"; (4) 7th and 8th grades only, and
reported a primary assignment other than
prekindergarten, kindergarten, general
elementary, or special education; (5) 7th
and 8th grades only, and reported a primary
assignment of special education and was
designated as a secondary teacher on the
list of teachers provided by the school; or
(6) 6th grade or lower and 7th grade or
higher, or 7th and 8th grades only, and was
not categorized above as either elementary
or secondary.

Urban fringe or	large town

Urban fringe of a large or mid-size city (a
place within an MSA of a mid-size central
city and defined as urban by the U.S. Bureau
of the Census) or a large town (a place not
within an MSA, but with a population greater
or equal to 25,000 and defined as urban by
the U.S. Bureau of the Census).

S. Patrick Kachur et al., "School-Associated
Violent Deaths in the United States, 1992 to
1994"

Homicide

An act involving a killing of one person by
another resulting from interpersonal
violence.

School-associated violent death

A homicide or suicide in which the fatal
injury occurred on the campus of a
functioning elementary or secondary school
in the United States, while the victim was
on the way to or from regular sessions at
such a school, or while the victim was
attending or traveling to or from an
official school-sponsored event. Victims
included nonstudents as well as students and
staff members.

Suicide

An act of taking one's own life voluntarily
and intentionally.


End of file
10/31/02  pm
