Indicators of School Crime
and Safety, 1998

-----------------------------------------------------
This report has been superceded by
Indicators of School Crime and Safety, 1999
It is available at:
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/abstract/iscs98.htm
-----------------------------------------------------

[Note: The figures for this document are not 
included in this file, but only in the Acrobat
Portable Document Format files.]


This report is one in a series.  To determine if a
more recent version is available, go to
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/pubalp2.htm#indicators


U.S. Department of Education
Office of Educational Research and Improvement
National Center for Education Statistics
NCES 98-251

U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Programs
Bureau of Justice Statistics
NCJ 172215

October 1998

Phillip Kaufman, Xianglei Chen, Susan P. Choy
MPR Associates, Inc.

Kathryn A. Chandler, Christopher D. Chapman 
National Center for Education Statistics

Michael R. Rand, Cheryl Ringel
Bureau of Justice Statistics 


*

U.S. Department of Education 
Richard W. Riley, Secretary

Office of Educational Research and Improvement
C. Kent McGuire, Assistant Secretary

National Center for Education Statistics
Pascal D. Forgione, Jr., Commissioner

* 

U.S. Department of Justice
Janet Reno, Attorney General

Office of Justice Programs
Laurie O. Robinson, Assistant Attorney General

Bureau of Justice Statistics
Jan M. Chaiken, Director


The National Center for Education Statistics
(NCES) is the primary federal entity for
collecting, analyzing, and reporting data related
to education in the United States and other
nations. It fulfills a congressional mandate to
collect, collate, analyze, and report full and
complete statistics on the condition of education
in the United States; conduct and publish reports
and specialized analyses of the meaning and
significance of such statistics; assist state and
local education agencies in improving their
statistical systems; and report on education
activities in foreign countries.

The Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS) is the
primary federal entity for collecting, analyzing,
publishing, and disseminating statistical
information about crime, its perpetrators and
victims, and the operation of the justice system
at all levels of government. These data are
critical to federal, state, and local policymakers
in combating crime and ensuring that justice is
both efficient and evenhanded.
        

October 1998

Suggested Citation

Kaufman, P., Chen, X., Choy, S. P., Chandler, K.
A., Chapman, C. D., Rand, M. R. and Ringel, C.
Indicators of School Crime and Safety,
1998. U.S. Departments of Education and Justice.
NCES 98-251/NCJ 172215. Washington, D.C.: 1998.

This publication can be downloaded from the World
Wide Web at 
http://nces.ed.gov or
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/. 
Single hard copies can be ordered through 
ED Pubs at 1-877-4ED-PUBS 
(NCES 98-251) (TTY/TDD 1-877-576-7734), 
and the 
Bureau of Justice Statistics Clearinghouse 
at 1-800-732-3277 (NCJ-172215). 

Contact at NCES:
Kathryn Chandler
(202) 219-1767
(e-mail) kathryn_chandler@ed.gov

Contact at BJS:
Michael Rand
(202) 616-3494
(e-mail) randm@ojp.usdoj.gov
 
*
                                                
Foreword

The string of tragic violent incidents that
occurred in school year 1997-1998 has refocused
the American public's attention on school crime
and safety. When the first events occurred, it
became clear that there was no single source of
information about crime and violence in the
nation's schools, and President Clinton called on
the Departments of Justice and Education to
produce an annual report card on school violence.
The Departments responded to that request by
producing the Annual Report on School Safety: 1998
to inform educators, parents and students about
the current nature of crime in schools and about
programs schools and school systems have
instituted to work towards making schools safer.

At the same time, the statistical agencies of the
two departments identified a broader range of
indicators on school crime and safety to be
reported annually. This report, Indicators of
School Crime and Safety, 1998, is a joint effort
by the Bureau of Justice Statistics and the
National Center for Education Statistics. It is
meant to provide detailed statistical information
supporting the Annual Report. This series will
provide the President, Congress, and the public
with an analysis of the latest and best national
data on school crime and safety in the United
States.

In addition to providing this new report on school
safety and crime, the Bureau of Justice Statistics
and the National Center for Education Statistics
have initiated new data collection efforts that
will provide even more timely and accurate
statistics on this issue in years to come. These
efforts will include a more regularly conducted
School Crime Supplement to the National Crime
Victimization Survey scheduled now for 1999 and
every two years thereafter, and a new biennial
school-based survey starting in 2000 that will
collect data on crime and discipline problems in
our nation's schools.

We hope that this and subsequent reports will help
inform the President, Congress, and the public on
our nation's progress in providing our children
with safe places to live and learn. 

Pascal D. Forgione, Jr., Ph.D.   Jan M. Chaiken, Ph.D.
Commissioner of                  Director of the
Education Statistics             Bureau of 
                                 Justice Statistics

                                                
Highlights

Schools should be safe and secure places for all
students, teachers, and staff members. Without a
safe learning environment, teachers cannot teach
and students cannot learn. Recent efforts by
schools, local authorities, and the state and
federal governments have prompted the nation to
focus on improving the safety of American schools.
It is the hope that all children will be able to
go to and from school and be at school without
fearing for their safety or the safety of their
friends and teachers. Judging progress toward
providing safer schools requires establishing good
indicators on the current state of school crime
and safety and periodically monitoring and
updating these indicators.

This report, the first in a series of annual
reports on school crime and safety from the Bureau
of Justice Statistics and the National Center for
Education Statistics, presents the latest
available data on school crime and student safety.
The report provides a profile of school crime and
safety in the United States and describes the
characteristics of the victims of these crimes. It
is organized as a series of indicators, with each
indicator presenting data on different aspects of
school crime and safety. There are five sections
to the report: Nonfatal Student Victimization--
Student Reports; Violence and Crime at School--
Public School Principal/Disciplinarian Reports; 
Violent Deaths at School; Nonfatal Teacher
Victimization at School--Teacher Reports; and 
School Environment. Each section contains a set of
indicators that, taken as a whole, describe a
distinct aspect of school crime and safety.

The indicators rely on data collected by a variety
of federal departments and agencies including the
Bureau of Justice Statistics, the National Center
for Education Statistics, the National Center for
Health Statistics, and the Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention. Because the report relies
on so many different data sets, the age groups and
the time periods analyzed can vary from indicator
to indicator. Readers should keep this in mind as
they compare data from different indicators.
Furthermore, while every effort has been made to
keep key definitions consistent across indicators,
different surveys sometimes use different
definitions, such as those for specific crimes and
"at school." (Readers should consult the glossary
of terms in appendix C for the specific
definitions used in each survey.) Therefore
caution should be used in making comparisons
between results from different data sets.
Descriptions of these data sets are located in
appendix B of this report. Some of the key
findings from the various sections of this report
are as follows (all comparisons reported in this
report were statistically significant at the 0.05
level. See appendix B for details on the methods
used here):

Nonfatal Student Victimization--Student Reports

In 1996, students ages 12 through 18 were victims
of about 255,000 incidents of nonfatal serious
violent crime at school and about 671,000
incidents away from school. These numbers indicate
that when students were away from school they were
more likely to be victims of nonfatal serious
violent crime  including rape, sexual assault,
robbery, and aggravated assault--than when they
were at school (Indicator 1).

* The percentages of 12th graders who have been
injured (with or without a weapon) at school have
not changed notably over the past 20 years,
although the percentages who have been threatened
with injury (with a weapon or without a weapon)
show a very slight overall upward trend (Indicator
3). 

* In 1996, 5 percent of all 12th graders reported
that they had been injured with a weapon such as a
knife, gun, or club during the past 12 months
while they were at school that is, inside or
outside the school building or on a school bus and
12 percent reported that they had been injured
on purpose without a weapon while at school
(Indicator 3). 

* Students were differentially affected by crime
according to where they lived. In 1996, 12-
through 18-year-old students living in urban areas
were more vulnerable to serious violent crime than
were students in suburban and rural areas both at
and away from school. However, student
vulnerability to theft in 1996 was similar in
urban, suburban, and rural areas both at and away
from school (Indicator 1).


Violence and Crime at School--Public School
Principal/Disciplinarian Reports

In 1996-97, 10 percent of all public schools
reported at least one serious violent crime to the
police or a law enforcement representative.
Principals'reports of serious violent crimes
included murder, rape or other type of sexual
battery, suicide, physical attack or fight with a
weapon, or robbery. Another 47 percent of public
schools reported a less serious violent or
nonviolent crime (but not a serious violent one).
Crimes in this category include physical attack or
fight without a weapon, theft/larceny, and
vandalism. The remaining 43 percent of public
schools did not report any of these crimes to
the police (Indicator 6).

* Elementary schools were much less likely than
either middle or high schools to report any type
of crime in 1996-97. They were much more likely to
report vandalism (31 percent) than any of the
other crimes (19 percent or less) (Indicator 7). 
     
* At the middle and high school levels, physical
attack or fight without a weapon was generally the
most commonly reported crime in 1996-97 (9 and 8
per 1,000 students, respectively). Theft or
larceny was more common at the high school than
the middle school level (6 versus 4 per 1,000
students) (Indicator 7).


Violent Deaths at School

Seventy-six students were murdered or committed
suicide at school during the combined 1992-93 and
1993-94 school years (the latest period for
which data are available). Nonstudent violent
deaths also occurred at school. During this
period, there were 105 violent deaths at school of
which 29 involved nonstudents (Indicator 8).

* Most murders and suicides among young people
occurred while they were away from school. In the
combined 1992 and 1993 calendar years, 7,357 young
people ages 5 through 19 were murdered, and 4,366
committed suicide in all locations (Indicator 8). 
     
* Students in urban schools had a higher level of
risk of violent death at school than their peers
in suburban or rural schools. The estimated rate
of school-associated violent death for students in
urban schools was nine times greater than the rate
for students in rural schools and two times     
greater than that for students in suburban schools
during the combined 1992-93 and 1993-94 school
years (Indicator 8). 
 

Nonfatal Teacher Victimization at School--Teacher
Reports

Over the 5-year period from 1992 to 1996, teachers
were victims of 1,581,000 nonfatal crimes at
school, including 962,000 thefts and 619,000
violent crimes (rape or sexual assault, robbery,
and aggravated and simple assault) (Indicator 9).
This translates into about 316,000 nonfatal crimes
per year over this time period.

* In the period from 1992 to 1996, middle and
junior high school teachers were more likely to be
victims of violent crime (most of which were
simple assaults) than senior high school teachers,
who in turn were more likely to be victims of
violent crime than elementary school teachers
(Indicator 9).

* In the 1993-94 school year, 12 percent of all
elementary and secondary school teachers were
threatened with injury by a student, and 4 percent
were physically attacked by a student. This
represented about 341,000 teachers who were
victims of threats of injury by students and
120,000 teachers who were victims of attacks by
students that year (Indicator 10).
 

School Environment

Between 1989 and 1995, there were increases in the
percentages of students feeling unsafe while they
were at school and while they were going to
and from school. In 1989, 6 percent of students
ages 12 through 19 sometimes or most of the time
feared they were going to be attacked or harmed at
school. By 1995, this percentage had risen to 9
percent. During the same period, the percentage of
students fearing they would be attacked while
traveling to and from school rose from 4 percent
to 7 percent (Indicator 12).

* Between 1989 and 1995, the percentage of
students ages 12 through 19 who avoided one or
more places at school for fear of their own safety
increased, from 5 percent to 9 percent. In 1995,
this percentage represented 2.1 million students
(Indicator 13). 
     
* Between 1989 and 1995, the percentage of
students who reported that street gangs were
present at their schools increased. In 1989, 15
percent of students reported gangs being present
in their schools. By 1995, this percentage had
risen to 28 percent (Indicator 14). 

* There was a decline between 1993 and 1996 in the
percentage of male high school seniors who
reported carrying a weapon to school at least 1 
day within the 4 weeks before the survey the
percentage fell from 14 percent in 1993 to 9
percent in 1996. However, there was little change
in the percentage of female students who reported
doing so (from 2 to 3 percent) (Indicator 11). 
     
* Although 12th graders were less likely to use
alcohol at school than at home or at parties, in
1996 about 8 percent of 12th graders had
consumed alcohol at school in the past 12 months
(Indicator 16). 
     
* The percentage of 12th graders who had taken
various illegal drugs at school in the previous 12
months declined between 1976 and 1992. However,
since 1992, use of marijuana and stimulants at
school has increased (Indicator 17).

                                          
Acknowledgments

The authors wish to thank the heads of their
respective agencies, Pat Forgione of the National
Center for Education Statistics (NCES) and Jan
Chaiken of the Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS),
for supporting this report. We also wish to thank
members of the Department of Education/Department
of Justice School Safety Report Working Group for
guidance on content and constructive criticism on
early drafts of the report. 

From BJS, we wish to thank Patsy Klaus, Craig
Perkins, and Cathy Maston of Victimization
Statistics Branch for their work in preparing and
verifying data from the NCVS.

From NCES, we wish to thank Mary Frase, Dan
Kasprzyk, Edie McArthur, and Marilyn McMillen who
served as reviewers. They each provided input
that substantially improved the publication.

Outside of NCES and BJS, school crime experts who
reviewed the report were Bruce Taylor of the
General Accounting Office, Eileen Poe-Yamagata
of the National Center for Juvenile Justice in
Pittsburgh, and Joanne Wiggins of the Planning and
Evaluation Service of the U. S. Department of
Education. Their advice was gratefully accepted.
We particularly appreciated their willingness to
review the report under very strict time
constraints.

Without the assistance of the following staff at
MPR Associates this report could not have been
produced: Barbara Kridl (overall production and
proofreading), Andrea Livingston (editing), Leslie
Retallick (figure design and text layout),
Francesca Tussing (table layout), and Karyn Madden
(proofreading). They provided invaluable
editorial, graphic, and production assistance.

Finally, the authors would like to thank Amanda
Miller of the Education Statistics Services
Institute and Marilyn Marbrook, Chief, assisted by
Yvonne Boston and Jayne Robinson, of Publication
and Electronic Dissemination at BJS, for their
assistance in preparing this document for
publication and dissemination.
 

Table of Contents

Foreword  
Highlights  
Acknowledgments
List of Tables
List of Figures

Nonfatal Student Victimization Student Reports
     1. Victimization of students at school and
away from school  
     2. Prevalence of students being victimized at
school  
     3. Prevalence of 12th graders being injured
or threatened with injury at school  
     4. Prevalence of students being bullied at
school 
     5. Prevalence of 12th graders having property
stolen or damaged at school 


Violence and Crime at School Public School
Principal/Disciplinarian Reports 
     6. Crimes reported to the police
     7. Specific crimes reported to the police

Violent Deaths at School
     8. Violent deaths at school and away from
school

Nonfatal Teacher Victimization at School Teacher
Reports
     9. Nonfatal teacher victimization at school 
     10. Prevalence of teachers being threatened
with injury or attacked by students

School Environment

     11. Prevalence of students carrying weapons
to school
     12. Students' perceptions of personal safety
at school and when traveling to and from school
     13. Students' reports of avoiding places at
school
     14. Students' reports of gangs at school
     15. Public school principals' reports of
discipline problems at school
     16. Prevalence of 12th graders using alcohol
at school and away from school
     17. Prevalence of 12th graders using other
drugs at school and away from school
                                           
Supplemental Tables 
Standard Error Tables

Appendix A. School Practices and Policies Related
to Safety and Discipline

Appendix B. Technical Notes

Appendix C. Glossary of Terms


List of Tables

     1.1a Number of nonfatal crimes against
students ages 12 through 18 occurring at school or
going to or from school, by type of crime and
selected student characteristics: 1992 to 1994  
     1.1b Number of nonfatal crimes against
students ages 12 through 18 occurring at school or
going to or from school, by type of crime and
selected student characteristics: 1995 to 1996  
     1.2a Number of nonfatal crimes against
students ages 12 through 18 occurring at school or
going to or from school per 1,000 students, by
type of crime and selected student
characteristics: 1992 to 1994  
     1.2b Number of nonfatal crimes against
students ages 12 through 18 occurring at school or
going to or from school per 1,000 students, by
type of crime and selected student
characteristics: 1995 to 1996  
     1.3a Number of nonfatal crimes against
students ages 12 through 18 occurring away from
school, by type of crime and selected student
characteristics: 1992 to 1994  
     1.3b Number of nonfatal crimes against
students ages 12 through 18 occurring away from
school, by type of crime and selected student
characteristics: 1995 to 1996  
     1.4a Number of nonfatal crimes against
students ages 12 through 18 occurring away from
school per 1,000 students, by type of crime and
selected student characteristics: 1992 to 1994  
     1.4b Number of nonfatal crimes against
students ages 12 through 18 occurring away from
school per 1,000 students, by type of crime and
selected student characteristics: 1995 to 1996  
     2.1 Percentage of students ages 12 through 19
who reported criminal victimization at school
during the previous 6 months, by type of
victimization, grade level, and school control:
1989 and 1995  
     3.1 Percentage of 12th graders who reported
that someone had injured them at school during the 
past 12 months, by use of a weapon and sex: 1976
to 1996  
     3.2 Percentage of 12th graders who reported
that someone had threatened to injure, but had not
injured, them at school during the past 12 months,
by use of a weapon and sex: 1976 to 1996 
     4.1 Percentage and number of students in
grades 6 to 12 who reported being bullied at
school during the current school year, by
urbanicity and selected student characteristics:
1993  
     5.1 Percentage of 12th graders who reported
that something of theirs had been stolen at school
during the past 12 months, by sex: 1976 to 1996  
     5.2 Percentage of 12th graders who reported
that someone had deliberately damaged their
property at school during the past 12 months, by
sex: 1976 to 1996  
     6.1 Percentage of public schools reporting
one or more criminal incidents to police, by
seriousness of the incident, urbanicity, and
selected school characteristics: 1996-97
     6.2 Number of public schools reporting one or
more criminal incidents to police, by seriousness
of the incident, urbanicity, and selected school
characteristics: 1996-97
     6.3 Number of criminal incidents occurring in
public schools reported to police, by seriousness
of the incident, urbanicity, and selected school
characteristics: 1996-97
     6.4 Number of criminal incidents reported to
police per 1,000 public school students, by
seriousness of the incident, urbanicity, and
selected school characteristics: 1996-97
     7.1 Percentage of public schools reporting
one or more incidents of serious violent crime to
police, by type of incident, urbanicity, and
selected school characteristics: 1996-97
     7.2 Percentage of public schools reporting
one or more less serious violent or nonviolent
criminal incidents to police, by type of incident,
urbanicity, and selected school characteristics:
1996-97
     7.3 Number of public schools reporting one or
more incidents of serious violent crime to police,
by type of incident, urbanicity, and selected
school characteristics: 1996-97  
     7.4 Number of public schools reporting one or
more less serious violent or nonviolent criminal
incidents to police, by type of incident,
urbanicity, and selected school characteristics:
1996-97  
     7.5 Number of serious violent criminal
incidents occurring in public schools reported to
police, by type of incident, urbanicity, and
selected school characteristics: 1996-97  
     7.6 Number of less serious violent or
nonviolent criminal incidents occurring in public
schools reported to police, by type of incident,
urbanicity, and selected school characteristics:
1996-97  
     7.7 Number of serious violent criminal
incidents reported to police per 1,000 public
school students, by type of incident, urbanicity,
and selected school characteristics: 1996-97  
     7.8 Number of less serious violent or
nonviolent criminal incidents reported to police
per 1,000 public school students, by type of
incident, urbanicity, and selected school
characteristics: 1996-97  
     8.1 Number and percentage of
school-associated violent deaths, by selected
characteristics: 1992-93 and 1993-94 school years  
     9.1 Number of nonfatal crimes against
teachers at school and average annual number of
crimes per 1,000 teachers at school, by type of
crime and selected teacher characteristics:
Aggregated from 1992 to 1996  
     10.1 Percentage and number of teachers who
reported that they were threatened with injury or
that they were physically attacked by a student
during the past 12 months, by urbanicity and
selected teacher and school characteristics:
1993-94 school year  
     11.1 Percentage of 12th graders who reported
carrying a weapon or gun to school at least 1 day
in the past 4 weeks, by sex: 1992 to 1996  
     11.2 Percentage of students in grades 9 to 12
who reported carrying a weapon on school property
at least 1 day in the past 30 days, by selected
student characteristics: 1993, 1995, and 1997  
     12.1 Percentage of students ages 12 through
19 who reported fearing being attacked or harmed
at school or on the way to and from school, by
selected student characteristics: 1989 and 1995
     13.1 Percentage and number of students ages
12 through 19 who reported that they avoided one
or more places in school, by urbanicity and
selected student characteristics: 1989 and 1995
     14.1 Percentage of students ages 12 through
19 who reported that street gangs were present at
school, by urbanicity and selected student
characteristics: 1989 and 1995
     15.1 Percentage and number of public schools
reporting that 1 or more of 17 discipline issues
was a serious problem in their school, by
urbanicity and selected school characteristics:
1996-97  
     16.1 Percentage of 12th graders who reported
using alcohol in the past 12 months, by place and
sex: 1976 to 1996  
     17.1 Percentage of 12th graders who reported
taking illegal drugs at school in the past 12
months, by type of drug: 1976 to 1997  
     17.2 Percentage of 12th graders who reported
taking illegal drugs in the past 12 months, by
location and type of drug: 1976 to 1997  
     S1.1a Standard errors for table 1.1a: Number
of nonfatal crimes against students ages 12
through 18 occurring at school or going to or from
school, by type of crime and selected student  
characteristics: 1992 to 1994  
     S1.1b Standard errors for table 1.1b: Number
of nonfatal crimes against students ages 12
through 18 occurring at school or going to or from
school, by type of crime and selected student
characteristics: 1995 to 1996  
     S1.2a Standard errors for table 1.2a: Number
of nonfatal crimes against students ages 12
through 18 occurring at school or going to or from
school per 1,000 students, by type of crime and
selected student characteristics: 1992 to 1994  
     S1.2b Standard errors for table 1.2b: Number
of nonfatal crimes against students ages 12
through 18 occurring at school or going to or from
school per 1,000 students, by type of crime and
selected student characteristics: 1995 to 1996  
     S1.3a Standard errors for table 1.3a: Number
of nonfatal crimes against students ages 12
through 18 occurring away from school, by type of
crime and selected student characteristics: 1992
to 1994        
     S1.3b Standard errors for table 1.3b: Number
of nonfatal crimes against students ages 12
through 18 occurring away from school, by type of
crime and selected student characteristics: 1995
to 1996  
     S1.4a Standard errors for table 1.4a: Number
of nonfatal crimes against students ages 12
through 18 occurring away from school per 1,000
students, by type of crime and selected student 
characteristics: 1992 to 1994  
     S1.4b Standard errors for table 1.4b: Number
of nonfatal crimes against students ages 12
through 18 occurring away from school per 1,000
students, by type of crime and selected student 
characteristics: 1995 to 1996  
     S2.1 Standard errors for table 2.1:
Percentage of students ages 12 through 19 who
reported criminal victimization at school during
the previous 6 months, by type of victimization,
grade level, and school control: 1989 and 1995  
     S3.1 Standard errors for table 3.1:
Percentage of 12th graders who reported that
someone had injured them at school during the past
12 months, by use of a weapon and sex: 1976 to
1996            
     S3.2 Standard errors for table 3.2:
Percentage of 12th graders who reported that
someone had threatened to injure, but had not
injured, them at school during the past 12 months,
by use of a weapon and sex: 1976 to 1996  
     S4.1 Standard errors for table 4.1:
Percentage and number of students in grades 6 to
12 who reported being bullied at school during the
current school year, by urbanicity and selected
student characteristics: 1993 
     S5.1 Standard errors for table 5.1:
Percentage of 12th graders who reported that
something of theirs had been stolen at school
during the past 12 months, by sex: 1976 to 1996  
     S5.2 Standard errors for table 5.2:
Percentage of 12th graders who reported that
someone had deliberately damaged their property at
school during the past 12 months, by sex: 1976 to
1996 
     S6.1 Standard errors for table 6.1:
Percentage of public schools reporting one or more
criminal incidents to police, by seriousness of
the incident, urbanicity, and selected school
characteristics: 1996-97  
     S6.2 Standard errors for table 6.2: Number of
public schools reporting one or more criminal
incidents to police, by seriousness of the
incident, urbanicity, and selected school
characteristics: 1996-97
     S6.3 Standard errors for table 6.3: Number of
criminal incidents occurring in public schools
reported to police, by seriousness of the
incident, urbanicity, and selected school
characteristics: 1996-97  
     S6.4 Standard errors for table 6.4: Number of
criminal incidents reported to police per 1,000
public school students, by seriousness of the
incident, urbanicity, and selected school
characteristics: 1996-97  
     S7.1 Standard errors for table 7.1:
Percentage of public schools reporting one or more
incidents of serious violent crime to police, by
type of incident, urbanicity, and selected school
characteristics: 1996-97  
     S7.2 Standard errors for table 7.2:
Percentage of public schools reporting one or more
less serious violent or nonviolent criminal
incidents to police, by type of incident,
urbanicity, and selected school characteristics:
1996-97  
     S7.3 Standard errors for table 7.3: Number of
public schools reporting one or more incidents of 
serious violent crime to police, by type of
incident, urbanicity, and selected school
characteristics: 1996-97  
     S7.4 Standard errors for table 7.4: Number of
public schools reporting one or more less serious
violent or nonviolent criminal incidents to
police, by type of incident, urbanicity, and
selected school characteristics: 1996-97  
     S7.5 Standard errors for table 7.5: Number of
serious violent criminal incidents occurring in
public schools reported to police, by type of
incident, urbanicity, and selected school
characteristics: 1996-97  
     S7.6 Standard errors for table 7.6: Number of
less serious violent or nonviolent criminal
incidents occurring in public schools reported to
police, by type of incident, urbanicity, and
selected school characteristics: 1996-97  
     S7.7 Standard errors for table 7.7: Number of
serious violent criminal incidents reported to
police per 1,000 public school students, by type
of incident, urbanicity, and selected school
characteristics: 1996-97
     S7.8 Standard errors for table 7.8: Number of
less serious violent or nonviolent criminal
incidents reported to police per 1,000 public
school students, by type of incident, urbanicity,
and selected school characteristics: 1996-97
     S9.1 Standard errors for table 9.1: Number of
nonfatal crimes against teachers at school and
average annual number of crimes per 1,000 teachers
at school, by type of crime and selected teacher
characteristics: Aggregated from 1992 to 1996
     S10.1 Standard errors for table 10.1:
Percentage and number of teachers who reported
that they were threatened with injury or that they
were physically attacked by a student during the
past 12 months, by urbanicity and selected teacher
and school characteristics: 1993-94 school year
     S11.1 Standard errors for table 11.1:
Percentage of 12th graders who reported carrying a
weapon or gun to school at least 1 day in the past
4 weeks, by sex: 1992 to 1996 
     S11.2 Standard errors for table 11.2:
Percentage of students in grades 9 to 12 who
reported carrying a weapon on school property at
least 1 day in the past 30 days, by selected
student characteristics: 1993, 1995, and 1997
     S12.1 Standard errors for table 12.1:
Percentage of students ages 12 through 19 who
reported fearing being attacked or harmed at
school or on the way to and from school, by
selected student characteristics: 1989 and 1995 
     S13.1 Standard errors for table 13.1:
Percentage and number of students ages 12 through
19 who reported that they avoided one or more
places in school, by urbanicity and selected
student characteristics: 1989 and 1995
     S14.1 Standard errors for table 14.1:
Percentage of students ages 12 through 19 who
reported that street gangs were present at school,
by urbanicity and selected student
characteristics: 1989 and 1995  
     S15.1 Standard errors for table 15.1:
Percentage and number of public schools reporting
that 1 or more of 17 discipline issues was a
serious problem in their school, by urbanicity and
selected school characteristics: 1996-97  
     S16.1 Standard errors for table 16.1:
Percentage of 12th graders who reported using
alcohol in the past 12 months, by place and sex:
1976 to 1996
     S17.1 Standard errors for table 17.1:
Percentage of 12th graders who reported taking
illegal drugs at school in the past 12 months, by
type of drug: 1976 to 1997
     S17.2 Standard errors for table 17.2:
Percentage of 12th graders who reported taking
illegal drugs in the past 12 months, by location
and type of drug: 1976 to 1997
     A1 Percentage of public schools reporting
that they have a zero tolerance policy for various 
specified student offenses, by selected school
characteristics: 1996-97  
     A2 Percentage of public schools reporting
that students were required to wear school
uniforms, by selected school characteristics:
1996-97  
     A3 Percentage of public schools reporting
that they use various types of security measures
at their schools, by selected school
characteristics: 1996-97  
     A4 Percentage of public schools reporting
that various levels of police or other law
enforcement representatives were present during a
typical week, by selected school characteristics:
1996-97  
     A5 Percentage of public schools reporting
formal school violence prevention or reduction
programs or efforts, by selected school
characteristics: 1996-97  
     A6 Number and percentage of schools in which
specified disciplinary actions were taken against 
students, total number of actions taken, and
percentage of specific disciplinary actions taken 
against students, by type of infraction: 1996-97 
     A7 Standard errors for table A1: Percentage
of public schools reporting that they have a zero 
tolerance policy for various specified student
offenses, by selected school characteristics: 
1996-97
     A8 Standard errors for table A2: Percentage
of public schools reporting that students were 
required to wear school uniforms, by selected
school characteristics: 1996-97  
     A9 Standard errors for table A3: Percentage
of public schools reporting that they use various 
types of security measures at their schools, by
selected school characteristics: 1996-97 
     A10 Standard errors for table A4: Percentage
of public schools reporting that various levels of 
police or other law enforcement representatives
were present during a typical week, by selected 
school characteristics: 1996-97 
     A11 Standard errors for table A5: Percentage
of public schools reporting formal school violence 
prevention or reduction programs or efforts, by
selected school characteristics: 1996-97  
     A12 Standard errors for table A6: Number and
percentage of schools in which specified
disciplinary actions were taken against students,
total number of actions taken, and percentage of
specific disciplinary actions taken against
students, by type of infraction: 1996-97  
     B1 Descriptions of data sources and samples
used in the report  
     B2 Wording of survey questions used to construct
indicators  
     B3 Methods used to calculate standard errors
of statistics for different surveys  
  
*      

List of Figures

     1.1 Number of nonfatal crimes against
students ages 12 through 18 per 1,000 students, by
type of crime and location: 1992 to 1996  
     1.2 Number of nonfatal crimes against
students ages 12 through 18 occurring at school or
going to or from school per 1,000 students, by
type of crime and selected student
characteristics: 1996  
     1.3 Number of nonfatal crimes against
students ages 12 through 18 occurring away from
school per 1,000 students, by type of crime and
selected student characteristics: 1996  
     2.1 Percentage of students ages 12 through 19
who reported criminal victimization at school
during the previous 6 months, by type of
victimization and school control: 1989 and 1995  
     3.1 Percentage of 12th graders who reported
that someone had injured or had threatened to
injure them at school during the past 12 months,
by sex: 1996
     3.2 Percentage of 12th graders who reported
that someone had injured them at school during the
past 12 months, by sex: 1976 to 1996  
     3.3 Percentage of 12th graders who reported
that someone had threatened to injure, but had not
injured, them at school during the past 12 months,
by sex: 1976 to 1996  
     4.1 Percentage of students in grades 6 to 12
who reported being bullied at school during the
current school year, by grade: 1992-93  
     5.1 Percentage of 12th graders who reported
that something of theirs had been stolen at school 
during the past 12 months, by sex: 1976 to 1996  
     6.1 Percentage distribution of public schools
according to types of crimes reported to police:
1996-97  
     6.2 Percentage of public schools reporting
one or more criminal incidents to police and
number of incidents reported per 1,000 students,
urbanicity: 1996-97  
     7.1 Percentage of public schools reporting
one or more criminal incidents to police, by type
of crime and instructional level: 1996-97  
     7.2 Number of crimes per 1,000 public school
students, by type of crime, instructional level,
and urbanicity: 1996-97  
     8.1 Number of murders and suicides of
students at school and of youth ages 5 through 19
away from school: Combined 1992 and 1993  
     8.2 Percentage distribution of murders and
suicides of students at school, by race ethnicity, 
instructional level, and urbanicity: 1992-93 and
1993-94 school years  
     9.1 Number of nonfatal crimes against
teachers at school per 1,000 teachers, by type of
crime and selected teacher characteristics:
Aggregated from 1992 to 1996  
     10.1 Percentage of teachers who reported that
they were threatened with injury or that they were 
physically attacked by a student during the past
12 months, by urbanicity and control: 1993-94
school year  
     11.1 Percentage of 12th graders who reported
carrying a weapon or gun to school at least 1 day
in the past 4 weeks, by sex: Selected years 1992
to 1996   
     11.2 Percentage of students in grades 9
through 12 who reported carrying a weapon on
school property  at least 1 day in the past 30
days, by race ethnicity: 1993, 1995, and 1997  
     12.1 Percentage of students ages 12 through
19 who reported fearing being attacked or harmed
at school, by race ethnicity: 1989 and 1995  
     12.2 Percentage of students ages 12 through
19 who reported fearing being attacked or harmed
on the way to and from school, by race ethnicity:
1989 and 1995  
     12.3 Percentage of black, non-Hispanic
students ages 12 through 19 who reported fearing
being attacked or harmed on the way to and from
school, by urbanicity: 1989 and 1995
     13.1 Percentage of students ages 12 through
19 who reported that they avoided one or more
places in school, by race ethnicity: 1989 and 1995
     13.2 Percentage of students ages 12 through
19 who reported that they avoided one or more
places in school, by urbanicity and race ethnicity: 
1989 and 1995
     14.1 Percentage of students ages 12 through
19 who reported that street gangs were present at
school, by control of school: 1989 and 1995 
     14.2 Percentage of students ages 12 through
19 who reported that street gangs were present at
school, by urbanicity: 1989 and 1995
     15.1 Percentage of public schools reporting
that 1 or more of 17 discipline issues was a
serious problem in their school, by instructional
level and urbanicity: 1996-97
     16.1 Percentage of 12th graders who reported
using alcohol in the past 12 months, by place:
1976 to 1996  
     16.2 Percentage of 12th graders who reported
using alcohol in the past 12 months, by location
and sex:  1976 to 1996
     17.1 Percentage of 12th graders who reported
using marijuana in the past 12 months, by
location: 1976 to 1997
     17.2 Percentage of 12th graders who reported
using stimulants in the past 12 months, by
location: 1976 to 1997

* * *

Nonfatal Student Victimization--Student Reports
          
1. Victimization of students at school and away
from school                                        
                                      
The amount of crime committed in the nation's
schools continues to be a concern. However,
students are exposed and vulnerable to crime away 
from as well as at school. In fact, life away from
school may be more dangerous for some  
students than life at school.      
           
* Students ages 12 through 18 experienced fewer
nonfatal serious violent crimes (that is, rape,
sexual assault, robbery, and aggravated assault)
at school than away from school. (For this 
indicator, "at school" includes on school 
property or on the wasy to or from school.) In
1996, students in this age group were victims of
about 255,000 incidents of such crimes at school
and about 671,000 incidents away from school
(tables 1.1b and 1.3b). The victimization rate for
this type of crime remained relatively constant at
school from 1992 to 1996, and declined very 
slightly away from school (figure 1.1 and tables
1.2a, b and 1.4a, b).
                                   
* Students ages 12 through 18 were victims of
about 1.3 million incidents of nonfatal  
violent crime (that is, serious violent crime plus
simple assault) at school, and about 1.4 million
incidents away from school in 1996 (tables 1.1b
and 1.3b). There was a decline in the
victimization rate at school between 1993 and 1996
(from 67 to 49 incidents per 1,000 students ages
12 through 18) (figure 1.1 and tables 1.2a, b).
During this period, the victimization rates for
nonfatal violent crime were similar at school and
away from school.
   
* Students ages 12 through 18 were more likely to
be victims of theft at school than away from
school each year between 1992 and 1996 (tables
1.1a, b and 1.3a, b). In 1996, they were victims
of about 2.1 million thefts at school (62 percent
of all crimes at school) and about 1.6 million
thefts away from school (53 percent of all crimes
away from school). The victimization rate declined
slightly for thefts at school between 1992 and
1996, but remained about the same for thefts away
from school during this period (figure 1.1 and
tables 1.2a, b and 1.4a, b).

* Considering all nonfatal crime (theft plus
violent crime), 12- through 18-year-old students
were victims of about 3.3 million crimes while
they were at school in 1996, and a similar number
of crimes (about 3.1 million) away from school
(tables 1.1b and 1.3b). These represent
victimization rates of 128 crimes per 1,000
students at school and 117 crimes per 1,000
students away from school (tables 1.2b and
1.4b).

* In 1996, the rates for serious violent crime
were higher for males than females at school and
away from school (figures 1.2 and 1.3 and
tables 1.2b and 1.4b). The rates for theft were
similar for males and females at school but higher
for males away from school compared to females.

* In 1996, 12- through 18-year-old students living
in urban areas were more vulnerable to serious
violent crime than were students in suburban and
rural areas both at school and away from school
(figures 1.2 and 1.3 and tables 1.2b and 1.4b).
However, student vulnerability to theft in 1996
was similar in urban, suburban, and rural areas
both at school and away from school.


2. Prevalence of students being victimized at
school                                             
                                     
Some of the crimes committed against students
involve violence, while others involve their
property. Presenting information on different
types of victimization for public and private
school students separately helps clarify how 
many students are affected and where the most
serious problems are.

* In 1995, about 15 percent of students ages 12
through 19 reported being victims of a crime at
school during the  previous 6 months (figure
2.1 and table 2.1). Students in both public and
private schools were much more likely to report
theft of property (from their desks, lockers, 
or other location) than they were to report being
the victim of a violent crime (being physically
attacked or having property taken by force).

* Public school students were more likely to
report having been victims of a violent crime
during the previous 6 months (4 percent) than were
private school students (2 percent) in 1995
(figure 2.1 and table 2.1). Public and private
school students were about equally likely to
report having had property stolen at school
(theft) in that year (12 and  11 percent,
respectively).
   
* Victimization was related to grade level. In
1995, students in higher grades were less likely
to report being the victims of violent and
property crimes than were students in lower grades
(table 2.1).  When considering both types of
crime, there was a notable difference between
students in grades 6 through 9 on the one hand and
students in grades 11 and 12 on the other.
 

3. Prevalence of 12th graders being injured or
threatened with injury at school 
 
Every year, some students are injured or
threatened with injury while they are at school.
The percentages of students victimized in this way
provide an important measure of how safe our
schools are and how this is changing over time.

* The percentages of 12th  graders who have been
injured at school--that is, inside or outside the
school building or on a school bus (with or
without a weapon)--have not changed notably over
the past 20 years, although the percentages who
have been threatened with injury (with a weapon or
without a weapon) show a very slight overall
upward trend (figures 3.2 and 3.3 and  tables 3.1
and 3.2).
   
* In 1996, 5 percent of all 12th graders reported
that they had been injured with a weapon such as a
knife, gun, or club during the past 12 months
while they were at school, and 12 percent reported
that they had been injured on purpose without a
weapon while at school (table 3.1).
   
* In 1996, 13 percent of all 12th graders reported
that someone had threatened them with a weapon at
school, and 22 percent reported that they had been
threatened with injury without a weapon at school
(table 3.2).
   
* Male and female 12th graders were about equally
likely to report having been injured on purpose
without a weapon in 1996 at school (13 and 11
percent, respectively) (figure 3.1 and table 3.1).
However, males were more likely than females to
have been injured with a weapon or threatened with
injury with or without a weapon while at
school (figure 3.1 and tables 3.1 and 3.2).


4. Prevalence of students being bullied at school

Bullying contributes to a climate of fear and
intimidation in schools. As part of a youth
interview on school safety and discipline 
conducted in 1993, students in grades 6 through 12
were asked if they had been victims of bullying at
school.
     
* Eight percent of all students in grades 6
through 12 reported that they had been victims of
bullying at school during the 1992-93 school year
(either in school, at school activities during the
day, or on the way to or from school) (figure 4.1
and table 4.1). 
     
* The incidence of bullying declined as grade
level increased (figure 4.1 and table 4.1).
Students in 6th grade were about four times as
likely as students in 12th grade to report being
bullied at school in the 1992-93 school year. 

* The incidence of bullying at school was about
the same (between 8 and 10 percent) in the 1992-
93 school year regardless of the urbanicity of the
place where the student lived (table 4.1). 
     
* Urban males were more likely than urban females
to report being victims of bullying at school (9
percent versus 6 percent) in the 1992-93 school
year (table 4.1). However, this was not true of
males and females in suburban areas or in rural
areas. (See appendix C for definition of suburban
used in NHES.)


5. Prevalence of 12th graders having property
stolen or damaged at school

One way that students are victimized at school is
by having their personal property stolen or
deliberately damaged. While less harmful than
attacks on students themselves, such crimes have
financial consequences and can divert students'
attention from their studies as well as contribute
to perceptions of school as unsafe places.

* It is relatively common for 12th graders to have
something of theirs stolen while on school
property or on a school bus (theft) (figure 5.1
and table 5.1). In 1996, 42 percent of males and
40 percent of females reported that this had
happened to them at least once during the past 12
months. The percentage of 12th graders having
items stolen has increased slightly since 1976. 
     
* In most years between 1976 and 1996, 12th-grade
males were more likely than 12th-grade females to
have had something stolen at school or on a school
bus (figure 5.1 and table 5.1). 
     
* In 1996, 26 percent of all 12th graders reported
that, at least once during the last 12 months,
someone had deliberately damaged their property
(their car or their clothing, for example) while 
they were at school or on a school bus (table 
5.2). The proportion of students victimized in 
this way has remained relatively constant between 
1976 and 1996. 
     
* Twelfth-grade males had their property 
deliberately damaged at a consistently higher rate 
than 12th-grade females between 1976 and 1996
(table 5.2). In 1996, 32 percent of males had
their property deliberately damaged at school or
on a school bus, compared with 20 percent of
females. 

* * *


Violence and Crime at School--Public School    
Principal/Disciplinarian Reports


6. Crimes reported to the police

The number of crimes that principals indicated
that they reported to police or other law
enforcement representatives is a useful measure of
the occurrences of serious crimes in the nation's
schools. The percentage of schools reporting
crimes provides an indication of how widespread
crime is, while the number of crimes reported
provides information on the magnitude of the
problem.
     
* In 1996-97, 10 percent of all public schools
reported at least one serious violent crime to a
law enforcement representative (figure 6.1 and
table 6.1). Another 47 percent of public schools
reported a less serious violent or nonviolent
crime (but not a serious violent one). The
remaining 43 percent of public schools did not
report any of these crimes to the police. 
     
* The vast majority of crimes reported by public
schools were of the less serious violent or
nonviolent type in 1996-97 (402,000 out of the
424,000 total crimes reported to the police)
(table 6.3). 
     
* The percentage of schools reporting crimes was
similar at the middle and high school levels
(figure 6.2 and table 6.1). At each level, about
20 percent of the schools reported at least one
serious violent crime, and about 55 percent
reported at least one less serious violent or
nonviolent crime, but no serious violent crime in
1996-97. 
     
* The numbers of reported incidents per 1,000
students were similar for middle and high schools
for both serious violent and less serious violent
and nonviolent crimes (figure 6.2 and table 6.4).
For both types of crimes, there was a lower rate
at the elementary level than at the middle or high
school levels. 
     
* The percentage of schools reporting at least one
serious violent crime was much higher in cities
(17 percent) than in towns (5 percent) or rural
areas (8 percent) during 1996-97 (figure 6.2 and
table 6.1).
 

7. Specific crimes reported to the police

Data on the prevalence of specific types of crimes
add detail to the more general discussion of
serious violent crimes and less serious
violent and nonviolent crimes. Each type of crime
affects students and schools differently.
     
* About one-half (44 to 55 percent) of all public
middle and high schools reported incidents of
vandalism, theft or larceny, and physical attacks
or fights without weapons to the police or other
law enforcement representatives in the 1996-97
school year (figure 7.1 and table 7.2).
Considerably smaller percentages of public middle
and high schools reported the more serious violent
crimes of rape or other type of sexual battery (5
and 8 percent, respectively); robbery (5 and 8
percent); or physical attack or fight with a
weapon (12 and 13 percent) (table 7.1). 
     
* Elementary schools were much less likely than
either middle or high schools to report any of the
types of crime described here in 1996-97 (figure
7.1 and tables 7.1 and 7.2). They were much more
likely to report vandalism (31 percent) than any
of the other crimes (19 percent or less). 
     
* In 1996-97, physical attack or fight without a
weapon was generally the most commonly reported
crime at the middle and high school levels (9 and
8 per 1,000 public school students, respectively)
(figure 7.2 and table 7.8). Theft or larceny was
more common at the high school than the middle
school level (6 versus 4 per 1,000 students). 
     
* Overall, there was relatively little variation
by urbanicity in the crime rates at school
discussed here during the 1996-97 school year (as
measured by the number of crimes reported per
1,000 public school students) (figure 7.2 and
tables 7.7 and 7.8).

* * *
 
Violent Deaths at School


8. Violent deaths at school and away from school

Violent deaths are tragic events that affect not
only the individuals directly involved but also
everyone in the schools where they occur. Violent
deaths at school have been the focus of recent
attention; monitoring the magnitude of this
problem is important.
     
* Seventy-six youth were murdered or committed
suicide at school  during the combined 1992-93 and
1993-94 school years, the latest period for which
data are available (figure 8.1 and table 8.1).
(Homicides or suicides could have happened during
any time of the day, not just during school hours.
For this indicator, "at school" includes on school
property, on the way to or from school, and while
attending or traveling to or from an official
school-sponsored event.) Nonstudent violent deaths
also occurred at school. During this period, there
was a total of 105 violent deaths at school of
which 29 involved nonstudents. 
     
* Most murders and suicides of young people
occurred while they were away from school. In the
combined 1992 and 1993 calendar years, 7,357 young
people ages 5 through 19 were murdered, and 4,366
committed suicide in all locations (figure 8.1). 
     
* Students in higher grades were more likely to be
victims of violent death at school than those in
lower grades during the combined 1992-93 and 1993-94 
school years (figure 8.2 and table 8.1).
Students in grades 9 through 12 had an estimated
rate of school-associated violent death that was
13 times greater than that of students in grades 8
and under. 
     
* Of those who were murdered or who committed
suicide at school during the combined 1992-93 and
1993-94 school years, black students were more
likely than their counterparts from other 
racial-ethnic groups to be victims
(figure 8.2 and table 8.1). 
     
* Students in urban schools also had a higher
level of risk than their peers in suburban or
rural schools (figure 8.2 and table 8.1). The
estimated rate of school-associated violent death
for students in urban schools was nine times
greater than the rate for students in rural
schools and two times greater than that for
students in suburban schools during the combined
1992-93 and 1993-94 school years. 

* * *
 
Nonfatal Teacher Victimization
at School--Teacher Reports

9. Nonfatal teacher victimization at school

Students are not the only ones who are victims of
crime at school. Teachers in school are also the
targets of violence. In addition to the personal
toll such violence takes on teachers, teachers who
worry for their safety may have difficulty
teaching and may leave the profession altogether.
Information on the number of crimes against
teachers at school can help show how severe and
widespread the problem is.

* Over the 5-year period from 1992 and 1996, 
teachers were the victims of 1,581,000 nonfatal 
crimes at school, including 962,000 thefts and 
619,000 violent crimes (rape or sexual assault, 
robbery, aggravated assault, and simple assault) 
(table 9.1). On average, this translates into 
316,000 nonfatal crimes per year. Among the 
violent crimes against teachers, there were about 
89,000 serious violent crimes (14 percent of the 
violent crimes), including rape or sexual assault, 
robbery, and aggravated assault. On average, this 
translates into 18,000 serious violent crimes per 
year. 
     
* During the 1992-96 time period, the rate of
serious violent crime at school was similar for
elementary and secondary teachers (on average, 4
incidents per 1,000 teachers) regardless of their
instructional level, sex, race-ethnicity, and the
urbanicity of the schools where they taught
(figure 9.1 and table 9.1). 

* In the period from 1992 to 1996, middle and
junior high school teachers were more likely to be
victims of violent crimes (most of which were
simple assaults) than senior high school teachers
(59 versus 32 crimes per 1,000 teachers), who in
turn were more likely to be victims of violent
crime than elementary school teachers (32 versus
17 crimes per 1,000 teachers) (figure 9.1 and
table 9.1). 
     
* During the 1992-96 time period, compared with
elementary school teachers, senior high school
teachers were more likely to be targets of theft
(64 versus 38 incidents per 1,000 teachers). 
     
* The violent crime rate among teachers at school
varied by sex. Over the 5-year period from 1992 to
1996, male teachers were more likely to be victims
of violent crimes than female teachers (41 versus
26 crimes per 1,000 teachers) (figure 9.1 and
table 9.1). 
     
* Teachers were differentially affected by crimes
at school according to where they taught. For
example, during the 1992 to 1996 time period,
urban teachers were more likely to be victims of
violent crimes than suburban teachers (39 versus
20 crimes per 1,000 teachers). Urban teachers were
also more likely to experience theft (57 incidents
per 1,000 teachers) than suburban and rural
teachers (37 and 32 incidents per 1,000 teachers,
respectively) (figure 9.1 and table 9.1).


10. Prevalence of teachers being threatened with
injury or attacked by students

Some of the offenses against teachers are
committed by students. Data on physical attacks
and threats against elementary and secondary
teachers by students can provide a snapshot of the
prevalence of this problem.
 
* In the 1993-94 school year, 12 percent of all
elementary and secondary school teachers (341,000)
were threatened with injury by a student from
their school, and 4 percent (120,000) were
physically attacked by a student (table 10.1). 
 
* Teachers in central city schools were more 
likely to be victims than were teachers in urban 
fringe or rural schools in 1993-94 (table 10.1).
About 15 percent of teachers in central city 
schools had been threatened with injury by 
students, compared with 11 and 10 percent of 
teachers in urban fringe and rural schools. About
6 percent of teachers in central city schools 
had been attacked by students, compared with 4 and
3 percent of teachers in urban fringe and rural
schools. 
 
* Public school teachers were more likely than
private school teachers to be victimized by 
students in school in 1993-94 (figure 10.1 and
table 10.1). Almost 13 percent of public school
teachers had been threatened with injury by
students, compared with 4 percent of private
school teachers, and 4 percent of public school
teachers had been physically attacked by students,
compared with 2 percent of private school
teachers. Teachers in public central city schools
were about five times more likely to be targets of
threats of injury and about three times more
likely to be targets of attacks than their
colleagues in private central city schools. 
 
* In 1993-94, secondary school teachers were more
likely than elementary school teachers to have 
been threatened with injury by a student from
their school (15 percent versus 9 percent) (table
10.1). However, elementary school teachers were 
more likely than secondary school teachers to have 
been physically attacked by a student (5 percent 
versus 3 percent). The prevalence of teacher 
victimization by students did not vary according 
to the racial ethnic backgrounds of teachers.

* * *

School Environment


11. Prevalence of students carrying weapons to
school

The presence of deadly weapons at school can
create an intimidating and threatening atmosphere,
making teaching and learning difficult. The
percentages of students who report that they carry
a weapon or a gun to school is an indicator of how
widespread the problem of weapons at school is.
     
* There was a decline between 1993 and 1996 in the 
percentage of male high school seniors who 
reported carrying a weapon to school at least 1 
day within the 4 weeks before the survey the 
percentage fell from 14 percent in 1993 to 9 
percent in 1996 (figure 11.1 and table 11.1).
However, there was little change in the percentage
of female students who reported carrying a weapon
to school during this period (from 2 to 3
percent). 
     
* About 3 percent of high school seniors reported 
carrying a gun to school at least 1 day during the 
4-week period preceding the survey (figure 11.1 
and table 11.1). This percentage remained fairly
stable from 1994 to 1996. 
     
* Among high school seniors in 1996, males were
about 3 times more likely to report carrying a
weapon to school and over 20 times more likely to
report carrying a gun to school than were their
female counterparts (figure 11.1 and table 11.1). 
     
* Eight percent of white 9th through 12th graders
carried a weapon to school in 1997 (figure 11.2
and table 11.2). Between 1993 and 1997, the
percentage of black 9th through 12th grade
students who reported carrying a weapon to school
at least 1 day within 30 days before the survey
fell from 15 percent to 9 percent (a 40 percent
reduction).


12. Students' perceptions of personal safety at 
school and when traveling to and from school

One consequence of school violence is the fear
that it can instill in students. Students who fear 
for their own safety may not be able or ready to 
learn. Concerns about vulnerability to attacks by 
others at school and on the way to and from school 
may also have a detrimental effect on the school 
environment and learning.
     
* Between 1989 and 1995, there were increases in
the percentages of students feeling unsafe while
they were at school and while they were going to
and from school (figures 12.1 and 12.2 and table
12.1). In 1989, 6 percent of students ages 12
through 19 sometimes or most of the time feared
they were going to be attacked or harmed at
school, while in 1995 this percentage rose to 9
percent. Between these years, the percentage of
students fearing they would be attacked while
traveling to and from school rose from 4 percent
to 7 percent. 
     
* In 1989 and 1995, larger percentages of black
and Hispanic students than white students feared
attacks at school and when traveling to and from
school (figures 12.1 and 12.2 and table 12.1). 
     
* Much of the increase between 1989 and 1995 in
the percentage of students ages 12 through 19
fearing for their own safety at school came from
an increase in the percentage of black students
who did so (figure 12.1 and table 12.1). In 1995,
this percentage was 13 percent, nearly double the
percentage in 1989 (7 percent). 
     
* Examining student perceptions by location 
indicates that there was a large increase between 
1989 and 1995 in the percentage of suburban black 
students who feared being attacked when traveling 
to and from school (figure 12.3 and table 12.1). 
The percentage of suburban lack students ages 12 
through 19 fearing attacks increased almost 
threefold--from 6 percent to 16 percent.


13. Students' reports of avoiding places at school

One consequence of crime at school is that 
students begin to perceive specific areas at 
school as unsafe. In order to try to ensure their 
own safety, they begin to avoid these areas.
Changes in the percentage of students avoiding 
areas at school may be a good barometer of how 
safe schools are at least in the minds of those
who attend these schools.
     
* Between 1989 and 1995, there was an increase in 
the percentage of students ages 12 through 19 who 
avoided one or more places at school--from 5 
percent in 1989 to 9 percent in 1995 (figure 13.1 
and table 13.1). This percentage represented 2.1 
million students in 1995 who reported avoiding
some areas at school for fear of their own safety. 
     
* The percentage of black students avoiding
specific areas at school rose from 7 percent in 
1989 to 12 percent in 1995, and for Hispanic
students it rose from 7 percent in 1989 to 13    
percent in 1995 (figure 13.1 and table 13.1). The
percentage of white students avoiding areas at
school rose from 5 percent to 7 percent. 
     
* In suburban areas in 1989, there were no 
significant differences in the percentages of 
white, black, and Hispanic students who avoided 
one or more places at school (figure 13.2 and 
table 13.1). However, in 1995, black and Hispanic
students in suburban areas were much more likely
than suburban white students to stay away from
some places at school.


14. Students' reports of gangs at school

Gangs are organized groups that are often involved 
in drugs, weapons trafficking, and criminal
activities. The presence of gangs in school can be 
very disruptive to the school environment. Gangs 
may not only create fear among students but also 
increase the level of violence in school. The 
percentage of students who report the presence of 
street gangs in their schools indicates the 
existence and severity of the gang problem in 
schools.
     
* Between 1989 and 1995, the percentage of 
students who reported that street gangs were 
present at their schools increased (figure 14.1 
and table 14.1). In 1989, 15 percent of    
students reported gangs being present in their 
schools. By 1995, this percentage had risen to 28 
percent. 
     
* Gangs were more likely to exist in public 
schools than in private schools (figure 14.1 and  
table 14.1). In 1989, 17 percent of students in 
public schools reported that street gangs were 
present in their schools compared with 4 percent  
in private schools. Similar results were reported 
in 1995. However, between these two years, the 
percentage of public school students reporting 
that gangs were present in their schools almost 
doubled (from 17 percent in 1989 to 31 percent in 
1995) as has the percentage of private school 
students reporting gang presence (from 4 percent 
to 7 percent). 
     
* In 1995, urban students were more likely to 
report that there were street gangs at their 
schools (41 percent) than were suburban students 
(26 percent) or rural students (20 percent) 
(figure 14.2 and table 14.1). Similar results 
occurred in 1989. Between 1989 and 1995, reports 
of gang presence increased in all three categories 
of students' place of residence. 
     
* In both years, black students were more likely 
than white students to report the existence of 
street gangs in their schools, and Hispanic 
students were more likely than either white or 
black students to do so (table 14.1). Between 1989 
and 1995, reports of gang presence increased for
whites, blacks, and Hispanics.


15. Public school principals' reports of
discipline problems at school

Discipline problems in a school may contribute to 
an overall climate in which violence may occur.
Schools that suffer from student drug or alcohol
use, racial tensions, or verbal and physical abuse
of teachers may be filled with pressures that
result in school violence.
 
* During the 1996-97 school year, 16 percent of
all public school principals reported that one or
more discipline issues had been a serious problem
in their school4 (figure 15.1 and table 15.1).
About the same percentage of principals in city,
urban fringe, town, and rural settings reported
one or more serious discipline problems. 
     
* Public elementary schools were the least likely 
to report any serious discipline issues,followed
by middle schools and then high schools (figure 
15.1 and table 15.1). About 8 percent of 
elementary school principals reported one or more 
of these issues as a serious problem, while 18
percent of principals in middle schools and 37
percent of those in high schools did so. 
     
* While overall there were no significant 
differences in reported serious problems by 
urbanicity, a greater percentage of principals in 
public city high schools than in rural high 
schools reported having serious discipline 
problems--47 percent compared with 28 percent    
(figure 15.1 and table 15.1).


16. Prevalence of 12th graders using alcohol at
school and away from school 

The presence of alcohol on school grounds, while a 
crime in itself, may lead to other crimes and 
misbehavior. The consumption of alcohol may lead 
to a school environment that is harmful to 
students, teachers, and staff.
     
* Although 12th graders were less likely to use
alcohol at school than at home or at parties, in
1996 about 8 percent of 12th graders had consumed
alcohol at school (figure 16.1 and table 16.1).
The percentage of 12th graders who had used
alcohol at school in the past 12 months declined
over the last two decades--falling from 12 percent
in 1976 to 8 percent in 1996. 
     
* For both males and females, rates of drinking 
alcohol at school fell between 1976 and 1996    
(figure 16.2 and table 16.1). During this period, 
sharply among males than among females. However, 
in 1996, male 12th graders were more likely than
their female counterparts to have had at least one 
drink at school in the past year.


17. Prevalence of 12th graders using other drugs
at school and away from school 

The presence of other drugs at school also causes 
disruptions in the learning environment. The 
consumption of these substances leads to a school 
environment that is harmful to students, teachers, 
and school administrators. 
     
* The percentage of 12th graders who had taken
various illegal drugs at school in the previous 12
months declined between 1976 and 1992. Marijuana
was the illegal drug (other than alcohol) that was
most likely to be used at school (figure 17.1 and
table 17.1). 
     
* Use of drugs other than marijuana and stimulants
is relatively low at school. With the exception of
marijuana, stimulants were used more often than
other illegal drugs in the late 1970s and early
1980s, but 12th graders in the 1990s were about as
likely to use stimulants at school as other
illegal drugs (figure 17.2 and table 17.1).

* Between 1976 and 1992, marijuana use and use of 
stimulants at school declined among 12th graders 
(figures 17.1 and 17.2 and table 17.1). In the 
case of marijuana, use fell from 21 percent in
1976 to 5 percent in 1992. 
     
* Since 1992, use of marijuana and stimulants at 
school has increased among 12th graders (figures 
17.1 and 17.2 and table 17.1). In 1997, about 10 
percent had used marijuana at school in the past 
12 months, while about 4 percent had used 
stimulants. 
     
* Over the last two decades, marijuana use by 12th 
graders at parties has been consistently higher 
than at school (figure 17.1 and tables 17.1 and 
17.2). Since the late 1980s, marijuana use at home 
has also been higher than at school. The increase 
in marijuana use in the 1990s at home and at 
parties was also more severe than the increase for 
marijuana use at school. 

*  
Supplemental Tables
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------


Table 1.1a-Number of nonfatal crimes against students ages 12 through 18 occurring at school or
going to or from school, by type of crime and selected student characteristics:  1992 to 1994
                                                                       
 
                                       1992                                             1993                                              1994
Student                                              Serious                                   Serious                                        Serious
characteristics           Total    Theft    Violent  violent/1      Total    Theft    Violent  violent/1         Total    Theft    Violent    violent/1
 
Total                  3,554,000 2,283,600 1,270,300  287,400    4,028,600  2,388,100  1,640,500  349,000      3,992,900  2,443,400  1,549,500   362,800
 
Sex
Male                   2,178,300 1,292,200   886,200  216,800    2,308,400  1,289,900  1,018,500  213,200      2,234,500  1,304,300    930,200  232,800
Female                 1,375,700    91,500   384,200   70,600    1,720,200  1,098,200    622,000  135,700      1,758,300  1,139,100    619,300  130,000
 
Age
12--14                 1,955,600 1,150,400   805,200  204,200    2,273,500  1,265,800  1,007,700  209,400      2,259,900  1,289,500    970,500  227,900
15--18                 1,598,400 1,133,200   465,200   83,200    1,755,100  1,122,300    632,800  139,600      1,733,000  1,153,900    579,100  134,900
 
Race--ethnicity
White, non-Hispanic    2,678,300 1,725,500   952,800  182,000    3,017,300  1,820,600  1,196,700  213,700      2,848,100  1,802,800  1,045,300  198,900
Black, non-Hispanic      461,000   271,500   189,500   75,700      544,600    307,400    237,200   97,300        585,700    336,200    249,600   65,500
Hispanic                 303,000   191,300   111,700   29,700      363,800    195,900    168,000   27,300        449,100    234,000    215,100   83,500
Other, non-Hispanic      111,600    95,300    16,300       --      102,900     64,200     38,700   10,600        110,000     70,400     39,600   14,800
 
Urbanicity
Urban                    895,600   575,200   320,500  101,100    1,029,700    561,300    468,500  112,700      1,036,900    547,900    489,000  156,400
Suburban               1,902,900 1,247,000   655,900  143,000    2,151,800  1,340,700    811,100  157,800      2,128,500  1,333,400    795,000  174,800
Rural                    755,500   461,500   294,000   43,300      847,000    486,200    360,900   78,400        827,500    562,000    265,500   31,700
 
Household income
Less than $7,500         261,200   135,700   125,500   27,400      280,000    105,900    174,100   27,900        206,600     99,500    107,100   46,000
$7,500--14,999           348,300   200,100   148,200   42,600      359,100    209,700    149,400   41,100        343,200    216,700    126,500   18,100
$15,000--24,999          430,800   199,700   231,200   64,800      512,700    270,800    241,900   36,000        512,200    314,500    197,600   48,800
$25,000--34,999          530,300   334,700   195,600   31,200      723,000    473,200    249,800   43,600        600,000    320,100    279,900   62,300
$35,000--49,999          786,500   570,300   216,200   38,600      720,400    420,500    299,900   73,800        786,900    488,400    298,500   58,800
$50,000--74,999          529,800   410,000   119,800   12,000      674,100    432,900    241,200   51,500        703,700    439,500    264,200   55,600
$75,000 or more          395,500   255,600   140,000   35,400      430,300    312,700    117,500   21,900        453,600    317,300    136,300   22,400

--No cases are reported in this cell, although the event defined by this cell could 
have been reported by some students with these characteristics had a
1/Serious violent crimes are included in violent crimes.
2/Estimate based on fewer than 10 cases.
NOTE: Serious violent crimes include rape, sexual assault, robbery, and aggravated assault. 
Violent crimes include serious violent crimes and simple assa
details may not add to totals. Numbers are rounded to the nearest 100.
SOURCE: U.S. Department of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics, National Crime 
Victimization Survey, 1992 to 1994.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Table 1.1b-Number of nonfatal crimes against students ages 12 through 18 occurring at school 
or going to or from school, by type of crime and selected student characteristics:  1995 to 1996
 
 
                                         1995                                         1996
                                                        Serious                                        Serious
Student characteristics    Total      Theft    Violent  violent/1        Total      Theft     Violent  violent/1
 
Total                   3,667,000   2,213,900  1,453,200  273,500      3,347,700  2,075,600  1,272,100  255,000
 
Sex
Male                    2,106,600   1,235,100    871,400  180,900      1,932,800  1,067,800    865,000  175,200
Female                  1,560,400     978,700    581,700   92,600      1,414,900  1,007,800    407,100   79,800
 
Age
12-14                  2,191,300    1,227,400    964,000  178,900      1,872,600  1,093,600    779,100  118,900
15-18                  1,475,700      986,500    489,200   94,600      1,475,100    982,000    493,100  136,200
 
Race/ethnicity
White, non-Hispanic     2,648,200   1,632,900  1,015,300  133,500      2,378,700  1,488,900    889,800  130,400
Black, non-Hispanic       511,000     266,700    244,300   86,600        449,000    299,700    149,300   52,000
Hispanic                  391,800     228,500    163,300   41,600        395,100    205,400    189,700   60,500
Other, non-Hispanic       116,000      85,800     30,300   11,900        124,900     81,600     43,300   12,100
 
Urbanicity
Urban                     960,600     554,000    406,600  124,800        949,800    553,000    396,700  119,100
Suburban                1,983,900   1,211,100    772,700  109,300      1,810,000  1,103,600    706,400  111,700
Rural                     722,500     448,700    273,900   39,500        587,900    418,900    168,900   24,200
 
Household income
Less than $7,500          159,100      52,700   106,400    43,200        136,800     87,900     48,900   13,500
$7,500-14,999             317,300     169,000   148,400    44,100        263,600    149,400    114,200   29,200
$15,000-24,999            469,200     277,400   191,800    34,100        467,500    244,300    223,100   58,600
$25,000-34,999            577,900     330,200   247,700    51,500        465,700    271,500    194,200   35,600
$35,000-49,999            699,900     439,100   260,800    37,400        644,600    394,900    249,700   52,000
$50,000-74,999            648,700     426,500   222,100    39,300        633,300    426,400    206,900   37,400
$75,000 or more           516,100     345,500   170,600    13,600        451,300    332,800    118,500   16,000

1/Serious violent crimes are included in violent crimes.
2/Estimate based on fewer than 10 cases.
NOTE: Serious violent crimes include rape, sexual assault, robbery, and aggravated 
assault. Violent crimes include serious violent crimes and simple assault.
Due to rounding or missing cases, details may not add to totals. Numbers are rounded 
to the nearest 100.
SOURCE: U.S. Department of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics, National Crime 
Victimization Survey, 1995 to 1996.


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Table 1.2a-Number of nonfatal crimes against students ages 12 through 18 occurring at school or
going to or from school per 1,000 students, by type of crime and selected student characteristics:  1992 to 1994
 
 
                               1992                                         1993                                         1994
                                                                                    Serious
Student                                       Serious                                      Serious
characteristics     Total    Theft    Violent  violent/1    Total    Theft    Violent  violent/1          Total    Theft    Violent  violent/1
  
Total                150       96       54       12               164       97       67       14               158       96       61       14
 
Sex
Male                 178      106       72       18               182      102       80       17               172      100       71       18
Female               119       86       33        6               145       92       52       11               143       93       50       11
 
Age
12--14               181      106       75       19               203      113       90       19               197      112       85       20
15--18               124       88       36        6               131       84       47       10               125       83       42       10
 
Race--ethnicity
White, non-Hispanic  166      107       59       11               181      109       72       13               167      105       61       12
Black, non-Hispanic  118       70       49       19               137       77       60       25               153       85       68       21
Hispanic             115       72       42       11               128       69       59       10               142       74       68       26
Other, non-Hispanic  129      110       19        *               112       70       42       12               114       73       41       15
 
Urbanicity
Urban                143       92       51       16               155       84       70       17               152       80       72       23
Suburban             163      107       56       12               185      115       70       14               177      111       66       15
Rural                130       80       51        7               135       78       58       13               128       87       41        5
 
Household income
Less than $7,500     129       67       62       14               136       51       84       13               108       52       56       24
$7,500--14,999       115       66       49       14               130       76       54       15               127       80       47        7
$15,000--24,999      129       60       69       19               144       76       68       10               139       85       54       13
$25,000--34,999      148       94       55        9               197      129       68       12               170       91       79       18
$35,000--49,999      185      134       51        9               169       99       70       17               174      108       66       13
$50,000--74,999      156      120       35        4               180      115       64       14               175      109       66       14
$75,000 or more      213      138       75       19               205      149       56       10               185      130       56        9

*No cases are reported in this cell, although the event defined by this cell could have been 
reported by some students with these characteristics had a different sample been drawn
1/Serious violent crimes are included in violent crimes.
2/Estimate based on fewer than 10 cases.
NOTE: Serious violent crimes include rape, sexual assault, robbery, and aggravated assault.
Violent crimes include serious violent crimes and simple assault.  Population sizes are
23,740,295 students ages 12 through 18 in 1992, 24,557,779 in 1993, and 25,326,989 in 1994. 
Due to rounding or missing cases, details may not add to totals.
SOURCE: U.S. Department of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics, National Crime 
Victimization Survey, 1992 to 1994.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Table 1.2b-Number of nonfatal crimes against students ages 12 through 18 occurring at school 
or going to or from school per 1,000 students, by type of crime and selected student 
characteristics:  1995 to 1996
 
 
                               1995                                         1996
                                                         Serious                                      Serious
Student characteristics       Total    Theft    Violent  violent/1          Total    Theft    Violent  violent/1
 
Total                           143       86       57       11               128       79       49       10
 
Sex
Male                            159       93       66       14               144       80       64       13
Female                          125       78       47        7               111       79       32        6
 
Age
12-14                           188      105       83       15               161       94       67       10
15-18                           105       70       35        7               102       68       34        9
 
Race-ethnicity
White, non-Hispanic             154       95       59        8               137       85       51        7
Black, non-Hispanic             127       66       61       21               114       76       38       13
Hispanic                        118       69       49       13               112       58       54       17
Other, non-Hispanic             108       80       28       11               116       76       40       11
 
Urbanicity
Urban                           136       79       58       18               131       77       55       16
Suburban                        159       97       62        9               138       84       54        9
Rural                           117       73       44        6               101       72       29        4
 
Household income
Less than $7,500                 91       30       61       25                86       55       31        8
$7,500-14,999                   113       60       53       16                95       54       41       11
$15,000-24,999                  139       82       57       10               132       69       63       17
$25,000-34,999                  164       94       70       15               138       80       57       11
$35,000-49,999                  146       92       55        8               141       86       55       11
$50,000-74,999                  157      104       54       10               147       99       48        9
$75,000 or more                 180      121       60        5               144      106       38        5

1/Serious violent crimes are included in violent crimes.
2/Estimate based on fewer than 10 cases.
NOTE: Serious violent crimes include rape, sexual assault, robbery, 
and aggravated assault. Violent crimes include serious violent crime and simple assault.
Population sizes are 25,715,220 students ages 12 through 18 in 1995 and 26,151,364 
in 1996. Due to rounding or missing cases, details may not add to totals.
SOURCE: U.S. Department of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics, 
National Crime Victimization Survey, 1995 to 1996.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Table 1.3a-Number of nonfatal crimes against students ages 12 through 18 occurring away from school,
by type of crime and selected student characteristics:  1992 to 1994
 
 
                                      1992                                         1993                                         1994
                                             
Student                                       Serious                                    Serious                                   Serious
characteristics        Total  Theft    Violent      violent/1     Total    Theft    Violent    violent/1      Total    Theft    Violent  violent/1
 
Total               3,303,900 1,621,300  1,682,600  750,200    3,434,200  1,699,300 1,734,900  854,500    3,262,100  1,523,700  1,738,400  832,700
 
Sex
Male                1,978,300 1,007,700    970,600  433,300    2,017,100  1,004,200 1,012,800  532,800    1,923,300    866,200  1,057,000  522,800
Female              1,325,600   613,600    712,000  316,900    1,417,200    695,100   722,100  321,700    1,338,800    657,400    681,400  309,900
 
Age
12--14              1,256,800   688,900    567,800  249,700    1,243,200    655,800   587,400  285,500    1,136,900    574,200    562,700  231,400
15--18              2,047,100   932,400  1,114,700  500,500    2,191,000  1,043,500 1,147,500  569,000    2,125,200    949,500  1,175,700  601,300
 
Race--ethnicity
White, non-Hispanic 2,326,700 1,170,700  1,156,000  457,100    2,349,200  1,146,000 1,203,200  505,100    2,232,700  1,054,300  1,178,400  490,000
Black, non-Hispanic   461,300   227,100    234,200  139,000      607,200    304,200   303,000  198,400      506,700    229,900    276,800  175,900
Hispanic              383,400   163,900    219,500  113,200      380,600    187,800   192,900  129,300      423,300    191,800    231,500  141,500
Other, non-Hispanic   132,400    59,600     72,800   40,900       97,100     61,300    35,800   21,700       99,400     47,600     51,700   25,300
 
Urbanicity
Urban               1,128,300   536,400    591,900  265,800    1,256,000    592,100   663,900  359,200    1,095,100    489,500    605,600  320,200
Suburban            1,671,100   848,200    822,900  360,100    1,519,800    776,100   743,700  364,700    1,594,300    729,700    864,600  396,000
Rural                 504,500   236,800    267,700  124,300      658,400    331,200   327,200  130,700      572,700    304,400    268,200  116,500
 
Household income
Less than $7,500      379,500   192,900    186,600   75,200      423,500    180,300   243,300  107,100      354,400    157,800    196,600  108,600
$7,500--14,999        491,500   197,500    294,000  168,600      494,700    261,600   233,200  136,900      389,900    170,800    219,200  116,500
$15,000--24,999       592,300   246,500    345,800  143,500      563,600    257,100   306,500  152,700      430,100    181,000    249,100  110,800
$25,000--34,999       501,400   217,400    284,000  121,600      511,500    261,800   249,800  129,800      487,200    226,000    261,200  122,300
$35,000--49,999       479,800   242,600    237,200   80,200      549,500    253,600   295,900  144,700      494,200    233,500    260,700  120,900
$50,000--74,999       380,800   228,800    152,000   60,000      380,200    217,000   163,200   76,200      483,500    248,700    234,700  105,900
$75,000 or more       253,800   158,400     95,400   34,600      226,400    127,200    99,300   38,100      292,700    156,200    136,500   60,000

1/Serious violent crimes are included in violent crimes.
2/Estimate based on fewer than 10 cases.
NOTE: Serious violent crimes include rape, sexual assault, robbery, and aggravated assault.
Violent crimes include serious violent crimes and simple assault.  
Due to rounding or mission cases, details may not add to totals. 
Numbers are rounded to the nearest 100.
SOURCE: U.S. Department of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics, 
National Crime Victimization Survey, 1992 to 1994.
 


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Table 1.3b-Number of nonfatal crimes against students ages 12 through 18 occurring away from school,
by type of crime and selected student characteristics: 1995 to 1996
 
 
                                          1995                                         1996
                                                      Serious                                       Serious
Student characteristics    Total    Theft    Violent  violent/1          Total    Theft    Violent  violent/1
 
Total                    3,069,200 1,565,800 1,503,500  601,500       3,065,100  1,634,500 1,430,600  670,600
 
Sex
Male                     1,791,800   883,000   908,800  377,000       1,890,300  1,004,000   886,400  421,200
Female                   1,277,400   682,700   594,700  224,400       1,174,800    630,500   544,300  249,300
 
Age
12--14                   1,045,100   556,100   489,000  180,800       1,058,100    600,800   457,200  209,100
15--18                   2,024,100 1,009,700 1,014,500  420,700       2,007,000  1,033,600   973,400  461,400
 
Race--ethnicity
White, non-Hispanic      2,074,900 1,094,200  980,600   374,300       2,068,000  1,097,500   970,500  394,100
Black, non-Hispanic        528,100   262,700  265,500   105,900         528,900    271,400   257,500  157,400
Hispanic                   352,200   144,000  208,200    97,900         354,100    191,500   162,600   94,200
Other, non-Hispanic        114,000    64,800   49,200    23,400         114,100     74,100    39,900   24,800
 
Urbanicity
Urban                    1,057,300   518,000  539,400   229,900         995,900    494,800   501,200  274,800
Suburban                 1,474,700   780,800  693,900   279,400       1,490,200    809,400   680,700  294,600
Rural                      537,200   267,000  270,300    92,100         579,000    330,300   248,700  101,100
 
Household income
Less than $7,500           329,100   162,000  167,100    68,500         284,800    134,500   150,300  103,000
$7,500--14,999             428,100   191,400  236,700    97,100         422,400    213,300   209,100  127,200
$15,000--24,999            491,400   289,100  202,300    86,100         468,600    218,800   249,800  109,800
$25,000--34,999            414,100   203,700  210,400    78,400         377,600    215,900   161,700   68,100
$35,000--49,999            490,000   242,700  247,300   104,200         468,500    252,900   215,600   69,500
$50,000--74,999            444,200   225,000  219,100    96,400         402,300    250,100   152,300   72,300
$75,000 or more            291,400   140,000  151,400    38,300         329,000    222,400   106,500   29,300

1/Serious violent crimes are included in violent crimes.
2/Estimate based on fewer than 10 cases.
NOTE: Serious violent crimes include rape, sexual assault, robbery, 
and aggravated assault. Violent crimes include serious violent crimes and simple assault.
Due to rounding or missing cases, details may not add to totals. Numbers are rounded 
to the nearest 100.
SOURCE: U.S. Department of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics, National Crime 
Victimization Survey, 1995 to 1996.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Table 1.4a-Number of nonfatal crimes against students ages 12 through 18 occurring away from
school per 1,000 students, by type of crime and selected student characteristics:  1992 to 1994
 
 
                                        1992                                         1993                                         1994
                                                      Serious                                      Serious                                      Serious
Student characteristics    Total    Theft    Violent  violent/1          Total    Theft    Violent  violent/1      Total    Theft    Violent  violent/1
 
Total                       139       68       71       32               140       69       71       35               129       60       69       33
 
Sex
Male                        162       82       79       35               159       79       80       42               148       66       81       40
Female                      115       53       62       28               119       58       61       27               109       53       55       25
 
Age
12-14                       116       64       53       23               111       59       53       26                99       50       49       20
15-18                       158       72       86       39               164       78       86       43               153       68       85       43
 
Race-ethnicity
White, non-Hispanic         144       72       72       28               141       69       72       30               131       62       69       29
Black, non-Hispanic         118       58       60       36               153       77       76       50               129       58       70       45
Hispanic                    145       62       83       43               134       66       68       46               134       61       73       45
Other, non-Hispanic         153       69       84       47               106       67       39       24               103       49       54       26
 
Urbanicity
Urban                       181       86       95       43               189       89      100       54               160       72       89       47
Suburban                    143       73       70       31               130       67       64       31               132       61       72       33
Rural                        87       41       46       21               105       53       52       21                89       47       42       18
 
Household income
Less than $7,500            187       95       92       37               205       87      118       52               185       82      102       57
$7,500--14,999              162       65       97       56               180       95       85       50               144       63       81       43
$15,000--24,999             178       74      104       43               158       72       86       43               117       49       68       30
$25,000--34,999             140       61       79       34               140       71       68       35               138       64       74       35
$35,000--49,999             113       57       56       19               129       59       69       34               110       52       58       27
$50,000--74,999             112       67       45       18               101       58       43       20               120       62       58       26
$75,000 or more             137       85       51       19               108       60       47       18               120       64       56       25

1/Serious violent crimes are included in violent crimes.
2/Estimate based on fewer than 10 cases.
NOTE: Serious violent crimes include rape, sexual assault, robbery, and aggravated assault. 
Violent crimes include serious violent crimes and simple assault.  Popopulation sizes are 
23,740,295 students ages 12 through 18 in 1992, 24,557,779 in 1993, and 25,326,989 in 1994.
Due to rounding or missing cases, details may not add to totals.
SOURCE: U.S. Department of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics, National Crime 
Victimization Survey, 1992 to 1994.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Table 1.4b-Number of nonfatal crimes against students ages 12 through 18 occurring
away from school per 1,000 students, by type of crime and selected student
characteristics:  1995 to 1996
 
 
                                          1995                                         1996
                                                      Serious                                      Serious
Student characteristics    Total    Theft    Violent  violent/1          Total    Theft    Violent  violent/1
 
Total                       119       61       58       23               117       63       55       26
 
Sex
Male                        135       67       69       28               141       75       66       31
Female                      102       55       48       18                92       50       43       20
 
Age
12--14                       90       48       42       16                91       52       39       18
15--18                      144       72       72       30               138       71       67       32
 
Race--ethnicity
White, non-Hispanic         121       64       57       22               119       63       56       23
Black, non-Hispanic         131       65       66       26               134       69       65       40
Hispanic                    106       43       63       30               101       54       46       27
Other, non-Hispanic         106       60       46       22               106       69       37       23
 
Urbanicity
Urban                       150       74       77       33               138       68       69       38
Suburban                    118       63       56       22               114       62       52       23
Rural                        87       43       44       15                99       57       43       17
 
Household income
Less than $7,500            189       93       96       39               179       85       94       65
$7,500--14,999              152       68       84       35               153       77       76       46
$15,000--24,999             146       86       60       26               132       62       70       31
$25,000--34,999             118       58       60       22               112       64       48       20
$35,000--49,999             103       51       52       22               102       55       47       15
$50,000--74,999             108       55       53       23                93       58       35       17
$75,000 or more             102       49       53       13               105       71       34        9

1/Serious violent crimes are included in violent crimes.
2/Estimate based on fewer than 10 cases.
NOTE: Serious violent crimes include rape, sexual assault, robbery, and 
aggravated assault. Violent crimes include serious violent crimes and simple assault.
Population sizes are 25,715,220 students ages 12 through 18 in 1995 and 26,151,364 
in 1996. Due to rounding or missing cases, details may not add to totals.
SOURCE: U.S. Department of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics, National Crime
Victimization Survey, 1995 to 1996.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Table 2.1-Percentage of students ages 12 through 19 who reported criminal victimization at 
school during the previous 6 months, by type of victimization, grade level, 
and school control:  1989 and 1995
 
 
                                    1989                                1995
                             Type of victimization               Type of victimization
School characteristics     Any/1   Violent/2 Property/3         Any/1  Violent/2 Property/3
 
Total                       14.5      3.4     12.2              14.6      4.2     11.6
 
Grade level
Grade 6                     17.9      5.7     14.8              18.0      6.7     13.3
Grade 7                     18.9      5.4     15.5              20.4      6.6     16.0
Grade 8                     16.1      4.0     13.1              17.1      4.7     13.9
Grade 9                     17.1      3.6     14.7              15.5      4.6     12.1
Grade 10                    13.9      2.5     11.9              12.9      3.3     10.7
Grade 11                    10.5      2.2      8.8               9.5      2.3      7.5
Grade 12                     8.3      1.2      7.6               8.7      1.7      7.5
Other                       13.5      7.0     10.0              10.3      4.6      6.4
 
School control
Public                      14.7      3.5     12.3              14.8      4.4     11.7
Private                     12.8      2.9     10.8              12.4      2.3     10.7
Not ascertained             11.8      3.1      9.6                --       --       --

--Fewer than 30 sample cases.
1/Any victimization is a combination of reported violent and property victimization.  
If the student reported an incident of either, he or she is as having experienced any
vicitimization.  If the respondent reported having experienced both, he or she is only
counted once under "Any victimization."
2/Violent victimization includes physical attacks or taking property from the student
directly by force, weapons, or threats.
3/Property victimization includes theft of property from a student's desk, locker, 
or other locations.
NOTE: "At school" means in the school building, on the school grounds, or on a school bus. 
Population sizes are 21,554,000 students ages 12 through 19 in 1989 and 23,933,000 in 1995.
SOURCE: U.S. Department of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics, School Crime Supplement 
to the National Crime Victimization Survey, 1989 and 1995.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Table 3.1-Percentage of 12th graders who reported that someone had
injured them at school during the past 12 months, by use of a weapon
and sex:  1976 to 1996
 
 
             With a weapon                 On purpose, without a weapon
Year     Total    Male     Female            Total    Male     Female
 
1976      5.5      8.9      2.5              13.3     16.9     10.1
1977      4.8      8.0      1.7              11.1     12.8      9.5
1978      4.4      7.0      2.3              12.1     14.5     10.2
1979      4.6      7.4      2.1              12.1     15.6      8.7
1980      4.4      6.9      2.1              11.2     14.3      8.4
1981      6.4      9.4      3.5              14.3     18.2     10.6
1982      4.5      6.8      2.3              12.3     15.6      9.0
1983      4.6      6.9      2.5              13.7     16.7     11.1
1984      3.9      6.6      1.5              12.2     15.5      9.2
1985      5.7      9.0      2.7              14.0     18.6      9.9
1986      5.2      8.7      2.2              13.6     17.0     10.6
1987      4.6      7.8      1.8              15.3     18.9     12.1
1988      4.6      7.7      1.8              13.4     16.7     10.4
1989      5.5      7.9      3.3              14.0     17.0     11.3
1990      5.9      9.0      2.8              13.7     16.4     11.1
1991      5.9      8.4      3.5              14.5     16.8     12.3
1992      5.1      8.0      1.8              12.8     15.6      9.8
1993      4.3      6.8      2.0              11.2     13.9      8.8
1994      4.8      7.9      1.7              11.8     15.1      8.2
1995      4.9      7.5      2.3              11.6     15.2      8.2
1996      4.8      6.7      3.1              11.7     12.9     10.7

NOTE: Examples of weapons are knives, guns, and clubs. "At school" 
means inside or outside the school building or on a school bus. Population sizes
are not available.  Response rates for this survey do not meet NCES standards.  
See table B1 for details.
SOURCE: University of Michigan, Survey Research Center, Institute for Social 
Research, Monitoring the Future Study, 1976 to 1996.
 

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Table 3.2-Percentage of 12th graders who reported that someone had threatened 
to injure, but had not injured, them at school during the past 12 months, 
by use of a weapon and sex:  1976 to 1996
 
 
         Threatened with a weapon            Threatened by unarmed person
Year     Total    Male     Female            Total    Male     Female
 
    1976     12.4     18.2      7.0              21.1     28.9     13.9
    1977     12.1     17.7      6.9              20.8     27.5     14.6
    1978     11.3     16.8      6.7              19.8     26.9     14.1
    1979     11.6     17.1      6.8              20.1     28.1     13.1
    1980     10.7     16.4      5.7              19.3     27.6     11.9
    1981     14.8     20.5      9.3              23.5     32.2     15.0
    1982     11.9     16.0      7.7              21.4     28.3     14.5
    1983     12.5     17.3      8.1              24.2     31.3     17.7
    1984     12.1     17.7      7.0              22.9     31.4     15.2
    1985     13.3     19.6      7.7              24.2     32.4     17.0
    1986     12.9     20.2      6.5              24.7     33.3     17.3
    1987     11.9     17.6      7.0              24.3     31.6     17.9
    1988     12.4     18.7      6.6              23.7     31.5     16.5
    1989     13.3     18.7      8.4              24.0     31.2     17.6
    1990     13.0     18.0      8.2              24.8     31.6     18.3
    1991     15.8     20.9     10.7              25.5     31.5     19.6
    1992     13.7     20.7      7.1              24.3     30.9     18.1
    1993     15.1     21.5      9.5              23.1     29.9     17.0
    1994     15.0     22.3      8.3              23.5     31.0     16.4
    1995     13.5     20.0      7.7              23.8     31.2     17.2
    1996     13.3     17.5      9.5              21.6     26.5     17.2

NOTE: Examples of weapons are knives, guns, and clubs. "At school" means inside 
or outside the school building or on a school bus. Population sizes are not
available Response rates for this survey do not meet NCES standards.  
See table B1 for details.
SOURCE: University of Michigan, Survey Research Center, Institute for 
Social Research, Monitoring the Future Study, 1976 to 1996.
 
 

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Table 4.1-Percentage and number of students in grades 6 to 12 who reported being bullied 
at school during the current school year, by urbanicity and selected student characteristics:  1993
 
 
                                        Percent                                      Number
Student characteristics    Total    Urban    Suburban Rural             Total    Urban    Suburban   Rural
 
Total                           8.2      7.7      9.7      8.6       1,979,100  1,088,700  347,400  543,100
 
Sex
Male                            9.5      9.4     11.1      8.9       1,144,600    656,100  206,500  282,000
Female                          6.9      6.1      8.2      8.2         834,500    432,500  140,900  261,100
 
Race--ethnicity
White, non-Hispanic             8.7      8.5      9.5      8.6       1,467,300    730,800  263,200  473,200
Black, non-Hispanic             7.3      6.5     10.4      9.8         279,900    189,400   37,500   53,000
Hispanic                        6.1      5.9      9.1      3.5         161,400    122,200   31,400    7,800
Other, non-Hispanic             9.3      8.5      --       --           70,500     46,200      --       --
 
Grade level
Grade 6                        13.4     13.6     15.2     11.9         509,600    306,100   86,400  117,100
Grade 7                        11.1     12.1      9.2      9.9         407,900    258,800   51,400   97,800
Grade 8                         8.5      8.5      7.4      9.3         299,800    182,500   36,200   81,000
Grade 9                         8.1      4.9     15.2     10.6         283,600     97,500   83,600  102,500
Grade 10                        8.1      6.9     10.9      9.0         269,600    133,400   58,200   78,000
Grade 11                        3.9      3.7      5.2      3.5         120,900     69,700   24,100   27,200
Grade 12                        2.9      2.3      1.8      4.4          87,700     40,800    7,500   39,500
 
Region
Northeast                       8.6      9.7      5.4      7.5         378,900    262,900   23,600   92,400
South                           8.8      8.6      9.3      8.9         753,300    392,000  112,300  249,000
Midwest                         7.9      7.5      9.6      7.5         466,900    237,200  103,600  126,100
West                            7.3      5.3     12.6     11.9         380,100    196,600  107,900   75,600

--Fewer than 30 sample cases.
NOTE: Bullying was described as students picking on others a lot or making other students 
do things like give them money. "At school" means in school, at school activities during
the day, or on the way to or from school. Population size is 24,060,000 students in 
grades 6 to 12. Due to rounding or missing cases, details may not add to totals.  
Numbers are rounded to the nearest 100.
SOURCE: U.S. Department of Education, National Center for Education Statistics, 
National Household Education Survey, 1993.
 
 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Table 5.1-Percentage of 12th graders who reported that something of theirs had been 
stolen at school during the past 12 month 1976 to 1996
 
 
Year     Total    Male     Female
 
    1976     38.3     44.9     32.2
    1977     39.6     45.0     34.5
    1978     37.6     42.1     33.9
    1979     33.6     38.2     29.5
    1980     34.4     37.7     31.6
    1981     40.0     44.2     35.8
    1982     40.0     44.2     35.8
    1983     38.8     42.5     35.5
    1984     38.0     41.8     34.6
    1985     38.8     40.7     37.2
    1986     40.3     44.7     36.4
    1987     42.0     44.9     39.5
    1988     42.2     45.8     39.0
    1989     40.7     42.7     38.8
    1990     41.3     47.3     35.6
    1991     41.4     46.3     36.4
    1992     37.1     41.6     32.9
    1993     41.5     42.2     40.9
    1994     39.6     44.2     35.3
    1995     40.4     44.2     36.9
    1996     40.7     41.6     39.9

NOTE: "At school" means inside or outside the school building or on a school bus. 
Population sizes are not available. Response rates for this survey do not meet
NCES standards.  See table B1 for details.
SOURCE: University of Michigan, Survey Research Center, Institute for 
Social Research, Monitoring the Future Study, 1976 to 1996.
 

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Table 5.2-Percentage of 12th graders who reported that someone had deliberately damaged
their property at school during the past 12 months, by sex:  1976 to 1996
 
 
Year     Total    Male     Female
 
1976     25.7     33.8     18.3
1977     24.8     33.9     16.2
1978     25.0     32.0     19.3
1979     24.4     33.0     16.9
1980     24.9     32.5     18.1
1981     30.4     40.1     21.0
1982     25.8     32.5     19.0
1983     25.4     32.9     18.5
1984     24.2     31.4     17.7
1985     26.9     34.9     19.8
1986     25.8     31.2     21.0
1987     26.4     31.1     22.3
1988     27.3     34.0     21.2
1989     26.4     31.9     21.4
1990     29.4     33.6     25.4
1991     27.8     33.8     21.8
1992     26.2     33.5     19.1
1993     25.9     29.7     22.6
1994     26.9     33.4     20.4
1995     27.6     33.6     22.8
1996     26.0     32.3     20.3


NOTE: "At school" means inside or outside the school building or on a school bus.
Population sizes are not available. Response rates for this survey do not
meet NCES standards.  See table B1 for details.
SOURCE: University of Michigan, Survey Research Center, Institute for Social Research,
Monitoring the Future Study, 1976 to 1996.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Table 6.1-Percentage of public schools reporting one or more criminal incidents to police, 
by seriousness of the incident, urbanicity, and selected school characteristics:  1996-97
 
 
                                                                                                        Less serious violent or nonviolent incidents
                             Any incidents                            Serious violent incidents              and no serious violent incidents
                                   Urban                                   Urban                                       Urban
School              Total   City   fringe   Town   Rural      Total  City  fringe  Town  Rural       Total    City     fringe   Town     Rural
characteristics    
 
Total                56.7    59.3   58.4    63.2   46.9        10.1   16.8  11.2    5.4   7.8        46.5     42.4     46.7     57.8     39.2
 
Instructional level
Elementary school    45.1    46.9    47.0   52.6   34.2         4.2    6.1   3.3    2.0   5.1        40.8     40.8     43.2     50.6     29.1
Middle school        74.1    86.7    78.8   70.0   62.0        18.7   35.8  21.7    7.0  15.0        55.4     50.9     57.1     63.0     47.0
High school          76.9    88.8    84.0   84.2   64.1        20.6   48.0  33.0   12.7   9.4        55.9     39.9     49.4     71.5     54.7
 
Region
Northeast            51.6    51.9    49.3   53.7   52.5         6.8    9.5   6.9    2.6   11.0        44.7     42.2     42.4     51.2     41.5
Southeast            58.8    55.1    65.5   64.8   51.1         9.2   17.3  13.2    4.9    4.9        49.6     37.8     52.3     59.9     46.2
Central              50.8    52.5    51.7   59.9   43.6        11.1   16.4  12.4    6.4   10.2        39.7     36.1     39.3     53.4     33.5
West                 64.3    69.8    69.9   72.5   45.8        11.9   20.2  13.3    7.2    5.7        51.9     49.5     54.4     65.3     40.0
 
School enrollment
Less than 300        37.8      --      --   44.9   38.0         3.9     --    --    8.8    2.5        33.8      --        --     36.1     35.5
300--999             59.6    54.2    59.2   67.3   56.8         9.3   12.5   9.0    3.2   13.9        50.2     41.7     49.5     64.1     42.9
1,000 or more        89.1    93.1    86.7   86.5    --         32.9   44.2  29.8   15.9     --        56.0     48.1     56.9     70.6       --
 
Minority enrollment
Less than 5 percent  46.7      --    47.2   53.9   40.8         5.8     --   5.9    3.3    7.3        40.9       --     41.3     50.5     33.5
5--19 percent        57.7    52.0    62.9   64.0   45.0        10.9   14.5  11.3   10.6    6.8        46.6     37.4     51.1     53.5     38.1
20--49 percent       58.1    54.7    58.5   66.7   53.3        11.1   19.1  10.1    5.0    8.0        47.0     35.6     48.4     61.7     45.3
50 percent or more   68.3    64.8    62.3   81.5   74.9        14.7   17.6  17.8    4.4   11.6        53.1     47.1     42.6     77.1     63.3
 
Free/reduced-price 
lunch eligibility
Less than 20%        54.4    50.6    57.3   64.2   41.2         8.6   12.2   9.9    7.1    5.6        45.8     38.2     47.4     57.1     35.7
21--34 percent       53.2    56.0    65.5   57.2   39.5        11.7   18.4  13.3    7.1   11.6        41.6     37.5     52.2     50.2     27.9
35--49 percent       59.4    76.1    53.3   63.1   52.5        11.6   34.2   8.6    3.0    8.6        47.8     41.5     44.7     60.1     43.9
50--74 percent       58.8    60.8    54.7   66.6   52.0         8.9   22.9  10.3    2.0    2.3        49.5     37.9     42.4     64.6     49.8
75 percent or more   59.2    58.5      --     --     --        10.2    8.4    --     --     --        49.0     50.2       --       --       --

--Fewer than 30 sample cases.
NOTE: Serious violent crimes include murder, rape or other type of sexual battery, suicide, 
physical attack or fight with a weapon, or robbery. Less serious violent or nonviolent crimes 
include physical attack or fight without a weapon, theft/larceny, and vandalism. Any incidents 
refer to any of the crimes listed. Not included are any crimes not listed here and any crimes
not reported to police.  Schools were asked to report crimes that took place in school buildings, 
on school buses, on school grounds, and at places holding school-sponsored events. Population 
size is 78,000 public schools.
SOURCE: U.S. Department of Education, National Center for Education Statistics, Fast 
Response Survey System, "Principal/School Disciplinarian Survey on School Violence," FRSS 63, 1997.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Table 6.2-Number of public schools reporting one or more criminal incidents to police, 
by seriousness of the incident, urbanicity, and selected school characteristics:  1996-97
 
 
                                                                                                    Less serious violent or nonviolent incidents
                           Any incidents                             Serious violent incidents         and no serious violent incidents
                                    Urban                                   Urban                                   Urban
School                Total  City   fringe   Town   Rural      Total  City  fringe  Town  Rural   Total     City    fringe    Town     Rural
characteristics    
 
Total                 44,000 10,600 11,000  12,400   9,900     7,900  3,000  2,100  1,100 1,600   36,100    7,600    8,900    11,400   8,300
 
Instructional level 
Elementary school     21,600  5,900  5,900   5,800  4,100      2,000    800    400    200    600  19,600    5,100    5,500    5,600    3,500
Middle school         10,400  2,600  2,800   3,100  1,900      2,600  1,100    800    300    500   7,800    1,600    2,000    2,800    1,400
High school           12,000  2,200  2,300   3,500  4,000      3,200  1,200    900    500    600   8,700    1,000    1,400    3,000    3,400
 
Region
Northeast              7,800  1,500  2,700   2,300  1,200      1,000    300    400    100    300   6,700    1,300    2,300    2,200      900
Southeast             10,000  2,100  2,200   3,200  2,500      1,600    600    400    200    200   8,400    1,400    1,700    3,000    2,300
Central               11,400  2,500  2,500   3,000  3,500      2,500    800    600    300    800   8,900    1,700    1,900    2,700    2,700
West                  14,800  4,600  3,600   3,900  2,700      2,800  1,300    700    400    300  12,000    3,300    2,900    3,500    2,400
 
School enrollment
Less than 300          7,700   --       --   2,100  4,400        800     --   --      400    300   6,900     --       --      1,700    4,100
300--999              29,800  7,200  8,200   9,200  5,200      4,600  1,700  1,300    400  1,300  25,100    5,600    6,900    8,700    3,900
1,000 or more          6,600  2,800  2,400   1,100    --       2,400  1,300    800    200     --   4,100    1,400    1,500      900      --
 
Minority enrollment
Less than 5 percent   11,300   --    1,800   4,200  4,800      1,400     --    200    300    900   9,900      --     1,500    4,000    4,000
5--19 percent         10,100  1,800  3,900   3,000  1,400      1,900    500    700    500    200   8,200    1,300    3,200    2,500    1,200
20--49 percent        10,300  2,700  3,100   2,500  2,000      2,000    900    500    200    300   8,300    1,700    2,600    2,300    1,700
50 percent or more    11,900  5,600  2,300   2,300  1,600      2,600  1,500    700    100    300   9,300    4,100    1,600    2,200    1,400
  
Free/reduced-price 
lunch eligibility
Less than 20 percent  10,000  1,400  4,000   3,000   1,700     1,600    300    700    300    200   8,500    1,000    3,300    2,600    1,500
21--34 percent         9,200  1,500  2,600   2,900   2,200     2,000    500    500    400    700   7,200    1,000    2,100    2,600    1,600
35--49 percent         7,700  1,700  1,400   2,100   2,500     1,500    800    200    100    400   6,200      900    1,100    2,000    2,100
50--74 percent         9,400  2,400  1,700   3,000   2,300     1,400    900    300    100    100   7,900    1,500    1,400    2,900    2,200
75 percent or more     7,400  3,700     --      --     --      1,300    500     --     --      --  6,100    3,200      --       --       --

--Fewer than 30 sample cases.
NOTE: Serious violent crimes include murder, rape or other type of sexual battery, suicide, 
physical attack orfight with a weapon, or robbery. Less serious violent or nonviolent crimes include
physical attack or fight without a weapon, theft/larceny, and vandalism. Any incidents refer to 
any of the crimes listed. Not included are any crimes not listed here and any crimes not reported to
police. Schools were asked to report crimes that took place in school buildings, on school buses, 
on school grounds, and at places holding school-sponsored events. Population size 78,000
public schools. Due to rounding or missing cases, details may not add to totals. Numbers 
are rounded to the nearest 100.
SOURCE: U.S. Department of Education, National Center for Education Statistics, Fast Response Survey System,
"Principal/School Disciplinarian Survey on School Violence," FRSS 63, 1997.


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Table 6.3-Number of criminal incidents occurring in public schools reported to police,
by seriousness of the incident, urbanicity, and selected, school characteristics:  1996-97


                                                                                                 Less serious violent or nonviolent incidents
                             Any incidents                            Serious violent incidents          and no serious violent incidents
School                            Urban                                   Urban                                       Urban
characteristics    Total   City   fringe   Town   Rural      Total  City  fringe  Town  Rural       Total    City     fringe   Town     Rural

Total            424,500 146,700 110,600  103,800 63,400    22,600 11,900 4,700  2,800  3,100      401,900  134,800  105,900  101,000  60,200
 
Instructional 
level Elementary 
school            78,700 19,000   25,900   22,200   11,600   2,900  1,400   400    200     900      75,800   17,600   25,500   22,000   10,800
Middle school    136,400 61,000   32,600   29,800   13,000   7,800  5,200 1,400    400     800     128,600   55,800   31,200   29,400   12,200
High school      209,400 66,800   52,000   51,900   38,700  11,900  5,300 2,900  2,200   1,500     197,500   61,500   49,200   49,700   37,200
 
Region
Northeast         67,400 19,000   23,500   17,500   7,400    3,200 1,800    700    400     500      64,200   17,300   22,800   17,200    6,900
Southeast         95,400 24,400   34,600   20,700   15,700   4,100 1,600  1,600    300     600      91,300   22,800   32,900   20,400   15,200
Central           95,000 34,800   16,400   21,800   21,900   7,800 4,700  1,000    500   1,700      87,200   30,200   15,400   21,300   20,200
West             166,700 68,500   36,100   43,800   18,300   7,500 3,900  1,400  1,700     400     159,200   64,600   34,600   42,100   17,900
 
School enrollment
Less than 300     40,000   --       --     14,800   21,700   2,300    --    --   1,600     600      37,700      --       --   13,200   21,200
300--999         204,100 61,900   41,500   63,000   37,700  10,800 5,800  1,700    800   2,500     193,400  56,100   39,800   62,300   35,200
1,000 or more    180,400 82,800   67,700   26,000      --    9,600 6,000  3,000    500      --     170,800  76,800   64,700   25,500      --
 

Minority enrollment
Less than 
5 percent         66,200     --    9,100   27,000   26,400   1,800    --    200    300   1,300      64,500      --    8,900  26,800   25,100
5--19%            88,800 15,700   35,200   28,500    9,300   4,100 1,000  1,000  1,800     200      84,700   14,700  34,200  26,700    9,100
20--49%          103,500 37,900   31,600   20,700   13,400   5,200 2,800  1,300    600     500      98,300   35,100  30,300  20,100   12,800
50 percent
 or more         159,400 89,000   34,700   21,400   14,300  11,500 8,000  2,200    200   1,100     147,900   81,000  32,500  21,200   13,200
 
Free/reduced-price 
lunch eligibility
Less than 20%     91,700 18,100   34,300   27,300   12,000   2,900   900  1,000    600      400     88,800   17,200  33,300  26,700   11,600
21--34 percent    83,900 22,800   26,900   21,400   12,800   5,300 2,000  2,000    400      900     78,600   20,900  24,900  21,000   11,900
35--49 percent    72,900 23,600   15,700   16,600   17,100   3,300 2,000    300    400      600     69,600   21,600  15,400  16,200   16,400
50--74 percent    93,900 45,900   17,000   21,400   9,700    5,500 4,400    900    100      100     88,500   41,500  16,100  21,200    9,600
75 percent 
  or more         75,800 35,900       --      --        --   5,400 2,500    --       --       --    70,400   33,500   --       --       --

--Fewer than 30 sample cases.
NOTE: Serious violent crimes include murder, rape or other type of sexual battery, suicide, 
physical attack orfight with a weapon, or robbery. Less serious violent or nonviolent crimes include
physical attack or fight without a weapon, theft/larceny, and vandalism. Any incidents refer to 
any of the crimes listed. Not included are any crimes not listed here and any crimes not reported to
police. Schools were asked to report crimes that took place in school buildings, on school buses, 
on school grounds, and at places holding school-sponsored events. Population size 78,000
public schools. Due to rounding or missing cases, details may not add to totals. Numbers 
are rounded to the nearest 100.
SOURCE: U.S. Department of Education, National Center for Education Statistics, Fast Response Survey System,
"Principal/School Disciplinarian Survey on School Violence," FRSS 63, 1997.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Table 6.4-Number of criminal incidents reported to police per 1,000 public school students, 
by seriousness of the incident, urbanicity, and selected school characteristics:  1996-97
 
 
                             Any incidents                          Serious violent incidents      Less serious violent or nonviolent incidents
                                       Urban                                Urban                             Urban
School characteristics   Total  City   fringe  Town  Rural    Total   City  fringe Town  Rural  Total  City   fringe  Town   Rural
 
Total                     10.0    11.6  8.8     10.2    9.0    0.5     0.9   0.4    0.3   0.4    9.5    10.7   8.4    9.9     8.5
 
Instructional level
Elementary school          3.5     2.7  3.9      4.5   3.0     0.1     0.2   0.1    0.0   0.2    3.4     2.5   3.8    4.5     2.8
Middle school             16.2    24.8 12.6     13.0  12.2     0.9     2.1   0.6    0.2   0.8   15.3    22.6  12.0   12.9    11.4
High school               18.1    20.9 15.7     17.6  18.1     1.0     1.7   0.9    0.8   0.7   17.0    19.3  14.9   16.8    17.4
 
Region
Northeast                  8.1     8.8  7.7      8.2   7.4     0.4     0.8   0.2    0.2   0.5    7.7     8.0   7.5    8.0     6.9
Southeast                  9.2     9.1 13.6      7.2   7.0     0.4     0.6   0.6    0.1   0.3    8.8     8.5  13.0    7.1     6.7
Central                    9.5    13.7  5.9      9.4   9.6     0.8     1.8   0.4    0.2   0.7    8.8    11.9   5.5    9.2     8.9
West                      12.2    13.1  8.7     15.5  12.1     0.5     0.7   0.3    0.6   0.3   11.6    12.4   8.4   14.8    11.8
 
School enrollment
Less than 300             10.7     --    --     17.1  11.2     0.6       --   --    1.8   0.3   10.1       --   --    15.3   10.9
300--999                   7.3     8.0  5.2      8.3   8.0     0.4     0.8   0.2    0.1   0.5    6.9      7.3  5.0     8.2    7.5
1,000 or more             16.9    18.2 17.0     15.3    --     0.9     1.3   0.8    0.3    --   16.0     16.8 16.3    15.0     --
 
Minority enrollment
Less than 5 percent        6.9      --  4.6      7.6   7.3     0.2      --   0.1    0.1   0.3   6.7       --   4.4      7.6   7.0
5--19 percent              8.7     7.4  8.1     11.1   8.0     0.4     0.5   0.2    0.7   0.2   8.3      6.9   7.9     10.4   7.8
20--49 percent            10.2    11.6  9.7      9.7   8.9     0.5     0.9   0.4    0.3   0.4   9.7     10.8   9.3      9.4   8.5
50 percent or more        13.2    13.1 11.8     13.3  20.0     1.0     1.2   0.8    0.1   1.6  12.3     12.0  11.1     13.2  18.4
 
Free/reduced-price lunch eligibility
Less than 20 percent       8.1     9.1  6.8      9.9   8.0     0.3     0.5   0.2    0.2   0.3   7.9      8.6   6.6      9.7   7.8
21--34 percent             9.2    11.3 10.5      8.2   6.5     0.6     1.0   0.8    0.2   0.5   8.6     10.3   9.7      8.1   6.0
35--49 percent            10.7    13.7 10.3      9.4   9.6     0.5     1.2   0.2    0.2   0.4  10.2     12.5  10.1      9.2   9.2
50--74 percent            11.7    16.1  8.7      9.8   9.1     0.7     1.5   0.4    0.1   0.1  11.0     14.5   8.3      9.8   9.0
75 percent or more        11.2     9.2   --       --    --     0.8     0.6    --     --    --  10.4      8.6    --       --    --
--Fewer than 30 sample cases.
NOTE: Serious violent crimes include murder, rape or other type of sexual battery, 
suicide, physical attack or fight with a weapon, or robbery. Less serious violent 
or nonviolent crimes include physical attack or fight without a weapon, theft/larceny, 
and vandalism. Any incidents refer to any of the crimes listed. Not included are any
crimes not listed here and any crimes not reported to police. Schools were asked to 
report crimes that took place in school buildings, on school buses, on school grounds, 
and at places holding school-sponsored events. Population size is 42,336,819 public
school students.
SOURCE: U.S. Department of Education, National Center for Education Statistics, 
Fast Response Survey System, "Principal/School Disciplinarian Survey on School Violence," 
FRSS 63, 1997.


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Table 7.1-Percentage of public schools reporting one or more incidents of serious violent crime
to police, by type of incident, urbanicity, and selected school characteristics:  1996-97
 
                                Rape or other type of             Physical attack or 
                                    sexual battery                 fight with a weapon                Robbery
                                        Urban                               Urban                              Urban
School characteristics     Total  City  fringe Town  Rural    Total   City  fringe  Town  Rural   Total  City  fringe Town  Rural
 
Total                        3.0   5.1   3.7  1.3   2.1        6.0    10.3    6.5    3.0   4.9      3.1   8.1   2.7    0.9    1.1
 
Instructional level
Elementary school            0.8   1.1    0.9   *   1.3        2.3     4.0    2.0      *   3.0      0.8   1.9   0.4     *     0.9
Middle school                5.2   9.2    7.5  2.1  3.1       11.6    21.8   10.7    5.6  11.1      5.4  15.3   6.8     *     1.7
High school                  7.6  20.4   11.6  3.9  3.4       12.5    28.0   21.1    8.0   5.7      7.9  31.0   8.0    4.1    1.3
 
Region
Northeast                    2.2   4.2    2.0  0.9  2.7        4.2     7.5    3.7    0.9   7.2      3.1   7.8   2.1    0.9    3.6
Southeast                    3.5   4.2    8.7  2.4  0.6        5.0    12.2    4.4    1.8   3.2      2.3   5.9   2.6    0.7    1.1
Central                      2.9   7.0    1.3    *  3.4        5.8     6.3    9.4    2.0   5.8      2.6   7.6   2.5     *     1.3
West                         3.2   4.7    4.6  1.9  1.5        8.2    13.2    8.0    6.6   4.3      4.1   9.9   3.7    1.8      *
 
School enrollment
Less than 300                1.3    --    --   1.5  1.3        1.9      --     --    4.0   1.2      0.5    --    --    1.5      *
300--999                     2.5   2.5    3.4  0.9  3.3        5.6     7.9    4.7    2.0   9.0      2.2   4.6   1.4    0.5    2.6
1,000 or more               11.4  18.3    8.7  4.5   --       20.4    26.5   18.8    9.1    --     15.8  27.0  12.0    2.3     --
 
Minority enrollment
Less than 5 percent          1.8     --   2.6  0.9  2.1        3.2       --   1.6    2.0   4.4      1.0    --   1.6    0.5    1.1
5--19 percent                3.2   5.9    3.6  1.5  1.8        5.6     4.4    6.8    5.7   4.3      2.1   6.1   0.9    1.5    0.8
20--49 percent               3.6   7.0    2.2  1.6  3.1        7.4    12.1    7.9    3.2   4.9      2.9   8.7   1.1    1.0     *
50 percent or more           4.0   4.0    7.2  2.1  1.4        9.3    12.2    8.7    1.3   9.3      7.3   9.5   9.1    1.0    3.5
 
Free/reduced-price lunch eligibility
Less than 20 percent         2.9   4.5    3.5  1.4  2.4        5.1     8.0     5.2   5.6   2.6      1.2   4.1   1.2     *     0.6
21--34 percent               3.4   6.4    5.4    *  3.7        6.5    11.9     9.1   2.0   6.1      2.7   8.7   1.9   0.7     2.4
35--49 percent               4.4  11.3    5.4  1.9  2.4        6.1    19.2     1.0   1.0   6.2      2.9  12.6   2.2   1.1       *
50--74 percent               1.6   4.2    2.6    *    *        6.0    13.3     8.4   1.3   2.3      3.8  11.5   3.8   0.7       *
75 percent or more           3.0   3.0      --   --  --        6.7     5.5       --    --    --     5.6   5.9     --    --      --

--Fewer than 30 sample cases.
*No cases are reported in this cell, although the event defined by this cell could have been 
reported by some schools with these characteristics had a different sample been drawn.
NOTE: Examples of weapons are guns, knives, sharp-edged or pointed objects, 
baseball bats, frying pans, sticks, rocks, and bottles. Schools were asked to report 
crimes that took place in school buildings, on school buses, on school grounds, and
at places holding school-sponsored events. Population size is 78,000 public schools.
SOURCE: U.S. Department of Education, National Center for Education Statistics, Fast 
Response Survey System, "Principal/School Disciplinarian Survey on School Violence," FRSS 63, 1997.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Table 7.2-Percentage of public schools reporting one or more less serious violent or nonviolent
criminal incidents to police, by type of incident, urbanicity, and selected school characteristics:  1996-97
 
 
                               Physical attack or fight without a weapon                   Theft or larceny                                      Vandalism
                                             Urban                                                 Urban                                                 Urban
School characteristics     Total    City     fringe   Town     Rural             Total    City     fringe   Town     Rural             Total    City     fringe   Town     Rural
 
Total                       27.8     30.4     28.2     31.8     21.3              30.7     34.5     28.9     36.1     24.0              37.8     40.9     37.3     43.6     30.1
 
Instructional level
Elementary school           12.1     13.3     14.9     11.2      8.6              18.8     21.3     17.4     23.3     13.7              30.5     31.6     31.7     38.5     20.6
Middle school               51.2     65.8     47.8     49.9     42.5              44.0     60.7     44.1     44.3     26.6              47.3     60.4     43.8     44.8     41.6
High school                 55.1     74.3     63.3     67.2     35.5              55.2     69.7     61.2     61.6     42.5              51.7     64.8     54.0     55.8     42.9
 
Region
Northeast                   22.8     20.6     21.8     28.2     17.9              26.4     34.7     20.8     31.1     20.2              37.0     37.8     31.4     45.7     33.0
Southeast                   28.7     31.8     31.0     32.2     21.2              31.7     25.6     39.8     34.6     28.0              36.4     39.2     38.1     35.8     33.6
Central                     26.4     26.4     29.5     34.5     19.5              25.7     27.8     22.3     36.7     19.6              30.3     35.0     29.7     30.0     28.1
West                        31.6     36.9     31.9     31.6     25.3              37.6     44.2     36.7     41.0     28.0              46.6     47.5     50.0     61.7     28.9       
School enrollment
Less than 300               16.6      --        --     15.9     18.0              17.6       --       --     23.8     19.3              23.4       --       --     26.1     24.6
300--999                    26.5     24.2     23.8     33.1     24.1              30.5     28.5     26.6     37.6     28.6              40.1     36.6     38.0     47.8     37.1
1,000 or more               67.0     69.7     61.7     74.3       --              68.0     75.0     63.3     64.4      --               61.6     64.5     61.3     63.7      --
 
Minority enrollment
Less than 5 percent         22.3      --      22.3     29.3     17.4              24.2       --     20.1     32.3     20.3              29.1      --      27.3     35.7     24.7
5--19 percent               27.4     19.6     30.7     30.0     25.9              28.1     21.6     27.2     35.7     26.2              40.0     41.2     45.7     41.4     26.0
20--49 percent              31.5     40.9     26.3     36.8     21.5              30.5     30.6     34.5     31.2     24.2              37.8     37.8     33.3     42.1     39.8
50 percent or more          31.7     29.3     32.7     33.0     37.4              41.3     43.0     32.5     47.1     42.1              46.9     42.9     39.2     65.3     51.1
 
Free/reduced-price lunch eligibility
Less than 20 percent        28.9     27.5     29.6     38.4     18.4              30.0     26.4     29.5     40.8     21.2              37.3     40.1     37.6     40.2     32.0
21--34 percent              27.3     32.4     33.0     26.8     21.4              24.7     39.2     21.9     29.5     15.5              33.6     45.0     42.4     38.1     17.7
35--49 percent              28.3     48.9     20.8     30.6     21.2              34.8     47.2     35.3     36.5     27.7              37.9     56.6     22.3     40.6     35.8
50--74 percent              28.0     33.0     28.5     29.5     21.6              31.1     32.1     31.6     37.2     23.8              39.2     32.8     35.4     49.6     37.1
75 percent or more          24.8     23.1      --       --       --               35.5     33.5      --       --       --               41.6     39.8      --       --       --

--Fewer than 30 sample cases.
NOTE: Examples of weapons are guns, knives, sharp-edged or pointed objects, baseball bats, frying
pans, sticks, rocks, and bottles. Schools were asked to report crimes that took place in school
buildings, on school buses, on school grounds, and at places holding school-sponsored events.
Population size is 78,000 public schools.  Due to rounding or missing cases, details may not
add to totals.  Number are rounded to the nearest 100.
SOURCE: U.S. Department of Education, National Center for Education Statistics,
Fast Response Survey System, "Principal/School Disciplinarian Survey on School
Violence, FRSS 63, 1997.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Table 7.3-Number of public schools reporting one or more incidents of serious violent crime to
police, by type of incident, urbanicity, and selected school characteristics:  1996-97
 
 
                           Rape or other type of sexual battery                  Physical attack or fight with a weapon                               Robbery
                                             Urban                                             Urban                                                 Urban
School characteristics     Total    City     fringe   Town     Rural         Total    City     fringe   Town     Rural             Total    City     fringe   Town     Rural
 
Total                      2,326      912      707      256      451          4,695    1,845    1,230    580      1,039             2,389    1,461     520      171      237
 
Instructional level
Elementary school            404      141      115        *      149          1,108      499      254      *        355               395      239       53       *      103
Middle school                731      281      265       91       93          1,626      665      379    247        335               760      467      242       *       51
High school                1,192      491      328      164      209          1,960      681      597    334        349             1,235      755      226      171      83
 
Region
Northeast                    333      124      112       36       61            627      224      203     36        165               468      233      116       36      82
Southeast                    595      155      290      120       31            850      456      146     90        158               394      220       85       36      52
Central                      661      327       61       *       273          1,313      298      454     98        463               582      356      123        *     103
West                         738      307      245      100       86          1,904      868      427    356        253               946      652      196       98       *
 
School enrollment
Less than 300                255       --       --       68      154            383       --       --    187        135               101       --       --       68       *
300--999                   1,232      334      473      128      297          2,804    1,051      658    273        821             1,123      619      194       73     237
1,000 or more                840      545      235       60       --          1,508      794      512    120         --             1,166      810      326       30      --
 
Minority enrollment
Less than 5 percent          430       --       97       66      247            773      --       61      158       515               231       --       61       36     133
5--19 percent                557      210      223       68       56            974      156      418     265       136               366      215       57       68      26
20--49 percent               636      341      116       62      117          1,320      589      424     121       185               520      424       59       36       *
50 percent or more           704      342      272       60       31          1,628    1,060      328      36       203             1,273      822      344       30      78
 Free/reduced-price lunch eligibility
Less than 20 percent         531      123      244       66       98            946      218      359     261       108               222      110       86        *       26
21--34 percent               589      167      217        *      205          1,120      308      368     100       344               473      226       77       36      133
35--49 percent               566      250      138       62      117            785      426       26      32       301               373      279       57       36        *
50--74 percent               250      166       85        *        *            959      528      271      60       100               607      456      121       30        *
75 percent or more           373      191       --       --       --            844      349       --      --        --               698      373       --       --       --


--Fewer than 30 sample cases.
*No cases are reported in this cell, although the event defined by this cell could have been reported by some schools with these characteristics
had a different sample been drawn.  NOTE: Examples of weapons are guns, knives, sharp-edged or
pointed objects, baseball bats, frying pans, sticks, rocks, and bottles. Schools were asked to
report crimes that took place in school buildings, on school buses, on school grounds, and at
places holding school-sponsored events. Population size is 78,000 public schools.
Due to rounding or missing cases, details may not add to totals.
SOURCE: U.S. Department of Education, National Center for Education Statistics, Fast Response
Survey System, "Principal/School Disciplinarian Survey on School Violence, FRSS 63, 1997.
                                                                                                                                                        64

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Table 7.4-Number of public schools reporting one or more less serious violent or nonviolent criminal
incidents to police, by type of  incident, urbanicity, and selected school characteristics:  1996-97
 
 
                           Physical attack or fight without a weapon                         Theft or larceny                                      Vandalism
                                             Urban                                                 Urban                                                 Urban
School characteristics     Total    City     fringe   Town     Rural             Total    City     fringe   Town     Rural             Total    City     fringe   Town     Rural
 
Total                      21,600   5,500    5,400    6,200    4,500             23,800   6,200    5,400    7,100    5,100             29,300    7,400    7,000    8,500    6,400
 
Instructional level
Elementary school          5,800    1,700    1,900    1,200    1,000             9,000    2,700    2,200    2,600    1,600             14,600    3,900    4,000    4,200    2,400
Middle school              7,200    2,000    1,700    2,200    1,300             6,200    1,900    1,600    1,900      800              6,600    1,800    1,600    2,000    1,300
High school                8,600    1,800    1,800    2,800    2,200             8,600    1,700    1,700    2,600    2,600              8,100    1,600    1,500    2,300    2,600
 
Region
Northeast                  3,400      600    1,200    1,200      400             4,000    1,000    1,100    1,300      500              5,600    1,100    1,700    2,000      800
Southeast                  4,900    1,200    1,000    1,600    1,000             5,400    1,000    1,300    1,700    1,400              6,200    1,500    1,300    1,800    1,700
Central                    5,900    1,200    1,400    1,700    1,500             5,800    1,300    1,100    1,800    1,600              6,800    1,600    1,400    1,500    2,200
West                       7,300    2,400    1,700    1,700    1,500             8,700    2,900    1,900    2,200    1,700             10,700    3,100    2,600    3,300    1,700
 
School enrollment
Less than 300              3,400    --       --         700    2,100             3,600      --       --     1,100    2,200              4,700     --       --     1,200    2,800
300--999                   13,300   3,200    3,300    4,500    2,200             15,200   3,800    3,700    5,100    2,600             20,000   4,900    5,200    6,500    3,400
1,000 or more              4,900    2,100    1,700    1,000    --                5,000    2,200    1,700      900       --              4,500   1,900    1,700      800       --
 
Minority enrollment
Less than 5 percent        5,400      --       800    2,300    2,000             5,900    --         700    2,500    2,400             7,000     --      1,000    2,800    2,900
5--19 percent              4,800     700     1,900    1,400      800             4,900      800    1,700    1,700      800             7,000    1,500    2,800    1,900      800
20--49 percent             5,600    2,000    1,400    1,400      800             5,400    1,500    1,800    1,200      900             6,700    1,800    1,800    1,600    1,500
50 percent or more         5,500    2,500    1,200    1,000      800             7,200    3,700    1,200    1,400      900             8,200    3,700    1,400    1,900    1,100
 
Free/reduced-price lunch eligibility
Less than 20 percent       5,300      700    2,100    1,800      800             5,500      700    2,100    1,900      900             6,900    1,100    2,600    1,800    1,300
21--34 percent             4,700      800    1,300    1,400    1,200             4,300    1,000      900    1,500      900             5,800    1,200    1,700    1,900    1,000
35--49 percent             3,700    1,100      500    1,000    1,000             4,500    1,000      900    1,200    1,300             4,900    1,300      600    1,300    1,700
50--74 percent             4,500    1,300      900    1,300    1,000             5,000    1,300    1,000    1,700    1,100             6,200    1,300    1,100    2,200    1,600
75 percent or more         3,100    1,500       --       --       --             4,400    2,100       --       --       --             5,200    2,500       --       --       --

--Fewer than 30 sample cases.
NOTE: Examples of weapons are guns, knives, sharp-edged or pointed objects, baseball bats,
frying pans, sticks, rocks, and bottles. Schools were asked to report crimes that took place in
buildings, on school buses, on school grounds, and at places holding school-sponsored events.
Population size is 78,000 public schools. Due to rounding or missing cases, details may not add
totals. Numbers are rounded to the nearest 100.
SOURCE: U.S. Department of Education, National Center for Education Statistics,
Fast Response Survey System, "Principal/School Disciplinarian Survey on School
Violence, FRSS 63, 1997.                                                              

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Table 7.5-Number of serious violent criminal incidents occurring in public schools reported to
police, by type of incident, urbanicity, and selected school characteristics:  1996-97
 
 
                           Rape or other type of sexual battery                  Physical attack or fight with a weapon                Robbery
                                             Urban                                                 Urban                                                 Urban
School characteristics     Total    City     fringe   Town     Rural          Total    City     fringe   Town     Rural          Total    City     fringe   Town     Rural
 
Total                      4,200    1,900    1,100      300      800          11,000   5,400    2,100    1,700    1,800          7,200    4,500    1,500     600      500
 
Instructional level
Elementary school            700      300      100        *      300          1,600      900      300        *      500            400      200      100       *      100
Middle school              1,400      600      600      100      200          4,100    2,700      600      300      500          2,300    1,900      300       *      100
High school                2,100    1,100      500      200      400          5,300    1,800    1,200    1,400      800          4,400    2,400    1,200     600      300
 
Region
Northeast                    500      200      200       **      100          1,100      600      300       **      200          1,600      900      200     300      200
Southeast                  1,200      400      500      200      200          1,600      900      500      100      200          1,300      300      700      **      300
Central                    1,200      600      100        *      500          4,300    2,400      500      200    1,100          2,100    1,600      400       *      100
West                       1,300      700      400      100      100          3,900    1,600      700    1,300      400          2,200    1,600      300     300        *
 
School enrollment
Less than 300                300       --       --      100      200          1,400      --        --    1,000      300            200       --       --     200        *
300--999                   2,000      600      700      100      600          5,700    3,300      700      300    1,400          3,000    1,900       300    300      500
1,000 or more              1,800    1,300      500      100       --          3,900    2,100    1,300      400       --          3,900    2,600     1,300    100       --
 
Minority enrollment
Less than 5 percent          700       --      100      100      500            900       --      100      200      600            300       --       100     **      200
5--19 percent                800      400      300      100      100          2,400      400      600    1,300      100            600      300       100     200     100
20--49 percent             1,500      800      300      100      200          2,200    1,100      600      200      300          1,500      900       300     300       *
50 percent or more         1,200      700      400      100       **          5,400    3,900      700      **       800          4,800    3,400     1,100     100      300
 
Free/reduced-price lunch eligibility
Less than 20 percent         800      300      300      100      200          1,400      300      400      500      200            700      300      300       *      100
21--34 percent             1,100      400      400        *      400          2,400      900    1,000      100      400          1,500      700      600      **      200
35--49 percent             1,000      500      100      100      200          1,500    1,000       **       **      400            900      500      100     300        *
50--74 percent               600      400      200        *        *          2,900    2,300      500      100      100          2,000    1,700      200     100        *
75 percent or more           600      400       --       --       --          2,700      900      --        --       --          2,000    1,200      --       --       --

--Fewer than 30 sample cases.
*No cases are reported in this cell, although the event
defined by this cell could have been reported by some schools
with these characteristics had a different sample been drawn.
**Values are less than 50.
NOTE: Examples of weapons are guns, knives, sharp-edged or
pointed objects, baseball bats, frying pans, sticks, rocks,
and bottles. Schools were asked to report crimes that took place in school
buildings, on school buses, on school grounds, and at places holding
school-sponsored events. Due to rounding or missing cases, details may
not add to totals. Numbers are rounded to the nearest 100.
nearest 100.
SOURCE: U.S. Department of Education, National Center for Education Statistics,
Fast Response Survey System, "Principal/School Disciplinarian
Survey on School Violence, FRSS 63, 1997.


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Table 7.6-Number of less serious violent or nonviolent criminal incidents occurring in public
schools reported to police, by type of incident, urbanicity, and selected school
characteristics:  1996-97
 
 
                           Physical attack or fight without a weapon             Theft or larceny                                                        Vandalism
                                              Urban                                                 Urban                                                 Urban
School characteristics      Total    City     fringe   Town     Rural             Total    City     fringe   Town     Rural             Total    City     fringe   Town     Rural
 
Total                      187,900  62,100   54,800     46,300   24,700          115,500   39,900   28,300   29,000   18,300            98,500   32,700   22,800   25,700   17,200
 
Instructional level
Elementary school           21,500    2,900    8,300     7,400    3,000           19,500    5,700    6,400    4,600    2,900             34,800    9,000    10,800   10,000   5,000
Middle school               73,300   34,100   19,100    14,700    5,400           31,500   12,300    8,100    7,700    3,400             23,800    9,400     4,000    7,000   3,400
High school                 93,100   25,200   27,400    24,300   16,300           64,600   22,000   13,800   16,700   12,100             39,900   14,300     8,000    8,700   8,900
 
Region
Northeast                   29,100    8,800    12,200    5,000    3,000           18,100    4,000    6,000    5,500    2,600             17,100    4,400     4,700    6,700    1,200
Southeast                   50,700    9,800    22,700   11,400    6,800           23,300    7,400    6,400    5,300    4,200             17,300    5,600     3,900    3,700    4,200
Central                     45,600   18,300     8,200   10,900    8,200           23,000    7,500    4,200    6,000    5,300             18,600    4,400     3,000    4,400    6,700
West                        62,500   25,200    11,700   19,000    6,700           51,200   21,100   11,700   12,200    6,200             45,500   18,300    11,200   10,900    5,000
 
School enrollment
Less than 300               15,600      --       --      5,800    8,200            9,900       --       --    3,200    6,100             12,300     --        --      4,200    6,900
300--999                    87,900   27,500   18,400    27,600   14,500           51,400   13,500    9,900   17,400   10,700             54,000   15,100    11,600   17,300   10,000
1,000 or more               84,400   34,200    35,300    12,900      --           54,200   25,900   18,300    8,400     --               32,200   16,700    11,000    4,200    --
 
Minority enrollment
Less than 5 percent        24,300      --      3,100    11,200    8,300           21,400      --     3,400    8,100    8,700             18,700     --       2,400    7,500    8,100
5--19 percent              35,600    5,500    15,600    10,500    3,900           29,400    5,800   10,500    9,500    3,600             19,700    3,400     8,000    6,700    1,600
20--49 percent             54,000   16,800    17,500    13,400    6,200           25,900   11,000    8,800    3,000    3,100             18,500    7,300     4,000    3,700    3,400
50 percent or more         72,600   38,100    18,500     9,800    6,200           34,800   21,500    5,500    4,900    2,900             40,400   21,400     8,500    6,600    4,000
 
Free/reduced-price lunch eligibility
Less than 20 percent       40,000    6,400    16,100    12,900    4,500           29,500    7,200    10,100   8,300    3,900             19,300    3,600     7,100    5,500    3,200
21-34 percent              34,900    8,800    13,800     7,300    5,000           26,100    7,400    6,200    8,100    4,400             17,700    4,700     4,900    5,600    2,500
35-49 percent              33,300   10,700     8,700     7,200    6,800           21,600    6,500    5,100    5,100    4,900             14,700    4,400     1,600    4,000    4,800
50-74 percent              45,900   22,900     9,200    10,100    3,700           22,400   10,600    4,500    4,800    2,500             20,100    8,000     2,500    6,400    3,300
75 percent or more         28,800   13,200       --       --       --             15,800    8,200      --       --       --              25,800   12,000      --       --       --
 
--Fewer than 30 sample cases.
NOTE: Examples of weapons are guns, knives, sharp-edged or pointed objects, baseball bats, frying pans, sticks, rocks, and bottles.
Schools were asked to report crimes that took place in school buildings, on school buses, on school
grounds, and at places holding school-sponsored events. Due to rounding or missing cases, details may not add to totals.
Numbers are rounded to the nearest 100.
SOURCE: U.S. Department of Education, National Center for Education Statistics,
Fast Response Survey System, "Principal/School Disciplinarian Survey on School
Violence, FRSS 63, 1997.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Table 7.7-Number of serious violent criminal incidents reported to police per 1,000 public
school students, by type of incident, urbanicity, and selected school characteristics:  1996-97
 
 
                               Rape or other type of sexual battery                  Physical attack or fight with a weapon                Robbery
                                              Urban                                                 Urban                                                 Urban
School characteristics      Total    City     fringe   Town     Rural             Total    City     fringe   Town     Rural             Total    City     fringe   Town     Rural
 
Total                         0.1      0.2      0.1        0      0.1               0.3      0.4      0.2      0.2      0.3               0.2      0.4      0.1      0.1      0.1
 
Instructional level
Elementary school               0        0        0        *      0.1               0.1      0.1        0       *       0.1                 0        0        0        *        0
Middle school                 0.2      0.2      0.2        0      0.2               0.5      1.1      0.2      0.1      0.5               0.3      0.8      0.1        *      0.1
High school                   0.2      0.3      0.1      0.1      0.2               0.5      0.6      0.4      0.5      0.4               0.4      0.7      0.3      0.2      0.2
 
Region
Northeast                     0.1      0.1      0.1        0      0.1               0.1      0.3      0.1        0      0.2               0.2      0.4      0.1      0.1      0.2
Southeast                     0.1      0.2      0.2      0.1      0.1               0.2      0.3      0.2        0      0.1               0.1      0.1      0.3        0      0.1
Central                       0.1      0.2        0        *      0.2               0.4        1      0.2      0.1      0.5               0.2      0.6      0.1        *        0
West                          0.1      0.1      0.1        0      0.1               0.3      0.3      0.2      0.5      0.2               0.2      0.3      0.1      0.1        *
 
School enrollment
Less than 300                 0.1      --       --       0.1      0.1               0.4       --       --      1.2      0.2               0.1       --       --      0.2        *
300--999                      0.1      0.1      0.1        0      0.1               0.2      0.4      0.1        0      0.3               0.1      0.3        0        0      0.1
1,000 or more                 0.2      0.3      0.1      0.1       --               0.4      0.5      0.3      0.2       --               0.4      0.6      0.3        0       --
 
Minority enrollment
Less than 5 percent           0.1       --        0        0      0.1               0.1       --        0        0      0.2                 0       --        0        0        0
5--19 percent                 0.1      0.2      0.1        0        0               0.2      0.2      0.1      0.5      0.1               0.1      0.1        0      0.1        0
20--49 percent                0.1      0.2      0.1        0      0.2               0.2      0.3      0.2      0.1      0.2               0.1      0.3      0.1      0.1        *
50 percent or more            0.1      0.1      0.1        0        0               0.5      0.6      0.2        0      1.1               0.4      0.5      0.4        0      0.4
 
Free/reduced-price lunch eligibility
Less than 20 percent          0.1      0.1      0.1        0      0.1               0.1      0.2      0.1      0.2      0.1               0.1      0.2      0.1        *        0
21--34 percent                0.1      0.2      0.2        *      0.2               0.3      0.4      0.4      0.1      0.2               0.2      0.3      0.2        0      0.1
35--49 percent                0.1      0.3      0.1      0.1      0.1               0.2      0.6        0        0      0.2               0.1      0.3      0.1      0.2        *
50--74 percent                0.1      0.1      0.1       *        *                0.4      0.8      0.2        0      0.1               0.2      0.6      0.1        0        *
75 percent or more            0.1      0.1       --       --       --               0.4      0.2       --       --       --               0.3      0.3        --       --       --

--Fewer than 30 sample cases.
*No cases are reported in this cell, although the event defined by this cell could have been reported by some
schools with these characteristics had a different sample been drawn.
NOTE: Examples of weapons are guns, knives, sharp-edged or pointed objects, baseball bats,
frying pans, sticks, rocks, and bottles. Schools were asked to report crimes that took
buildings, on school buses, on school grounds, and at places holding school-sponsored events.
Population size is 42,336,819 public school students. Values of 0.0 are less than 0.05.
SOURCE: U.S. Department of Education, National Center for Education Statistics, Fast
Response Survey System, "Principal/School Disciplinarian Survey on School Violence," FRSS 63, 1997.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Table 8.1-Number and percentage of school-associated violent deaths, by selected
characteristics:  1992-93 and 1993-94 school years
 
 
                                  Total                      Student                         Nonstudent
Selected characteristic    Number   Percent           Number   Percent  Rate1             Number   Percent
 
Total                       105    100.0                76    100.0     0.09                29    100.0
 
Type of fatality
Homicide                     85     81.0                63     82.9     0.07                22     75.9
Suicide                      20     19.0                13     17.1     0.02                 7     24.1
 
Sex
Male                         87     82.9                --       --       --                --       --
Female                       18     17.1                --       --       --                --       --
 
Race--ethnicity
White, non-Hispanic          34     32.4                17     22.4     0.03                17     58.6
Black, non-Hispanic          48     45.7                38     50.0     0.28                10     34.5
Hispanic                     21     20.0                19     25.0     0.16                 2      6.9
Asian/Pacific Islander        2      1.9                 2      2.6     0.07                 0        0
 
Instructional level
Preschool--grade 8           --       --               102     13.7     0.02                --       --
Grades 9--12                 --       --                63     86.3     0.27                --       --
 
Urbanicity of school district
Urban                        63     60.0                47     61.8     0.18                16     55.2
Suburban                     32     30.5                23     30.3     0.09                 9     31.0
Rural                        10      9.5                 6      7.9     0.02                 4     13.8
--Not available.
1/The rate is the estimated annualized rate of school-associated violent deaths per 100,000
students based on 1992-93 enrollment figures.
2/Instructional level unknown for three students.
NOTE: A school-associated violent death was any homicide or suicide in which the fatal injury
occurred on the campus of a functioning elementary or secondary school in the United States,
while the victim was on the way to or from regular sessions at such a school, or while the victim was
attending or traveling to or from an official school-event.  Cases included the deaths of nonstudents
as well as students and staff members. Population size is 97,134,000. Due to rounding or
missing cases, details may not add to totals.
SOURCE: S.P. Kachur et al., "School-Associated Violent Deaths in the United States, 1992 to 1994,"
Journal of the American Medical Association 275 (22) (1996): 1729-1733.
 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Table 9.1-Number of nonfatal crimes against teachers and average annual number of crimes per
1,000 teachers at school, by type of selected teacher characteristics:  Aggregated from 1992 to 1996/1
 
 
                       Total crimes from 1992 to 1996               Average annual number of crimes per 1,000 teachers
Teacher                                             Serious                                           Serious
characteristics        Total/2   Theft    Violent/3 violent/4          Total/2   Theft    Violent/3   violent4
 
Total                1,581,100  962,100    619,000  89,000                  76       46       30        4
 
Instructional level
Elementary             606,700  416,200    190,500  47,900                  55       38       17        4
Middle/Junior high     423,000  180,100    242,900  17,500                 103       44       59        4
Senior high            551,400  365,700    185,600  23,600                  96       64       32        4
 
Sex
Male                   450,700  233,500   217,100   28,000                  86       44       41        5
Female               1,130,400  728,500   401,900   61,000                  72       47       26        4
 
Race--ethnicity
White, non-Hispanic  1,370,300  830,000   540,300   73,600                  78       47       31        4
Black, non-Hispanic    135,700   91,500    44,200   13,000                  69       47       23        7
Hispanic                49,700   34,400    15,300       *                   55       38       17        *
Other, non-Hispanic     25,400    6,200    19,200    2,300                  91       22       69        8
 
Urbanicity of school6
Urban                  912,300  544,900   367,400   51,700                  96       57       39        5
Suburban               370,200  237,800   132,400   19,500                  57       37       20        3
Rural                  211,500  124,700   86,800    11,900                  55       32       22        3

*No cases were reported in this cell, although the crime defined by the cell could have happened to
some teachers with these characteristics if different sample had been drawn.
1/The data were aggregated from 1992 to 1996 due to the small number of teachers in each year's sample.
2/Total crimes include rape/sexual assault, robbery, aggravated assault, simple assault, and theft.
3/Violent crimes include rape/sexual assault, robbery, aggravated assault, and simple assault.
4/Serious violent crimes include rape/sexual assault, robbery, and aggravated assault, which are included
in violent crime.
5/The estimate was based on fewer than 10 cases.
6/Teachers teaching in more than one school in different locales are not included.
NOTE: On average there were about 4.2 million teachers per year over the 5-year period for a total
population size of 20,909,729 teachers.  The average annual number of full-time equivalent
teachers is approximately 2.9 million. The population reported here includes part-time teachers
as well as other instructional and support staff.  Due to rounding or missing data, details may
not sum to totals. Numbers are rounded to the nearest 100.
SOURCE: U.S. Department of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics, National Crime Victimization
Survey, 1992 to 1996.



----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Table 10.1-Percentage and number of teachers who reported that they were threatened with injury or
that they were physically attacked by a student during the past 12 months, by urbanicity and
selected teacher and school characteristics:  1993-94 school year
 
 
                                   Teachers threatened with injury by a student                                              Teachers physically attacked by a student
                                     Percent                                       Number                                      Percent                                       Number
                                                       Urban         Small                      Urban      Small                               Urban         Small                          Urban       Small
                                              Central  fringe/       town/             Central  fringe/    town/                      Central  fringe/       town/                 Central  fringe/     town/
Selected characteristics               Total  city     large town    rural      Total  city     large town rural             Total    city     large town    rural          Total  city     large town  rural
 
Total                                  11.7     15.1     10.7      9.8          341,000  132,100   99,600  109,300                4.1      5.6        4      3.1          119,200  48,100   37,000   34,100
 
Sex
Male                                   14.7     19.5     14.0     11.8          115,900   45,100   33,800   37,000                3.9      5.8      3.6      2.7           30,800  13,500    8,800    8,500
Female                                 10.5     13.5      9.5      9.1          225,100   87,000   65,800   72,400                4.2      5.4      4.1      3.3           88,400  34,600   28,200   25,700
 
Race--ethnicity
White, non-Hispanic                    11.5     15.4     10.5      9.9          294,300  103,900   88,400  102,000                4.1      5.7      3.9      3.1          102,700  37,900   32,800   32,000
Black, non-Hispanic                    11.9       13     12.6      8.5           23,600   14,600    5,300    3,700                3.9      4.2      4.3      2.4            7,700   4,800    1,900    1,000
Hispanic                               13.1     15.3     10.6     10.1           15,800   10,200    3,400    2,200                5.2      6.4      4.3      2.7            6,100   4,200    1,300      500
Other, non-Hispanic                    13.4     16.9     13.0      9.4            7,300    3,300    2,500    1,400                5.2      6.6        5      3.6            2,800   1,200    1,000      500
 
Teacher level
Elementary                              8.7     11.7      7.4      7.3          133,600   56,300   35,900   41,400                4.9      6.5      4.6      3.8           75,400  31,100   22,400   22,000
Secondary                              15.0     19.3     14.2     12.5          207,400   75,800   63,700   67,900                3.2      4.3      3.2      2.2           43,800  17,000   14,600   12,200
 
Control
Public                                 12.8     17.8     11.6     10.2          325,400  126,800   92,600  106,000                4.4      6.4      4.2      3.2          110,700  45,100   32,900   32,600
Private                                 4.2      3.3      5.0      4.6           15,600    5,300    7,000    3,300                2.3      1.9      2.9      2.1            8,500   3,000    4,000    1,500

NOTE: Population size is 2,940,000 teachers. Due to rounding or missing cases, details may not add to totals.
Numbers are rounded to the nearest 100.
SOURCE: U.S. Department of Education, National Center for Education Statistics, Schools
and Staffing Survey, 1993--94 (Teacher and School Questionnaires).

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Table 11.1-Percentage of 12th graders who reported carrying a weapon or gun 
to school at least 1 day in the past 4 weeks, by sex: 1992 to 1996
 
 
                  Carrying a weapon                   Carrying a gun
Year         Total    Male     Female            Total    Male     Female
 
    1992      6.2     10.4      2.2                --       --       --
    1993      7.9     13.5      2.4                --       --       --
    1994      6.1      9.8      1.8               3.1      4.8      0.9
    1995      6.4      9.6      2.8               3.2      5.9      0.5
    1996      5.7      8.6      2.9               3.3      6.3      0.3

--Question was not asked in the 1992 and 1993 surveys.
NOTE: Examples of weapons are guns, knives, and clubs. "To school" was not 
defined for the questionnaire respondent. Response rates for this survey do
not meet NCES standards. See table B1 for details.
SOURCE: University of Michigan, Survey Research Center, Institute for Social 
Research, Monitoring the Future Study, 1992 to 1996.
 

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Table 11.2-Percentage of students in grades 9 to 12 who reported carrying a weapon on
school property at least 1 day in the past 30 days, by selected student characteristics:  1993, 1995, and 1997
 
 
Student characteristics        1993     1995*    1997*
 
Total                          11.7      9.6      8.5
 
Sex
Male                           17.8     14.1     12.5
Female                          5.1      4.9      3.7
 
Race--ethnicity
White, non-Hispanic            10.8      8.9      7.8
Black, non-Hispanic            14.8     10.1      9.2
Hispanic                       13.1     14.0     10.4
Other, non-Hispanic            12.7      9.6      9.4
 
Grade
Ninth                          12.5     10.6     10.2
Tenth                          11.4     10.3      7.7
Eleventh                       11.8     10.0      9.4
Twelfth                        10.7      7.5      7.0

*Response rates do not meet NCES standards. See table B1 for details.
NOTE: Examples of weapons are guns, knives, and clubs. "On school property"
was not defined for the questionnaire respondent. Populatio
SOURCE: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Public Health Service,
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, National Center for Heal Statistics,
National Health Interview Survey.
--Youth Risk Behavior Survey, 1993, 1995, and 1997.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Table 13.1-Percentage and number of students ages 12 through 19 who reported that they
avoided one or more places in school, by urbanicity and selected student characteristics:  1989 and 1995
 
 
                                      Percent                                                                                   Number
                                       1989                                         1995                                         1989                                         1995
                                             Sub-                                          Sub-                                      Sub-                                         Sub-
Student characteristics    Total    Urban    urban    Rural             Total    Urban    urban    Rural           Total    Urban    urban    Rural             Total    Urban    urban    Rural
 
Total                        5.1      6.9      4.1      5.1               8.7     11.8      7.9      6.9        1,096,000  400,100  409,000  287,000         2,073,900  741,900  897,200   434,900
 
Sex
Male                         5.1      6.9      4.0      5.2               8.7     12.4      7.6      7.2          569,000  203,200  210,600  155,300         1,077,000  397,700  446,700   232,600
Female                       5.1      6.8      4.1      4.9               8.6     11.1      8.2      6.7          527,000  196,900  198,400  131,700           996,900  344,200  450,500   202,300
 
Race--ethnicity
White, non-Hispanic          4.5      5.6      4.0      4.6               7.0      8.7      6.5      6.9          685,600  160,300  321,300  204,000         1,145,900  242,700  561,700   341,400
Black, non-Hispanic          6.8      7.8      3.2      8.6              12.0     14.1     11.0      8.0          229,000  135,500   28,300   65,200           448,900  270,100  117,400    61,400
Hispanic                     6.5      8.1      5.2      4.5              13.0     14.2     15.0      5.0          131,600   78,200   40,900   12,500           377,300  188,100  166,000    23,100
Other, non-Hispanic          6.3      9.6      4.7      4.3              10.9     14.5     10.0      6.9           49,800   26,100   18,400    5,300           102,000   40,900   52,000     9,000
 
Age
12                           6.5      8.8      4.9      6.8              11.6     13.2     12.2      8.8          209,300  77,500    71,900   59,800            432,900  128,400  218,900   85,600
13                           6.0      6.7      6.5      4.5              10.9     11.2     11.2     10.1          200,600  58,800   103,400   38,400            411,600  114,700  196,100  100,800
14                           6.3      8.4      5.0      6.3               8.6     11.7      7.7      7.1          203,900  73,100    76,700   54,000            320,800  115,600  139,400   65,900
15                           5.0      8.4      3.2      4.8               8.7     15.0      6.3      6.2          160,900  72,000    49,400   39,500            321,300  153,300  108,700   59,200
16                           4.0      6.0      2.9      3.8               6.8      9.0      6.5      5.5          130,500  52,000    45,300   33,100            250,500   80,100  114,100   56,300
17                           3.6      3.6      3.1      4.6               6.5     10.2      4.7      6.0          118,000  32,100    46,700   39,100            205,200   86,300   71,400   47,500
18                           3.5      5.4      1.7      4.6               5.8     10.3      4.5      3.8           60,900  26,300    13,600   21,000            105,600   48,000   38,100   19,500
19                           5.2     10.8      2.2      2.8               7.9     15.4      7.9      *             12,100   8,300     2,000    1,900             26,000   15,500   10,500   *
 
Control
Public                       5.4      7.5      4.4      5.0               9.3     13.2      8.6      7.1        1,042,200 383,400   394,900   263,900         2,022,700  720,500  869,700  432,600
Private                      1.5      1.7      1.2      2.4               2.3      2.6      2.2      1.2          28,200   11,000    11,300     5,900            49,100   21,400   25,400    2,200


*No cases are reported in this cell, although the event defined by this cell could have been
reported by some students with these characteristics had a different sample been drawn.
NOTE: Places include the entrance into the school, any hallways and stairs in the school,
parts of the school cafeteria, any school restrooms, and other places inside the school
building. Population sizes are 21,554,000 students ages 12 through 19 in 1989 and 23,933,000 in 1995.
Due to rounding or missing cases, details may not add to totals. Numbers are rounded to the
nearest 100.
SOURCE: U.S. Department of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics, School Crime Supplement
to the National Crime Victimization Survey, 1989 and 1995.
 


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Table 14.1-Percentage of students ages 12 through 19 who reported that street gangs were
present at school, by characteristics:  1989 and 1995
 
                                        1989                                         1995
Student characteristic    Total    Urban    Suburban Rural             Total    Urban    Suburban Rural
 
Total                     15.3     24.8     14.0      7.9              28.4     40.7     26.3     19.9
 
Sex
Male                      15.8     27.5     13.7      7.8              28.9     40.7     27.2     20.4
Female                    14.8     22.1     14.3      7.9              27.9     40.8     25.3     19.3
 
Race-ethnicity
White, non-Hispanic       11.7     19.8     11.2      7.3              23.0     34.0     22.6     17.8
Black, non-Hispanic       19.8     24.2     17.5     12.7              34.7     42.2     32.9     18.4
Hispanic                  31.6     37.2     33.9      5.5              49.5     53.5     47.9     41.9
Other, non-Hispanic       25.4     37.4     23.6      4.4              31.2     36.7     28.5     30.2
 
Age
12                        12.1     16.7     11.4      8.4              19.3     29.0     16.9     14.1
13                        14.5     22.2     13.5      8.3              26.7     36.0     26.3     18.0
14                        17.9     28.1     17.3      8.5              30.6     44.6     27.8     21.1
15                        16.2     29.8     12.6      8.8              32.7     46.6     30.3     22.1
16                        16.4     27.0     15.6      7.1              30.2     43.2     29.1     20.5
17                        15.3     24.1     14.8      7.0              31.0     44.6     26.3     25.7
18                        14.5     25.3     12.7      7.6              28.8     39.6     29.0     18.6
19                        16.9     36.1      7.0      7.6              30.7     54.1     23.8     15.9
 
Control
Public                    16.5     27.2     15.3      8.1              30.6     45.4     28.6     20.5
Private                    4.4      6.1      3.7      2.7               6.8      9.6      5.6      2.2

NOTE:  "At school" was not defined for the questionnaire respondent. Population sizes
are 21,554,000 students ages 12 through 19 in 1989 and 23,933,000 in 1995.
SOURCE: U.S. Department of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics, School Crime
Supplement to the National Crime Victimization Survey, 1989 and 1995.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Table 15.1-Percentage and number of public schools reporting that 1 or more of 17 discipline issues* was a s
serious problem in their schoool, by urbanicity and selected school characteristics:  1996-97
 
 
                                          Percent                                               Number
                                      Urban                                                 Urban
School characteristics Total    City     fringe   Town     Rural           Total    City     fringe   Town     Rural
 
Total                   16.0     18.6     14.1     15.7     15.7          12,400   3,300    2,700    3,100    3,300
 
Instructional level
Elementary school        8.4     11.7      6.6      6.2      9.1          4,100    1,500      800      700    1,100
Middle school           18.4     23.8     15.2     18.5     16.6          2,600      700      500      800      500
High school             36.9     47.3     46.1     37.9     28.0          5,800    1,200    1,300    1,600    1,700
 
Region
Northeast               13.2     22.5      9.5     13.8      8.8          2,000      700      500      600      200
Southeast               18.4     18.7     15.3     20.1     18.5          3,100      700      500    1,000      900
Central                 13.6     12.2     16.2       15     11.9          3,100      600      800      800      900
West                    18.3     21.2     16.3     13.7     21.1          4,300    1,400      900      700    1,200
 
School size
Less than 300            9.5     10.0       *       8.0     12.0         1,900       200        *      400    1,400
300--999                15.4     15.4     11.8     16.3     19.6         7,700     2,100    1,600    2,200    1,800
1,000 or more           37.6     37.4     38.3     37.2     34.7          2,800    1,100    1,000      500      100
 
Minority enrollment
Less than 5 percent     10.3      5.5      7.1     13.8      9.4          2,500       **      300    1,100    1,100
5--19 percent           17.3     15.2     16.5     21.2     15.3          3,000      500    1,000    1,000      500
20--49 percent          17.0     17.5     12.8     13.0     26.2          3,000      900      700      500    1,000
50 percent or more      21.7     21.8     18.9     16.4     33.1          3,800    1,900      700      500      700
 
Free/reduced-price lunch eligibility
Less than 20 percent    13.1     15.7     11.8     17.4      9.0          2,400      400      800      800      400
21--34 percent          15.6     22.9     17.0     15.4     11.4          2,700      600      700      800      600
35--49 percent          19.0     28.5      1.9     23.1     21.0          2,500      600       **      800    1,000
50--74 percent          16.0     14.0     25.4      9.3     17.8          2,600      600      800      400      800
75 percent or more      17.5     17.6     13.8     14.4     23.8          2,200    1,100      300      300      500
 
*Student tardiness, student absenteeism/class cutting, physical conflicts among students, robbery or theft
of items worth over $10, vandalism of school property, student alcohol use, student drug use, sale of
drugs on school grounds, student tobacco use, student possession of weapons, trespassing, verbal abuse
of teachers, teacher absenteeism, teacher alcohol or drug use, racial tensions, and gangs.
*No cases are reported in this cell, although the event defined by this cell could have been reported by some
students with these characteristics had a different sample been drawn.
**Values are less than 50.
NOTE: Population size is 78,000 public schools. Due to rounding or missing cases, details may not add to totals.
Numbers are rounded to the nearest 100.
SOURCE: U.S. Department of Education, National Center for Education Statistics, Fast Response Survey System,
"Principal/School Disciplinarian Survey on School Violence," FRSS 63, 1997.


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Table 16.1-Percentage of 12th graders who reported using alcohol in the past 12 months,
by place and sex:  1976 to 1996
 
 
                      Total                                        Male                                         Female
Year     Total    School   Home     Party             Total    School   Home     Party             Total    School   Home     Party
 
    1976     82.6     12.1     53.0     72.3              87.0     18.7     58.9     77.7              78.4      5.5     47.3     67.0
    1977     85.5     13.2     53.8     74.0              88.5     18.3     58.5     77.9              82.7      8.3     49.4     70.4
    1978     86.7     12.2     55.8     76.1              89.7     17.4     58.6     78.1              83.9      7.3     53.1     74.2
    1979     77.2     11.5     48.5     67.9              88.7     18.3     59.5     78.0              84.7      7.6     53.4     73.4
    1980     86.5     13.4     57.0     75.3              87.7     19.2     60.4     78.0              85.4      7.9     53.8     72.7
    1981     84.8     11.3     53.3     75.4              87.2     16.0     56.7     78.0              82.5        7     50.1     73.0
    1982     85.6     10.1     54.6     74.9              87.8     13.0     59.4     77.1              83.5      7.2     49.8     72.6
    1983     85.8     12.2     54.7     73.8              87.9     16.7     57.8     77.6              83.9      7.7     51.6     70.1
    1984     82.5     11.3     51.6     71.9              85.0     15.7     57.1     76.5              80.2      7.2     46.3     67.5
    1985     84.1     10.9     49.7     72.3              84.5     15.0     53.3     72.9              83.7      7.1     46.5     71.6
    1986     84.2     10.9     49.8     72.4              85.0     15.1     53.6     73.4              83.5      7.1     46.4     71.5
    1987     85.2     10.2     52.1     73.7              86.1     13.1     53.9     75.3              84.4      7.4     50.3     72.2
    1988     85.2     10.2     52.1     73.8              86.2     13.1     54.0     75.5              84.3      7.4     50.2     72.1
    1989     81.0      6.9     46.1     69.5              82.0     10.4     49.7     71.5              79.9      3.5     42.7     67.7
    1990     79.0      6.6     42.9     68.3              79.5      8.6     48.2     70.3              78.5      4.6     37.7     66.3
    1991     76.8      6.3     39.6     66.0              78.4      8.9     42.9     68.6              75.3      3.8     36.6     63.4
    1992     76.8      6.7     40.0     66.0              76.5      9.0     41.3     66.2              76.0      3.8     37.7     64.6
    1993     74.4      7.0     38.8     62.5              74.5     10.1     40.7     63.6              74.2      4.0     37.1     61.4
    1994     74.3      7.8     39.9     63.3              74.9     10.5     43.0     66.1              73.5      5.0     35.9     60.5
    1995     74.5      6.6     41.5     63.6              75.6      8.4     45.5     65.6              72.9      3.2     36.1     60.8
    1996     71.3      8.1     37.8     60.8              70.8     11.1     39.8     61.8              71.7      5.3     36.0     59.8
	
NOTE: "School" was not defined for the questionnaire respondent. Population sizes are not available.
Response rates for this survey do not meet NECS standards.  See table B1 for details.
SOURCE: University of Michigan, Survey Research Center, Institute for Social Research,
Monitoring the Future Study, 1976 to 1996.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Table 17.1-Percentage of 12th graders who reported taking illegal drugs at school in
the past 12 months, by type of drug:  1976-1997
 
 
Year     Marijuana  LSD   Stimulant Tranquilizers Cocaine
 
    1976     21.1      2.3      9.0      2.9      2.0
    1977     22.0      2.2     10.1      2.9      2.1
    1978     23.8      2.2      9.7      2.6      1.9
    1979     23.3      1.9      9.8      2.5      2.5
    1980     21.4      2.1     11.1      2.5      2.6
    1981     18.1      2.3     15.5      2.2      2.5
    1982     17.9      1.9     12.1      1.5      1.7
    1983     14.1      1.9     10.0      1.4      1.0
    1984     13.4      1.3      9.4      1.0      2.3
    1985     13.6      1.2      8.4      1.5      2.9
    1986     12.7      1.4      6.3      1.5      3.0
    1987     10.6      1.4      5.2      1.0      1.9
    1988      9.8      1.3      3.5      0.8      1.7
    1989      6.6      1.2      3.5      0.7      1.1
    1990      6.1      1.4      3.1      0.9      1.4
    1991      5.3      1.2      2.2      0.5      0.5
    1992      4.8      1.6      2.3      0.3      0.6
    1993      5.7      2.3      2.6      0.5      0.8
    1994      8.1      2.0      3.0      0.4      0.5
    1995      8.5      2.0      3.1      0.4      1.0
    1996     10.1      2.5      3.2      0.8      0.8
    1997      9.8      2.2      4.2      0.8      0.7
	
NOTE: "School" was not defined for the questionnaire respondent.
Population sizes are not available. Response rates for this survey do not
meet NCES standards.  See B1 for details.
SOURCE: University of Michigan, Survey Research Center, Institute for Social
Research, Monitoring the Future Study, 1976 to 1997.
Special tabultion provided by Monitoring the Future.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Table 17.2-Percentage of 12th graders who reported taking illegal drugs in the past 12 months,
by location and type of drug: 1976 to 1997
 
 
                          At a party                                            At home
Year     Marijuana    LSD  Stimulant Tranquilizers Cocaine     Marijuana    LSD   Stimulant Tranquilizers Cocaine
 
    1976     36.0      3.8      8.6      3.2      4.2              21.7      3.0      9.1      5.3      2.3
    1977     38.1      3.7      8.7      3.6      4.9              23.5      2.7      9.8      6.1      3.3
    1978     41.0      4.3      9.4      2.7      6.0              24.9      3.3     10.0      5.7      3.8
    1979     39.9      4.2     10.5      3.1      8.5              25.1      3.0     10.0      2.0      5.1
    1980     38.8      4.6     11.1      2.8      7.9              23.8      2.8     11.4      4.8      5.0
    1981     38.4      4.8     13.8      3.0      8.3              22.9      3.2     14.9      5.0      5.8
    1982     36.4      4.7     10.7      1.8      8.2              21.1      3.0     10.8      3.2      5.5
    1983     31.0      4.2      8.9      1.7      6.2              19.1      2.4      9.4      2.9      4.3
    1984     30.0      3.3      7.4      1.1      7.4              19.2      2.2      8.3      2.6      5.2
    1985     30.7      3.1      6.5      1.7      9.2              18.9      2.2      7.4      3.0      5.8
    1986     29.6      3.4      4.9      1.3      9.7              16.1      2.6      5.6      3.1      6.2
    1987     27.3      3.4      3.9      0.9      7.0              16.2      2.1      4.9      2.9      4.3
    1988     26.0      3.1      3.1      0.8      5.2              14.0      2.8      3.6      2.2      4.3
    1989     21.2      2.5      2.6      0.6      3.7              11.5      1.9      3.4      1.5      2.0
    1990     21.6      3.8      2.9      1.0      3.3              11.6      2.5      2.8      1.7      2.1
    1991     17.7      3.6      1.8      0.6      1.8               9.6      2.3      3.0      1.5      1.2
    1992     16.4      3.8      1.8      0.5      1.7               8.8      2.4      2.5      1.6      1.1
    1993     19.3      5.4      2.5      0.5      1.6              10.4      3.3      3.2      1.8      1.4
    1994     23.7      4.2      2.2      0.6      1.6              13.4      3.3      4.0      1.7      1.1
    1995     27.5      5.4      2.8      0.9      2.2              15.3      3.4      3.4      1.7      1.7
    1996     27.2      4.8      2.5      1.0      2.0              15.6      3.8      3.9      1.5      1.0
    1997     31.6      6.6      3.8      1.7      3.5              19.4      4.4      4.6      1.9      2.2
	
NOTE: "School" was not defined for the questionnaire respondent. Population sizes
are not available. Response rates for this suvey do not meet NCES standards. See table B1 for details.
SOURCE: University of Michigan, Survey Research Center, Institute for Social Research,
Monitoring the Future Study, 1976 to 1997.  Special tabulation provided by Monitoring the Future.
 


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

See printed version or acrobat file to view
standard error tables for Supplemental tables above.


Appendix A. School practices and policies related
to safety and discipline

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Table A1-Percentage of public schools reporting that they have a zero
tolerance policy for various specified student offenses, by selected school characteristics: 
1996-97


                                                     Types of offenses
                                                   Weapons other
School characteristics           Violence Firearms than fire     Alcohol Drugs     Tobacco

      All public schools              79      94      91           87      88           79

Instructional level
  Elementary school                   79      93      91           87      88           82
  Middle school                       75      95      90           86      90           77
  High school                         80      96      92           86      89           72

School enrollment
  Less than 300                       76      93      89           84      84           76
  300-999                             79      94      91           88      89           82
  1,000 or more                       86      98      93           85      92           72

Locale
  City                                87      97      95           89      91           83
  Urban fringe                        82      95      90           88      90           80
  Town                                71      90      86           82      83           77
  Rural                               76      94      92           88      89           78

Region
  Northeast                           78      89      90           83      84           79
  Southeast                           83      95      89           90      92           80
  Central                             72      93      88           82      83           75
  West                                83      97      95           91      93           83

Percent minority enrollment
  Less than 5 percent                 71      92      88           82      83           75
  5-19 percent                        79      94      92           89      90           80
  20-49 percent                       83      95      90           87      89           79
  50 percent or more                  85      97      94           90      92           83

Percent of students eligible for free or
 reduced-price school lunch
  Less than 20 percent                76      92      88           86      87           77
  20-34 percent                       77      94      90           87      88           82
  35-49 percent                       79      97      95           89      92           81
  70-74 percent                       80      95      90           85      88           79
  75 percent or more                  84      95      93           87      89           81


SOURCE: U.S. Department of Education, National Center for Education
Statistics,  Fast Response Survey System, "Principal/School
Disciplinarian Survey on School Violence," FRSS 63, 1997.

---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Table A2-Percentage of public schools reporting that students were required
to wear school uniforms, by selected school characteristics:  1996-97


School characteristics                  Uniforms required

      All public school                         3

Instructional level
  Elementary school                             4
  Middle school                                 4
  High school                                 (*)

School enrollment
  Less than 300                                --
  300-999                                       4
  1,000 or more                                 8

Locale
  City                                          9
  Urban fringe                                  6
  Town                                        (*)
  Rural                                       (*)

Region
  Northeast                                     1
  Southeast                                     4
  Central                                       2
  West                                          6

Percent minority enrollment
  Less than 5 percent                         (*)
  5-19 percent                                 --
  20-49 percent                                 2
  50 percent or more                           13

Percent of students eligible for free or
 reduced-price school lunch
  Less than 20 percent                        (*)
  20-34 percent                                 1
  35-49 percent                                 2
  70-74 percent                                 5
  75 percent or more                           11

*Less than 0.5 percent.
--No cases are reported in this cell, although the event defined by this cell
could have been reported by some students with these
characteristics had a different sample been drawn.
SOURCE: U.S. Department of Education, National Center for Education
Statistics, Fast Response Survey System, "Principal/School
Disciplinarian Survey on School Violence," FRSS 63, 1997.

------------------------------------------------------------------------------



Table A3-Percentage of public schools reporting that they use various types of security measures
at their schools, by selected school characteristics:  1996-97

                                               Closed                                                       Students
                                               campus                                           Random      must pass
                                               for most   Controlled   Controlled               metal       through
                                   Visitors    students   access to    access to     One or     detector    metal
                                   must        during     school       school        more drug  checks on   detectors
School characteristics             sign in     lunch      buildings    grounds       sweeps     students    each day

      All public schools               96          80          53           24          19            4       1

Instructional level
  Elementary school                    96          76          57           25           5            1     (*)
  Middle school                        96          93          51           22          36            7       1
  High school                          97          78          40           25          45            9       2

School enrollment
  Less than 300                        91          67          40           16          22          (*)       1
  300-999                              98          84          57           24          15            4       1
  1,000 or more                        99          82          55           49          34           15       3

Locale
  City                                100          81          62           35          12            8       2
  Urban fringe                         98          85          68           31          13            3     (*)
  Town                                 96          77          49           20          23            2       1
  Rural                                92          75          33           13          27            2     (*)

Region
  Northeast                            98          83          70           30           6            1     (*)
  Southeast                            99          86          52           28          24            9       1
  Central                              95          76          48           12          17            1       1
  West                                 94          76          46           31          25            4       1

Percent minority enrollment
  Less than 5 percent                  94          77          42           14          17          (*)        --
  5-19 percent                         97          81          55           22          23            1     (*)
  20-49 percent                        98          77          55           27          18            6     (*)
  50 percent or more                   97          84          63           38          18            9       4
Percent of students eligible for free or
 reduced-price school lunch
  Less than 20 percent                 94          74          50           18          17            1      --
  20-34 percent                        99          77          51           19          20            3     (*)
  35-49 percent                        96          80          49           25          22            5     (*)
  70-74 percent                        95          85          57           27          22            4       1
  75 percent or more                   97          83          58           37          13            8       5

*Less than 0.5 percent.
--No cases are reported in this cell, although the event defined by this cell could have been
reported by some students with these characteristics had a different sample been drawn.
SOURCE: U.S. Department of Education, National Center for Education Statistics, 
Fast Response Survey System, "Principal/School
Disciplinarian Survey on School Violence," FRSS 63, 1997.



---------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Table A4-Percentage of public schools reporting that various levels of police or other law enforcement
representatives were present during a typical week, by selected school characteristics:  1996-97


                                             Police or other law enforcement representatives
                                                  Stationed at school      Not stationed         None stationed
                                        30 hours     10-29         1-9     a typical week        at school
School characteristics                  or more      hours         hours   available as needed   during 1996-97

      All public schools                     6          1                3             12                  78

Instructional level
  Elementary school                          1          1                1              8                  89
  Middle school                             10          3                5             17                  65
  High school                               19          2                6             18                  54

School enrollment
  Less than 300                              1        (*)                1              9                  89
  300-999                                    4          1                3             12                  80
  1,000 or more                             39          5                7             15                  34

Locale
  City                                      13          4                3             11                  69
  Urban fringe                               7          1                2             11                  80
  Town                                       5          1                4             11                  78
  Rural                                      1        (*)                2             14                  83
Region
  Northeast                                  6        (*)                2             11                  81
  Southeast                                  9          2                2             11                  77
  Central                                    4          2                3             11                  81
  West                                       7          1                4             14                  74

Percent minority enrollment
  Less than 5 percent                        1          1                3             10                  85
  5-19 percent                               6          1                3             10                  80
  20-49 percent                              7          1                2             13                  77
  50 percent or more                        13          3                3             14                  67
Percent of students eligible for free or
 reduced-price school lunch
  Less than 20 percent                       5          1                4             10                  79
  20-34 percent                              7          1                2             10                  80
  35-49 percent                              5        (*)                3             12                  80
  70-74 percent                              6          2                1             13                  78
  75 percent or more                         8          2                4             14                  72

*Less than 0.5 percent.
SOURCE: U.S. Department of Education, National Center for Education 
Statistics, Fast Response Survey System, "Principal/School
Disciplinarian Survey on School Violence," FRSS 63, 1997.


---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Table A6-Number and percentage of schools in which specified disciplinary actions 
were taken against students, total number of actions taken, and percentage of 
specific disciplinary actions taken against students, by type of infraction: 1996-97


                                     Total number     Percent
                                     of schools       of schools                         Number of actions taken
                                     taking one or    taking one or    Total number                   Transfers to   Out-of-school
                                     more of these    more of these    of these                       alternative    suspensions
                                     specified        specified        specified                      schools or     lasting 5 or
Infraction                           actions          actions          actionstaken    Expulsions     programs       more days

Possession or use of a firearm          4,170              5             16,587           5,143         3,301          8,144

Possession or use of a weapon          16,740             22             58,554          13,698        12,943         31,970
 other than a firearm

Possession, distribution, or use of    20,960             27            170,464          30,522        34,255        105,723
 alcohol or drugs, including tobacco

Physical attacks or fights             30,160             39            330,696          50,961        62,108        217,627

SOURCE: U.S. Department of Education, National Center for Education Statistics, Fast Response 
Survey System, "Principal/School Disciplinarian Survey on School Violence," FRSS 63, 1997.

---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------


Table A7-Standard errors for table A1: Percentage of public schools reporting that 
they have a zero tolerance policy for various specified student offenses, by selected 
school characteristics:  1996-97


                                      Types of offenses
                                                         Weapons other
School characteristics           Violence     Firearms   than firearms   Alcohol       Drugs       Tobacco

      All public schools            1.6          1.0           1.2         1.2          1.1           1.5

Instructional level
  Elementary school                 2.4          1.6           1.8         1.8          1.8           2.1
  Middle school                     2.3          1.4           1.7         2.0          1.8           2.3
  High school                       2.0          1.1           1.5         2.2          1.9           2.4

School enrollment
  Less than 300                     3.8          2.7           3.1         3.6          3.6           3.8
  300-999                           1.8          1.0           1.2         1.2          1.2           1.5
  1,000 or more                     2.4          0.7           1.8         2.3          1.7           2.8

Locale
  City                              2.5          1.4           1.6         2.2          2.1           2.3
  Urban fringe                      2.7          1.5           2.2         2.4          2.2           2.6
  Town                              3.2          2.4           2.5         2.7          2.7           3.1
  Rural                             3.5          2.0           2.3         2.4          2.3           2.9

Region
  Northeast                         3.6          2.5           2.4         2.9          2.9           3.6
  Southeast                         2.6          1.3           2.1         1.5          1.4           2.7
  Central                           3.4          2.1           2.8         3.0          3.0           3.3
  West                              2.3          1.3           1.5         1.9          1.8           2.0

Percent minority enrollment
  Less than 5 percent               3.4          2.7           2.9         2.9          2.9           3.2
  5-19 percent                      3.9          1.8           2.2         2.6          2.6           2.9
  20-49 percent                     2.4          1.8           2.2         2.2          2.2           2.5
  50 percent or more                2.2          1.2           1.4         1.9          1.9           2.1

Percent of students eligible for free or
 reduced-price school lunch
  Less than 20 percent              3.4          2.2           2.6         2.6          2.7           3.0
  20-34 percent                     3.7          2.7           2.9         3.1          3.0           3.2
  35-49 percent                     4.2          1.8           1.9         2.8          2.8           3.2
  70-74 percent                     3.2          1.8           2.3         3.1          2.8           3.2
  75 percent or more                3.6          2.2           2.4         3.2          3.2           3.4

SOURCE: U.S. Department of Education, National Center for Education Statistics, 
Fast Response Survey System, "Principal/School
Disciplinarian Survey on School Violence," FRSS 63, 1997.

---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------


Table A8-Standard errors for table A2: Percentage of public schools reporting that 
students were required to wear school uniforms, by selected school characteristics:  1996-97


School characteristics                 Uniforms required

      All public schools                            0.6

Instructional level
  Elementary school                                 0.9
  Middle school                                     0.8
  High school                                        -

School enrollment
  Less than 300                                      --
  300-999                                           0.9
  1,000 or more                                     2.2

Locale
  City                                              1.9
  Urban fringe                                      1.8
  Town                                               -
  Rural                                              -

Region
  Northeast                                         0.9
  Southeast                                         1.4
  Central                                           1.0
  West                                              1.4

Percent minority enrollment
  Less than 5 percent                                -
  5-19 percent                                       --
  20-49 percent                                     1.0
  50 percent or more                                2.3

Percent of students eligible for free or
 reduced-price school lunch
  Less than 20 percent                               -
  20-34 percent                                     0.7
  35-49 percent                                     1.2
  70-74 percent                                     1.6
  75 percent or more                                2.6


-Estimate of standard error is not derived because it is based on a statistic 
estimated at less than 0.5 percent or at 100 percent.
--No cases are reported in this cell, although the event defined by this cell 
could have been reported by some students with these characteristics had a 
different sample been drawn.
SOURCE: U.S. Department of Education, National Center for Education Statistics, 
Fast Response Survey System, "Principal/School
Disciplinarian Survey on School Violence," FRSS 63, 1997.

---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Table A9-Standard errors for table A3:  Percentage of public schools reporting that they
used various types of security measures at their schools, by selected school characteristics:  1996-97


                                                    Closed                                                   Students
                                                    campus                                        Random     must pas
                                                    for most    Controlled Controlled             metal      through
                                      Visitors      students    access to  access to   One or     detector   metal
                                      must          during      school     school      more drug  checks on  detector
School characteristics                sign in       lunch       buildings  grounds     sweeps     students   each day

      All public schools                 0.9         1.7            1.9       1.5          1.1        0.4     0.3

Instructional level
  Elementary school                      1.4         2.5            2.8       2.3          1.3        0.5       -
  Middle school                          1.2         1.7            2.7       1.9          2.4        1.0     0.4
  High school                            1.0         2.2            2.3       2.0          3.2        1.1     0.7

School enrollment
  Less than 300                          3.0         3.9            3.7       3.2          3.2          -     0.4
  300-999                                0.6         1.8            2.4       2.1          1.1        0.6     0.4
  1,000 or more                          0.5         2.5            3.3       3.3          2.8        1.9     0.9

Locale
  City                                     -         2.9            3.2       3.7          1.0        1.0     0.5
  Urban fringe                           1.2         2.8            3.6       3.6          1.5        0.8       -
  Town                                   1.5         3.6            3.7       2.7          2.8        0.8     0.8
  Rural                                  2.4         3.4            3.8       2.8          3.0        1.0       -

Region
  Northeast                              1.2         4.0            3.9       3.9          1.2        0.5       -
  Southeast                              0.9         2.8            3.9       2.8          2.4        1.4     0.7
  Central                                1.5         3.3            3.2       2.6          2.4        0.3     0.3
  West                                   1.8         3.9            3.8       2.9          2.4        0.9     0.7

Percent minority enrollment
  Less than 5 percent                    2.3         3.3            3.6       2.6          2.4         -       --
  5-19 percent                           1.1         3.2            3.9       3.0          2.6        0.7       -
  20-49 percent                          0.9         3.9            4.0       3.2          2.5        1.2       -
  50 percent or more                     1.6         3.2            4.1       3.8          2.1        1.3     1.2

Percent of students eligible for free or
 reduced-price school lunch
  Less than 20 percent                    2.4         3.5            3.6      2.7          2.2        0.5      --
  20-34 percent                           0.5         3.6            4.6      3.5          3.0        0.8       -
  35-49 percent                           2.1         3.2            5.0      3.0          3.0        1.3       -
  70-74 percent                           1.9         4.0            4.4      3.9          2.9        0.8     0.4
  75 percent or more                      1.7         4.5            5.1      5.0          2.2        1.6     1.5

-Estimate of standard error is not derived because it is based on a statistic estimated 
at less than 0.5  percent or 100 percent.
--No cases are reported in this cell, although the event defined by this cell 
could have been reported by some student of theses characteristics had a different 
sample been drawn.
SOURCE: U.S. Department of Education, National Center for Education Statistics, 
Fast Response Survey System, "Principal/School Disciplinarian Survey on School
Violence," FRSS 63, 1997.

---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Table A10-Standard errors for table A4: Percentage of public schools reporting that various levels
of police or other law enforcement representatives were present during a typical week,
by selected school characteristics:  1996-97


                                  Police or other law enforcement representatives
                                                Stationed at school      Not stationed during     None stationed
                                       30 hours      10-29      1-9      a typical week, but      at school
School characteristics                 or more       hours      hours    available as needed      during 1996-97

      All public schools                  0.4        0.3         0.4                   1.0            1.1

Instructional level
  Elementary school                       0.5        0.4         0.6                   1.4            1.5
  Middle school                           1.3        0.8         1.1                   1.9            2.4
  High school                             1.6        0.7         1.0                   2.1            2.9

School enrollment
  Less than 300                           0.4          -         0.5                   2.4            2.8
  300-999                                 0.6        0.4         0.6                   1.2            1.3
  1,000 or more                           2.6        1.4         1.2                   2.0            3.2

Locale
  City                                    1.4        1.2         0.8                   2.9            3.1
  Urban fringe                            1.0        0.2         0.6                   1.9            2.2
  Town                                    0.9        0.5         1.1                   1.6            1.9
  Rural                                   0.5          -         0.8                   2.3            2.5

Region
  Northeast                               1.6          -         0.9                   2.0            2.5
  Southeast                               1.1        0.8         0.8                   2.1            2.5
  Central                                 0.8        0.8         0.8                   1.9            2.1
  West                                    0.9        0.5         0.8                   2.1            2.6

Percent minority enrollment
  Less than 5 percent                     0.3        0.3         0.8                   1.7            1.8
  5-19 percent                            0.9        0.3         0.8                   1.8            2.3
  20-49 percent                           0.9        0.4         0.8                   2.7            3.2
  50 percent or more                      1.7        1.3         0.9                   2.6            3.1

Percent of students eligible for free or
 reduced-price school lunch
  Less than 20 percent                     0.8        0.5         1.0                  1.8            2.2
  20-34 percent                            1.0        0.5         0.7                  1.9            2.3
  35-49 percent                            1.2          -         1.1                  2.9            3.3
  70-74 percent                            1.2        0.9         0.4                  2.6            3.2
  75 percent or more                       2.0        1.3         1.4                  3.7            4.4

-Estimate of standard error is not derived because it is based on a statistic estimated at 
less than 0.5 percent or at 100 percent.
SOURCE: U.S. Department of Education, National Center for Education Statistics,
Fast Response Survey System, "Principal/School
Disciplinarian Survey on School Violence," FRSS 63, 1997.

---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Table A11-Standard errors for table A5: Percentage of public schools reporting 
formal school violence prevention or reduction programs or efforts, by selected
school characteristics:  1996-97


                                                Percent of schools with:
                              Any           Only 1-day     Only ongoing   Both 1-day and
School characteristics        programs      programs       programs       ongoing programs

      All public schools        1.5            1.2             1.6             1.4

Instructional level
  Elementary school             2.3            1.6             2.5             2.5
  Middle school                 2.0            1.5             1.9             2.8
  High school                   2.2            2.4             1.8             2.1

School enrollment
  Less than 300                 4.2            3.0             4.0             4.0
  300-999                       1.6            1.2             1.9             1.8
  1,000 or more                 2.8            1.5             2.5             3.7

Locale
  City                          2.6            1.4             3.3             3.6
  Urban fringe                  3.0            1.3             3.1             3.3
  Town                          3.5            2.3             3.1             3.1
  Rural                         3.2            3.2             2.9             3.3

Region
  Northeast                     4.4            2.3             4.0             4.1
  Southeast                     2.5            2.8             3.4             3.7
  Central                       3.3            1.7             2.7             3.6
  West                          2.8            2.3             2.5             2.8

Percent minority enrollment
  Less than 5 percent           3.7            2.0             2.8             3.6
  5-19 percent                  3.5            1.9             2.5             3.1
  20-49 percent                 2.7            2.6             3.7             3.7
  50 percent or more            2.7            2.5             3.0             3.4

Percent of students eligible for free or
 reduced-price school lunch
  Less than 20 percent         3.0            1.5             2.9              3.4
  20-34 percent                3.0            2.0             3.7              3.9
  35-49 percent                4.2            3.5             4.6              3.8
  70-74 percent                3.6            3.2             3.8              3.9
  75 percent or more           3.4            3.8             4.3              4.6

SOURCE: U.S. Department of Education, National Center for Education Statistics, 
Fast Response Survey System, "Principal/School Disciplinarian Survey on School
Violence," FRSS 63, 1997.


---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Table A12-Standard errors for table A6: Number and percentage of schools in which 
specified disciplinary actions were taken against students, total number of actions 
taken, and percentage of specific disciplinary actions taken against students, 
by type of infraction:  1996-97


                                      Total number    Percent
                                      of schools      of schools                      Number of actions taken
                                      taking one or   taking one or  Total number                  Transfers to  Out-of-school
                                      more of these   more of these  of these                      alternative   suspensions
                                      specified       specified      specified                     schools or    lasting 5 or
Infraction                            actions         actions        actions taken     Expulsions  programs      more days

Possession or use of a firearm            480.6           0.6          3,778.2           1,094       1,139       2,495

Possession or use of a weapon             969.1           1.3          3,781.8           1,091       1,304       2,714
 other than a firearm
    
Possession, distribution, or use          782.7           1.0          8,734.6           2,767       4,129       6,234
 alcohol or drugs, including tobacco

Physical attacks or fights              1,081.4           1.4         15,964.2           5,537       8,125      12,087

SOURCE: U.S. Department of Education, National Center for Education Statistics, 
Fast Response Survey System, "Principal/School Disciplinarian Survey on School 
Violence," FRSS 63, 1997.

---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------


Appendix B. Technical Notes

General Information                

The information presented in this report was
obtained from many data sources, including
databases from the National Center for Education
Statistics (NCES), the Centers for Disease Control
and Prevention (CDC), the Bureau of Justice
Statistics (BJS), and the Survey Research Center
(SRC) of the University of  Michigan. While some
of the data were collected from universe surveys,
most were gathered by sample surveys. Some
questions from different surveys may appear the
same, but they were actually asked of different
populations of students (e.g., high school seniors
or students in grades 9 through 12); in different
years; about experiences that occurred within
different periods of times (e.g., in the past 4
weeks or during the past 12 months); and at
different locations (e.g., in school or at home).
Readers of this report should take particular care
when comparing data from the different data
sources. Because of the variation in collection
procedures, timing, phrasing of questions, and so
forth, the results from the different sources may
not be strictly comparable. After introducing the
data sources used for this report, the next
section discusses the accuracy of estimates and
describes the statistical procedures used.
  
Sources of Data                    

Table B1 presents some key information for each of
the data sets used in the report, including the
survey year, target population, response rates,
and sample sizes. The remainder of the section
briefly describes each data set and provides
directions for obtaining more information. The
exact wording of the interview questions used to
construct the indicators are presented in table
B2. 
  
National Household Education Survey (NHES)         
            
The National Household Education Survey (NHES) is
a data collection system of the National Center
for Education Statistics that provides descriptive
data on the condition of education in the United
States. It has been conducted in 1991, 1993, 1995,
and 1996. For each year, the survey covered two
substantive components addressing education-related 
topics. One topic that the 1993 survey
focused on was school safety and discipline,
covering information on the school learning
environment, discipline policy, safety at school,
victimization, availability and use of
alcohol/drugs, and alcohol/drug education.
  
Table B1--Descriptions of data sources and samples
used in the report

Data source: National Household Education Survey
(NCES)                      
  Target population: A nationally representative
sample of students enrolled in grades 6 through 12
in public and private schools at the time of the
interview.
  Year of survey: 1993
  Response rate (%): 68 (1)(2)
  Sample size: 6,504
                             
Data source: Schools and Staffing Survey (NCES)
  Target population: A nationally representative
sample of public and private school teachers from
grades K through 12.
  Year of survey: 1993 1994     
  Response rate (%): 
84 (public)(1)
73 (private)(1)           
  Sample size: 
47,105 public 
8,372 private
                                
Data source: Youth Risk Behavior Survey (CDC) 
  Target population: A nationally representative
sample of students 1993 enrolled in grades 9
through 12 in public and private schools at the
time of the survey.         
  Year of survey: 1993, 1995, 1997  
  Response rate (%): 
70(3)in 1993 
60(3),(5) in 1995 
69(3),(5) in 1997  
  Sample size: 
16,296 in 1993 
10,904 in 1995 
16,262 in 1997    

Data source: FRSS Principal/School Disciplinarian
Survey (NCES)
  Target population:  A nationally representative
sample of regular public elementary, middle, and
secondary schools.
  Year of survey: 1996 1997
  Response rate (%): 89(1)
  Sample size: 1,234                               
                         
Data source: National Crime Victimization Survey
(BJS)     
  Target population: A nationally representative
sample of individuals 12 years of age and older
living in households and group quarters.
  Year of survey: 1992 1996 (Annual)               
  Response rate (%): About 86(3)
  Sample size: About 90,000
                               
Data source: School Crime Supplement (BJS/NCES)
  Target population: A nationally representative
sample of students ages 12 through 19 enrolled in
public private schools during the 6 months prior
to the interview.    
  Year of survey: 1989, 1995       
  Response rate (%): 
83(3) in 1989 
74(3) in 1995       
  Sample size: 
10,449 in 1989
9,954 in 1995                                 

Data source: Monitoring the Future (SRC,
University of Michigan)
  Target population: A nationally representative
sample of high school seniors who were enrolled in
school at the time of the survey.
  Year of survey: 1976 1996 (Annual)
  Response rate (%): 46 67(1),(5)  
  Sample size: 15,483 18,924(4)                    
       
Data source: Data on school-associated violent
deaths, from S. P. Kachur et al., "School-Associated 
Violent Deaths in the United States, 1992 to 1994," 
Journal of the American Medical Association 
275 (22) (1996): 1729 1733.
  Target population: Any homicide or suicide in
which the fatal injury occurred on the campus of a
functioning elementary or secondary school in the
United States from July 1, 1992 to June 30, 1994.
  Year of survey: 1992 1994         
  Response rate (%): --
  Sample size:  --

---------------------------
Notes:
    Not applicable.
  1 Weighted response rate.
  2 Bias analyses by NCES found that estimates
from this survey are not substantially affected by
differential nonresponse.
  3 Unweighted response rate.
  4 This is the total sample of 12th-grade
students. These students were divided into six
subsamples, and each subsample was administered a
different form of the questionnaire.
  5 The response rates for these surveys do not
meet the NCES standard of 70 percent for the total
response rate, and an analysis of the bias caused
by nonresponse has not been conducted by NCES. As
a result, readers should use caution when
interpreting the results from these surveys.
----------------------------

Unlike traditional student- or school-based data
collections, the NHES collected data from
households. The data collection involved a three-stage 
process. First, using random digit dialing
(RDD) telephone survey methods, a representative
sample of households in the 50 states and the
District of Columbia was selected. Within these
households, individuals who met predetermined
criteria were then screened. Finally, eligible
persons were given detailed or extended interviews
by computer-assisted telephone interview (CATI)
procedures. Two groups of individuals completed
interviews for the School Safety and Discipline
component of NHES:93: 12,680 parents of children
enrolled in grades 3 through 12, and 6,504
students enrolled in grades 6 through 12. This
report focuses only on the responses of students
in grades 6 through 12; the overall weighted
student response rate was 68 percent. The item
nonresponse rate was generally low, and items with
missing data were imputed.  As a result, no
missing data remain in the data set. For
additional information about the School Safety and
Discipline component of NHES:93, refer to J.M.
Brick, M. Collins, M.J. Nolin, P. Ha,M. Levinsohn,
and K. Chandler, 1994, National Household
Education Survey of 1993, School Safety and
Discipline Data File User's Manual (NCES 94-193),
or contact:
  
Kathryn A. Chandler                
National Center for Education Statistics   
555 New Jersey Avenue NW
Washington, DC 20208               
Telephone: (202) 219-1767
E-mail: Kathryn_Chandler@ed.gov
  
Schools and Staffing Survey (SASS)  
      
This report draws upon data on teacher
victimization from the 1993 94 Schools and
Staffing Survey (SASS:93 94), which provides
national- and state-level data on public and
private schools, principals, school districts, and
teachers. The 1993 94 survey was the third in a
series of cross-sectional school-focused surveys,
following ones conducted in 1990 91 and 1987 88.
It consisted of four sets of linked
questionnaires, including surveys of schools, the
principals of each selected school, a subsample of
teachers within each school, and public school
districts. Data were collected by multistage
sampling. Stratified by state, control, type,
association membership, and grade level (for
private schools), schools were sampled first.
Approximately 9,900 public schools and 3,300
private schools were selected to participate in
the 1993 94 SASS. Within each school, teachers
were further stratified into one of five teacher
types in the following hierarchy: 1) Asian or
Pacific Islander; 2) American Indian, Aleut, or
Eskimo; 3) bilingual/ESL; 4) new teachers; and 5)
experienced teachers. Within each teacher stratum,
teachers were selected systematically with equal
probability. Approximately 56,700 public school
teachers and 11,500 private school teachers were
sampled. This report focuses on teachers'
responses. The overall weighted response rates
were 84 percent for public school teachers and 73
percent for private school teachers. In the Public
School Teacher Questionnaire, 91 percent of the
items had a response rate of 90 percent or more,
and in the Private School Teacher Questionnaire,
89 percent of the items had this level of
response. Values were imputed for questionnaire
items that should have been answered but were not.
For additional information about SASS, refer to R.
Arbramson, C. Cole, S. Fondelier, B.Jackson, R.
Parmer, and S. Kaufman, 1996, 1993 94 Schools and
Staffing Survey: Sample Design and Estimation
(NCES 96-089), or contact:

Kerry Gruber     
National Center for Education Statistics     
555 New Jersey Avenue NW
Washington, DC 20208     
Telephone: (202) 219-1461
E-mail:Kerry_Gruber@ed.gov
   
    
National School-Based Youth Risk Behavior Survey
(YRBS)    
   
The National School-Based Youth Risk Behavior
Survey (YRBS) is one component of the Youth Risk
Behavior Surveillance System (YRBSS), an
epidemiological surveillance system that was
developed by the Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention (CDC) to monitor the prevalence of
youth behaviors that most influence health. The
YRBS focuses on priority health-risk behaviors
established during youth that result in the most
significant mortality, morbidity, disability, and
social problems during both youth and adulthood.
This report uses 1993, 1995, and 1997 YRBS data.
  
The YRBS used a three-stage cluster sampling
design to produce a nationally representative
sample of 9th- through 12th-grade students in the
United States. The target population consisted of
all public and private school students in grades 9
through 12 in the 50 states and the District of
Columbia. The first-stage sampling frame included
selecting primary sampling units (PSUs) from
strata formed on the basis of urbanization and the
relative percentage of black and Hispanic students
in the PSU. These PSUs are either large counties
or groups of smaller, adjacent counties. At the
second stage, schools were selected with
probability proportional to school enrollment
size. Schools with substantial numbers of black
and Hispanic students were sampled at relatively
higher rates than all other schools. The final
stage of sampling consisted of randomly selecting
within each chosen school at each grade 9 through
12 one or two intact classes of a required
subject, such as English or social studies. All
students in selected classes were eligible to
participate. Approximately 16,300, 10,900, and
16,300 students were selected to participate in
the 1993 survey, the 1995 survey,and the 1997
survey, respectively. The overall response rate
was 70 percent for the 1993 survey, 60 percent for
the 1995 survey, and 69 percent for the 1997
survey. The weights were developed to adjust for
nonresponse and the oversampling of black and
Hispanic students in the sample. The final weights
were normalized so that only weighted proportions
of students (not weighted counts of students) in
each grade matched national population
projections. For additional information about the
YRBS,contact:
  
Laura Kann     
Division of Adolescent and School Health     
National Center for Chronic Disease Prevention and
  Health Promotion
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Mailstop K-33     
4770 Buford Highway NE
Atlanta, Georgia 30341     
Telephone: (404) 488-5330
       
Fast Response Survey System: Principal/School
Disciplinarian Survey on School Violence 

The Principal/School Disciplinarian Survey was
conducted through the NCES Fast Response Survey
System (FRSS) during the spring and summer of
1997. Generally, the FRSS is a survey system
designed to collect small amounts of issue-oriented 
data with minimal burden on respondents
and within a relatively short time frame. The FRSS
Principal/School Disciplinarian Survey focused on
incidents of specific crimes/offenses and a
variety of specific discipline issues in public
schools. The survey was conducted with a
nationally representative sample of regular public
elementary, middle, and high schools in the 50
states and the District of Columbia. Special
education, alternative and vocational schools,
schools in the territories, and schools that
taught only prekindergarten, kindergarten, or
adult education were not included in the sample.
  
The sample of public schools was selected from the
1993 94 NCES Common Core of Data (CCD) Public
School Universe File. The sample was stratified by
instructional level, locale, and school size.
Within the primary strata, schools were also
sorted by geographic region and by percent
minority enrollment. The sample sizes were then
allocated to the primary strata in rough
proportion to the aggregate square root of the
size of enrollment of schools in the stratum. A
total of 1,415 schools were selected. Among them,
11 schools were found no longer to be in
existence, and 1,234 schools completed the survey.
In April 1997, questionnaires were mailed to
school principals, who were asked to complete the
survey or to have it completed by the person most
knowledgeable about discipline issues at the
school. The raw response rate was 88 percent
(1,234 schools divided by the 1,404 eligible
schools in the sample). The weighted overall
response rate was 89 percent, and item nonresponse
rates ranged from 0 percent to 0.9 percent. The
weights were developed to adjust for the variable
probabilities of selection and differential
nonresponse and can be used to produce national
estimates for regular public schools in the
1996 97 school year. For more information about
the FRSS: Principal/School Disciplinarian Survey
on School Violence, contact:
    
Shelley Burns
National Center for Education Statistics
555 New Jersey Avenue NW
Washington, DC 20208
Telephone: (202) 219-1463
E-mail: Shelley_Burns@ed.gov
     
     
National Crime Victimization Survey (NCVS)         
           
The National Crime Victimization Survey (NCVS),
administered for the U.S. Bureau of Justice
Statistics by the Bureau of the Census, is the
nation's primary source of information on crime
victimization and the victims of crime. Initiated
in 1972 and redesigned in 1992, the NCVS collects
detailed information on the frequency and nature
of the crimes of rape, sexual assault, robbery,
aggravated and simple assault, theft, household
burglary, and motor vehicle theft experienced by
Americans and their households each year. The
survey measures crimes reported as well as those
not reported to police.
  
The NCVS sample consists of about 55,000
households, selected using a stratified, 
multi-stage cluster design. In the first stage, the
primary sampling units (PSU's), consisting of
counties or groups of counties, are selected. In
the second stage, smaller areas, called
Enumeration Districts (ED's) were selected from
each sampled PSU. Finally, from selected ED's,
clusters of four households, called segments, were
selected for interview. At each stage, the
selection was done proportionate to population
size in order to create a self- weighting sample.
The final sample was augmented to account for
housing units constructed after the decennial
Census. Within each sampled household, Census
Bureau personnel interviewed all household members
ages 12 and older to determine whether they had
been victimized by the measured crimes during the
6 months preceding the interview. About 90,000
persons ages 12 and older are interviewed each 6
months. Households remain in sample for 3 years
and are interviewed 7 times at 6-month intervals.
The initial interview at each sample unit is used
only to bound future interviews to establish a
time frame to avoid duplication of crimesuncovered
in these subsequent interviews. After theirseventh
interview households are replaced by new
samplehouseholds. The NCVS has consistently
obtained aresponse rate of about 95 percent at the
household level.  During the study period, the
completion ratesfor persons within households were
about 91 percent.  Thus,final response rates were
about 86 percent.  Weightswere developed to permit
estimates for the total U.S.population 12 years
and older. For more information about theNCVS,
contact:
  
Michael R. Rand     
Victimization Statistics
U.S. Bureau of Justice Statistics
810 7th Street NW     
Washington, DC 20531
Telephone: (202) 616-3494     
E-mail:   randm@ojp.usdoj.gov     
Internet: www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/
  

School Crime Supplement (SCS)      

Created as a supplement to the NCVS and co-designed 
by the National Center for Education
Statistics and Bureau of Justice Statistics, the
School Crime Supplement (SCS) survey was conducted
in 1989 and 1995 to collect additional information
about school-related victimizations on a national
level. The survey was designed to assist
policymakers as well as academic researchers and
practitioners at the federal, state, and local
levels so that they can make informed decisions
concerning crime in schools. The SCS asks students
a number of key questions about their experiences
with and perceptions of crime and violence that
occurred inside their school, on school grounds,
or on the way to or from school. Additional
questions not included in the NCVS were also added
to the SCS, such as those concerning preventive
measures used by the school, students'
participation in afterschool activities, students'
perceptions of school rules, the presence of
weapons and street gangs in school, and the
availability of drugs and alcohol in school, as
well as attitudinal questions relating to fear of
victimization in school.
  
In both 1989 and 1995, the SCS was conducted for a
6-month period from January through June in all
households selected for the NCVS (see discussion
above for information about the sampling design).
Within these households, the eligible respondents
for the SCS were those household members who were
between the ages of 12 and 19, had attended school
at any time during the 6 months preceding the
interview, and were enrolled in a school that
would help them advance toward eventually
receiving a high school diploma. These persons
were asked the supplemental questions in the SCS
onlyafter completing their entire NCVS interview.
A total of 10,449 students participated in the
1989 SCS, and 9,954 in the 1995SCS. In the 1989
and 1995 SCS, the household completion rateswere
97 percent and 95 percent, respectively, and
thestudent completion rates were 86 percent and 78
percent,respectively. Thus, the overall SCS
response rate(calculated by multiplying the
household completion rate bythe student completion
rate) was 83 percent in 1989 and 74percent in
1995. Response rates for most survey itemswere
high mostly over 95 percent of all eligible
respondents. The weights were developed to
compensate fordifferential probabilities of
selection and nonresponse. Theweighted data permit
inferences about the 12- to 19-year-old student
population who were enrolled in schoolsin 1989 and
1995. For more information about SCS,contact:
  
Kathryn A. Chandler     
National Center for Education Statistics     
555 New Jersey Avenue NW
Washington, DC 20208     
Telephone: (202) 219-1767
E-mail:Kathryn_Chandler@ed.gov

  
Monitoring the Future (MTF)

Monitoring the Future (MTF): A Continuing Study of
American Youth is an annual, ongoing survey
conducted by the University of Michigan's
Institute for Social Research to study changes in
important values, behaviors, and lifestyle
orientations of contemporary American youth.
During the spring of each year beginning with the
class of 1975, a large, nationally representative
sample of high school seniors in the United States
has been selected. The selected students are first
administered the core questionnaire on drug use
and demographics, and then randomly divided into
six subgroups, each receiving one form of the
questionnaire with a different subset of
questions, addressing such topics as their
attitudes toward education, social problems,
occupational aims, marital and family plans, or
deviant behavior and victimization.
  
The sample selection involves three stages. The
first stage selects geographic areas or primary
sampling units (PSUs). These PSUs are developed by
the Sampling Section of the Survey Research Center
for use in the Center's nationwide interview
studies. In the second stage, schools within PSUs
are selected with a probability proportionate to
the size of their senior class. In the third
stage, up to about 400 seniors within each
selected school are sampled. Each year, about 130
schools participate in the survey, and from these
schools, about 16,000 high school seniors complete
questionnaires. These students are divided into
six subsamples consisting of an average of 2,700
respondents, and each subsample is administered a
different form of the questionnaire. Since the
inception of the study, the participation rate
among schools has been between 60 and 80 percent,
and thestudent response rate has been between 77
and 86 percent.For more information about
Monitoring the Future, contact:
  
Survey Research Center
Institute for Social Research
The University of Michigan
Ann Arbor, MI 48109     


Data Source for School-Associated Violent Deaths 

This report draws upon data concerning school-
associated violent deaths from an article entitled
"School-Associated Violent Deaths in the United
States, 1992 to 1994," published in the Journal of
the American Medical Association in 1996.5 Using a
descriptive case study methodology, the study was
the first nationwide investigation of violent
deaths associated with schools conducted in the
United States. A "school-associated violent death"
was defined as a homicide or suicide in which the
fatal injury occurred on the campus of a
functioning elementary or secondary school in the
United States, while the victim was on the way to
or from regular class sessions at such a school,
or while the victim was attending or traveling to
or from an official school- sponsored event. The
cases included the deaths of students and staff
members as well as nonstudents. The investigation
focused on deaths that occurred from July 1, 1992
through June 30, 1994.
   
A total of 105 school-associated violent deaths
were identified by the following sequential
procedures: 1) tracking fatalities through a
newspaper clipping service and informal voluntary
reports from state and local education officers;
2) searching two computerized newspaper and
broadcast media databases; 3) interviewing local
press, law enforcement officers, or school
officials who were familiar with each case; and 4)
once cases were identified, obtaining further
information about the deaths from official
sources.

-----

Table B2 -Wording of survey questions used to
construct indicators


NONFATAL STUDENT VICTIMIZATION

Survey: National Crime Victimization Survey

Questions:
* (During the last 6 months) Was something
belonging to you stolen, such as  
  Things  that you carry, like luggage, a  wallet,
purse, briefcase, book?  
  Bicycle or sports equipment?
Or did anyone attempt to steal anything belonging
to you?
  
Response Categories: 
Yes / No; if Yes, then actual number of times

* (Other  than any incidents already mentioned,)
Since ______, 19__ were you attacked or threatened
or did you have something stolen from you
  At work or school?
Or did anyone attempt to attack or attempt to
steal anything belonging to you from any of these
places?
  
Response Categories: 
Yes / No; if Yes, then actual number of times

* (Other than any incidents already mentioned,)
Has anyone attacked or threatened you in any of
the following ways:
  With any weapon, for instance, a gun or knife?
  With  anything like a baseball bat, frying pan,
scissors, or stick?
  By something thrown, such as a rock or bottle?
  Include any grabbing, punching, or choking?
  Any rape, attempted rape or other type of sexual
attack?
  Any face to face threats?
Or any attack or threat or use of force by anyone
at all?
(Please mention it even if you are not certain it
was a crime)

Response Categories: 
Yes / No; if Yes, then actual number of times

* People often don't think of incidents committed
by someone they know. (Other than any incidents
already mentioned,) Did you have something stolen 
from you or were you attacked or threatened by
someone at work or school?

Response Categories: 
Yes / No; if Yes, then actual number of times

* Incidents involving forced or unwanted sexual
acts are often difficult to talk about.   
(Other than any incidents already mentioned,) Have
you been forced or coerced to engage in unwanted
sexual activity by:
  Someone you didn't know before?
  A casual acquaintance?
  Someone you know well?

Response Categories: 
Yes / No; if Yes, then actual number of times


Survey: School Crime Supplement  

Questions:
* During the past six months, did anyone take
money or things directly from you by force,
weapon, or threats at school?

Response Categories: Yes / No

* During the past six months, did anyone steal
something from your desk, locker, or some other
place at school (other than incidents just
mentioned)?

Response Categories: Yes / No

* Did anyone physically attack you at school
during the past six months (other than the
incidents just mentioned)?

Response Categories: Yes / No

       
Survey: Monitoring the Future   

Questions:
* The next questions are about some things which
may have happened to you while you were at school
(inside or outside or in a school bus). During the
last 12 months, how often ...       
  Has  something  of yours (worth under $50) been
stolen?
  Has  something  of yours (worth  over $50) been
stolen?
  Has someone deliberately damaged your property
(your car, clothing, etc.)?
  Has someone injured you with a weapon (like a
knife, gun, or club)?
  Has someone threatened you with a weapon, but
not actually injured you?
  Has someone injured you on purpose without using
a weapon?
  Has an unarmed person threatened you with
injury, but not actually injured you?

Response Categories: Not at all / Once / Twice / 
3 or 4 times / 5 or more times


Survey: National Household Education Survey   

Questions:
* Did any incidents of bullying happen to you this
school year?     

Response Categories: Yes / No


VIOLENCE AND CRIME AT SCHOOL

Survey: FRSS Principal/School Disciplinarian
Survey

Questions:
* During the 1996 97 school year, how many
incidents involving each type of the following
crimes or offenses have occurred at your school?
Only include incidents in which police or other
law enforcement representatives were contacted.
  Murder
  Rape or other type of sexual battery    
  Suicide
  Physical attack or fight with a weapon
  Physical attack or fight without a weapon
  Robbery
  Theft/larceny
  Vandalism

Response Categories: 
Actual number of incidents in which police or
other law  enforcement representatives were
contacted.


NONFATAL TEACHER VICTIMIZATION
 
Survey: National Crime Victimization Survey   

Questions: (See items under Nonfatal Student
Victimization).


Survey: Schools and Staffing Survey      

Questions: 
* Has a student (from this school) threatened 
to injure you in the past 12 months? 
* Has  a student (from this school) physically 
attacked you in the past 12 months?   

Response Categories: Yes / No


SCHOOL ENVIRONMENT


Survey: Monitoring the Future    

Questions:
* During the last four weeks, on how many days 
(if any) were you carrying a weapon such as a 
gun, knife, or club to school?      
* During the last four weeks, on how many days 
(if any) did you carry a gun?

Response Categories: 
0 day / 1 day / 2 days / 3 5 days / 
6 9 days / 10 or more days


Survey: Youth Risk Behavior Survey

Questions:
* During the past 30 days, on how many days did 
you carry a weapon such as a  gun, knife, or 
club on school property?

Response Categories: 0 day / 1 day / 2 3 days /
4 5 days / 6 or more days

Survey: School Crime Supplement  

Questions:
* How often are you afraid that someone will
attack or harm you at school?

Response Categories:
Never / Almost never / Sometimes / Most of time

* How often are you afraid that someone will
attack or harm you on the way to and from school?

Response Categories: 
Never / Almost never / Sometimes / Most of time

* Did you stay away from any of the following
places because you thought someone might attack or
harm you there?  
  The entrance into the school
  Any hallways or stairs in school
  Parts of the school cafeteria
  Any school rest rooms
  Other places inside the school building

Response Categories:  Yes / No

* Are there any street gangs at your school?  

Response Categories: Yes / No / Don't Know
       

Survey:  FRSS Principal/School 
Disciplinarian Survey

* Circle the number indicating to what extent, if
any, each of the following has been a problem in
your school during the 1996 97 school year:     
  Student tardiness
  Student absenteeism/class cutting
  Physical conflicts among students
  Robbery or theft of items over $10
  Vandalism of school property
  Student alcohol use
  Student drug use
  Sale of drugs on school grounds
  Student tobacco use
  Student possession of weapons
  Trespassing
  Verbal abuse of teachers
  Physical abuse of teachers
  Teacher absenteeism
  Teacher alcohol or drug use
  Racial tensions
  Gangs

Response Categories:
Serious / Moderate / Minor / Not a problem

  
Survey:  Monitoring the Future    

Questions:
* When you used alcohol during the last year, how
often did you  use it in each of the following
situations?
  At a party 
  At your home (or apartment or dorm)
  At school

Response Categories: Not at all / A few of the
times / Some of the times / Most of the times / 
Every time

* When you used marijuana or hashish during  the 
last
year, how often did you use it in each of the
following situations?  
  At a party   
  At your home (or apartment or dorm)
  At school

Response Categories: Not at all / A few of the
times / Some of the times / Most of the times / 
Every time

* When you used LSD during the last year, how
often did
you use it in each of the following situations?  
  At a party   
  At your home (or apartment or dorm)
  At school

Response Categories: Not at all / A few of the
times / Some of the times / Most of the times / 
Every time

* When you used amphetamines during the last year, 
how often did you use it in each of the following
situations?       
  At a party   
  At your home (or apartment or dorm)
  At school

Response Categories: Not at all / A few of the
times / Some of the times / Most of the times /
Every time

* When you used tranquilizers during the last
year, how often did you use it in each of the
following situations? 
  At a party   
  At your home (or apartment or dorm)
  At school

Response Categories: Not at all / A few of the
times / Some of the times / Most of the times /
Every time

* When you used cocaine during the last year, how
often did you use it in each of the following
situations?
  At a party
  At your home (or apartment or dorm)
  At school

* When you used narcotics other than heroin during 
the last year, how often did you use it in each of
the following situations?
  At a party 
  At your home (or apartment or dorm)
  At school

Response Categories: Not at all / A few of the
times / Some of the times / Most of the times /
Every time

------

Accuracy of Estimates      

The accuracy of any statistic is determined by the
joint effects of "nonsampling" and "sampling"
errors. Both types of error affect the estimates
presented in this report. Several sources can
contribute to nonsampling errors. For example,
members of the population of interest are
inadvertently excluded from the sampling frame;
sampled members refuse to answer some of the
survey questions (item nonresponse) or all of the
survey questions (questionnaire nonresponse);
mistakes are made during data editing, coding, or
entry; the responses that respondents provide
differ from the "true" responses; or measurement
instruments such as tests or questionnaires fail
to measure the characteristics they are intended
to measure. Although nonsampling errors due to
questionnaire and item nonresponse can be reduced
somewhat by the adjustment of sample weights and
imputation procedures, correcting nonsampling
errors or gauging the effects of these errors is
usually difficult.
  
Sampling errors occur because observations are
made on samples rather than on entire populations.
Surveys of population universes are not subject to
sampling errors. Estimates based on a sample will
differ somewhat from those that would have been
obtained by a complete census of the relevant
population using the same survey instruments,
instructions, and procedures. The standard error   
 
of a statistic is a measure of the variation due
to sampling; it indicates the precision of the
statistic obtained in a particular sample. In
addition, the standard errors for two sample
statistics can be used to estimate the  precision
of the difference between the two statistics and 
to help determine whether the difference based on
the sample  is large enough so that it represents
the population difference.

Most of the data used in this report were obtained
from complex sampling designs rather than a simple
random design. In these sampling designs, data
were collected through stratification, clustering,
unequal selection probabilities, or multistage
sampling. These features of the sampling usually
result in estimated statistics that are
more variable (that is, have larger standard
errors) than they would have been if they had been
based on data from a simple random sample of the
same size. Therefore, calculation of standard
errors requires procedures that are markedly
different from the ones used when the data are
from a simple random sample. The Taylor series
approximation technique or the balanced repeated
replication (BRR) method was used to estimate most
of the statistics and their standard errors in
this report. Table B3 lists the various methods
used to compute standard  errors for different
data sets.

Standard error calculation for data from the
National Crime Victimization Survey, the School
Crime Supplement, and Monitoring the Future relied
on a different procedure. For statistics based on
the NCVS and the SCS data, standard errors were
derived from a formula developed by the Census
Bureau, which consists of three generalized
variance function (gvf) constant parameters that
represent the curve fitted to the individual
standard errors calculated using the Jackknife
Repeated Replication technique. The formulas used
to compute the adjusted standard errors associated
with percentages or population counts can be found
in table B3.
                                   
For the statistics based on the Monitoring the
Future data, their standard errors were derived
from the published tables of confidence intervals
in appendix A (pp. 313 322) of Monitoring the
Future: Questionnaire Responses from the Nation's
High School Seniors, 1995, by Lloyd D. Johnston,
Jerald G. Bachman, and Patrick M. O'Malley, Survey
Research  Center, Institute for Social Research,
the University of Michigan, 1997. Generally, the 
table entries, when added to and subtracted from 
the observed percentage, establish the 95 percent 
confidence interval. The appendix presents specific 
guidelines for using the tables of confidence 
intervals and conducting statistical tests for 
the difference between two percentages.                            

-----

Table  B3--Methods used to calculate standard
errors of statistics for different surveys

Survey: 
National Crime Victimization Survey 

Year: 1992 to 1996  

Method of calculation:
Standard errors of crime level data and aggregated
crime rates per 1,000 persons were calculated
using three  generalized variance function (gvf)
constant parameters (denoted as a, b, and c) and
formulas published  in  Appendix  II, 144148) of
"Criminal Victimization in  the  United States,
1994," Bureau of Justice Statistics, May 1997,
NCJ-162126.

The formula used to calculate standard errors of
crime  level data (x) is: sqrt(ax2 + bx + cx3/2),
where x is the  estimated number of personal
crimes of interest, and a, b, and c are gvf
constant parameters.

The formula used to calculate standard errors of
aggregated  crime rates per 1,000 persons (r) is:
sqrt[br(1000-r)/y  + cr(sqrt(1000r)-r)/sqrt(y)],
where r is the aggregate crime rate (i.e., 1000 *
total crimes / total population), y is the
aggregated base population, and a, b, and c are
gvf constant parameters.

Three gvf constant parameters associated with a
specific year are:

Year             a         b      c

1992        -0.00015053  5,470  4.332
1993        -0.00007899  2,870  2.273
1994        -0.00006269  2,278  1.804
1995        -0.00006269  2,278  1.804
1996        -0.00006543  2,378  1.883
Aggregated    
data from
1992 to 96  -0.00002739  4,976  1.762


Survey: School Crime Supplement   

Year: 1989 and 1995   

Method of calculation: Standard errors of
percentage and population counts were calculated
using three generalized variance function (gvf)
constant parameters (denoted as a, b, and c) and
formulas drawn from Students' Reports of School
Crime: 1989 and 1995 (p. 26), March 1998, NCES 98-241.

The formula used to calculate standard errors for
percentages (p) is: 
sqrt [bp(1 p)/y + cp(sqrt(p)-p)/sqrt(y)],
where p is the percentage or interest expressed as
a proportion, y is the size of the population to
which the percent applies, and b and c are gvf
constant parameters. After the standard error is
estimated, multiply it by 100 to make it
applicable to the percentage.
 
The formula used to calculate standard errors of
population  counts (x) is: sqrt(ax2 + bx + cx3/2),
where x is the estimated number of students who
experienced a given event, and a, b, c are gvf
constant parameters.

Three gvf constant parameters associated with a
specific year are:

Year       a        b      c

1989  0.00001559  3,108   0.000
1995  0.00006269  2,278   1.804


Survey: National Household Education Survey

Year: 1993  

Method of calculation: Balance  repeated
replication method using replicate weights
available from the data set.
 

Survey:  Monitoring the Future 

Year: 1976  to  1996    

Method of calculation: Derived from the published
tables of confidence intervals in appendix A (pp.
313 322) of "Monitoring  the Future: Questionnaire
Responses from the Nation's High School Seniors,
1995," by Lloyd D. Johnston, Jerald G. Bachman,
and Patrick M. O'Malley, Survey Research Center,
Institute for Social Research, University of
Michigan, 1997.


Survey: Schools  and  Staffing Survey    

Year: 1993 1994  

Method of calculation: Balance repeated
replication method using replicate weights
available from the data set.


Survey: FRSS Principal/School Disciplinarian 
Survey 
         
Year: 1997    

Method of calculation: Balance repeated
replication method using replicate weights
available from the data set.
 

Survey: Youth Risk Behavior Survey     

Year: 1993, 1995, and 1997

Method of calculation: Taylor series approximation
method using PSU and and 1997 strata variables
available from the data set.

-------


Statistical Procedures

The comparisons in the text have been tested for
statistical significance to ensure that the
differences are larger than might be expected due
to sampling variations. Unless otherwise noted,
all statements cited in the report are
statistically significant at the .05 level.
Several test procedures were used, depending upon
the type of data being analyzed and the nature of
the statement being tested. The primary test
procedure used in this report was the Student's
"t" statistic, which tests the difference between
two sample estimates, for example, between males
and females. The formula used to compute the "t"
statistic is as follows:
 
    t=E1-E2/sqrt se1 squared + se2 squared
 
  [Equation is not precisely reproducible in this 
   format--see Acrobat Portable Document Format 
   (.pdf) file or printed report]
  
where E1 and E2 are the estimates to be compared
and se1 and se2 are their corresponding standard
errors. Note that this formula is valid only for
independent estimates. When the estimates are not
independent (for example, when comparing a total
percentage with that for a subgroup included in
the total), a covariance term (i.e., 2*se1*se2)
must be added to the denominator of the formula:
  
t=E1-E2/sqrt se1 squared + se2 squared + 2*se1*se2

  [Equation is not precisely reproducible in this 
   format--see Acrobat Portable Document Format 
   (.pdf) file or printed report]

Once the t value was computed, it was compared
with the published tables of values at certain
critical levels, called alpha levels. For this
report, an alpha value of 0.05 was used, which has
a t value of 1.96. If the t value was larger than
1.96, then the difference between the two
estimates was statistically significant at the 95
percent level.

When multiple comparisons between more than two
groups were made, for example, between
racial/ethnic groups, a Bonferroni adjustment to
the significance level was used to ensure that the
significance level for the tests as a group was at
the .05 level. Generally, when multiple
statistical comparisons are made, it becomes
increasingly likely that an indication of a
population difference is erroneous. Even when
there is no difference in the population, at an
alpha of .05, there is still a 5 percent chance of
concluding that an observed t value representing
one comparison in the sample is large enough to
be statistically significant. As the number of
comparisons increase, the risk of making such an
erroneous inference also increases. The Bonferroni
procedure corrects the significance (or alpha)
level for the total number of comparisons made
within a particular classification variable. For
each classification variable, there are
(K*(K l)/2) possible comparisons (or nonredundant
pairwise combinations), where K is the number of
categories. The Bonferroni procedure divides the
alpha level for a single t test by the number of
possible pairwise comparisons in order to produce
a new alpha level that is corrected for the fact
that multiple contrasts are being made. As a
result, the t value for a certain alpha level
(e.g., .05) increases, which makes it more
difficult to claim that the difference observed is
statistically significant. 

Finally, a linear trend test was used when a
statement describing a linear trend, rather than
the differences between two discrete categories,
was made. This test allows one to examine whether,
for example, the percentage of students using
drugs increased (or decreased)over time or whether
the percentage of students who reported being
physically attacked in school increased (or
decreased) with their age. Based on a regression
with,for example, student's age as the independent
variable and whether a student was physically
attacked as the dependent variable, the test
involves computing the regression coefficient (b)
and its corresponding standarderror (se). The
ratio of these two (b/se) is the test statistic t.
If t is greater than 1.96, the critical valuefor
one comparison at the .05 alpha level, the
hypothesis that there is a linear relationship
between student's age and being physically
attacked is not rejected.
       

Appendix C. Glossary of Terms

GENERAL TERMS

Crime     Any violation of a statute or
regulation or any act that the government has
determined is injurious to the public,
including felonies and misdemeanors. Such
violation may or may not involve violence,
and it may affect individuals or property.

Incident     A specific criminal act or offense
involving one or more victims and one or more
offenders.

Prevalence     The percentage of the
population directly affected by crime in a
given period. This rate is based upon
specific information elicited directly from
the respondent regarding crimes committed
against his or her person, against his or her
property, or against an individual bearing a
unique relationship to him or her. It is not
based upon perceptions and beliefs about, or
reactions to, criminal acts.

School     An education institution consisting
of one or more of grades K through 12.

School crime     Any criminal activity that is
committed on school property.

School property     School buildings, school
buses, school grounds, and places that are
holding school-sponsored events, even though
they are not officially on school grounds.

School year     The 12-month period of time
denoting the beginning and ending dates for
school accounting purposes, usually from July
1 through June 30.


SPECIFIC TERMS USED IN VARIOUS SURVEYS

National Crime Victimization Survey

Aggravated assault     Attack or attempted
attack with a weapon, regardless of whether
or not an injury occurs, and attack without a
weapon when serious injury results.

Rape     Forced sexual intercourse including both
psychological coercion as well as physical
force.  Forced sexual intercourse means
vaginal, anal, or oral penetration by the
offender(s).  This category also includes
incidents where the penetration is from a
foreign object such as a bottle.

Robbery     Completed or attempted theft,
directly from a person, of property or cash
by force or threat of force, with or without
a weapon, and with or without injury.

Rural     A place not located inside the
Metropolitan Statistical Area (MSA).  This
category includes a variety of localities,
ranging from sparsely populated rural areas
to cities with populations of less than
50,000.

Serious violent crime     Rape, sexual
assault, robbery, or aggravated assault.

Sexual assault      A wide range of
victimizations, separate from rape or
attempted rape.  These crimes include attacks
or attempted attacks generally involving
unwanted sexual contact between the victim
and offender.  Sexual assault may or may not
involve force and includes such things as
grabbing or fondling.  Sexual assault also
includes verbal threats.

Simple assault      Attack without a weapon
resulting either in no injury, minor injury,
or in undetermined injury requiring less than
2 days of hospitalization.  Also includes
attempted assault without a weapon.

Suburban     A county or counties containing a
central city, plus any contiguous counties
that are linked socially and economically to
the central city.  On the data tables,
suburban areas are categorized as those
portions of metropolitan areas situated
"outside central cities."

Theft     Completed or attempted theft of
property or cash without personal contact.

Victimization     A crime as it affects one
individual person or household.  For personal
crimes, the number of victimizations is equal
to the number of victims involved.  The
number of victimizations may be greater than
the number of incidents because more than one
person may be victimized during an incident.

Victimization rate     A measure of the
occurrence of victimizations among a specific
population group.

Violent crime     Rape, sexual assault, robbery,
or assault.

Urban     The largest city (or grouping of
cities) in an MSA.


SCHOOL CRIME SUPPLEMENT

At school     In the school building, on the
school grounds, or on a school bus.

Property crime     Theft of property from a
student's desk, locker, or other locations at
school.

Violent crime     Physical attacks or taking
property from the student directly by force,
weapons, or threats.


National Household Education Survey

At school     In the school, at school
activities, or on the way to or from school.

Bully     Treat other persons abusively or
affect others by means of force or coercion.
For example, pick on others or make other
students do things like give them money.

Rural     Places not classified as urban are
rural.

Urban     An urban area in an urbanized area
comprising a place and the adjacent densely
settled surrounding territory that together
have a minimum population of 50,000 people.

Suburban     A suburban area is an urban area
out of an urbanized area that includes
incorporated or unincorporated places outside
of an urbanized area with a minimum population of
2,500 people.


Youth Risk Behavior Survey

Weapon     Any instrument or object used with
the intent to threaten, injure, or kill.
Examples of weapons appearing in the
questionnaire include guns, knives, and
clubs.


FRSS Principal/School Disciplinarian Survey

At school     In school buildings, on school
buses, on school grounds, or at places that
hold school-sponsored events or activities,
but are not officially on school grounds.

Central region     Illinois, Indiana, Iowa,
Kansas, Michigan, Minnesota, Missouri,
Nebraska, North Dakota, Ohio, South Dakota,
and Wisconsin.

City     A central city of an MSA.

Elementary school     A school that has a low
grade of 3 or less and a high grade of 1
through 8.

Free/reduced-price     The percent of students
enrolled in the school who are eligible for
the federally lunch funded free or reduced-price
lunch program.

High school/combined     A school that has a
low grade of 9 through 12 and a high grade of
10 through 12.  Schools that do not precisely
meet these qualifications are classified as
"combined" and are included in the analyses
with high schools.

Less serious or nonviolent crime     Physical
attack or fight without a weapon, theft or
larceny, or vandalism.


Minority enrollment     The percent of students
enrolled in the school whose race or ethnicity is
classified as one of the following: American
Indian or Alaskan Native, Asian or Pacific
Islander, black, or Hispanic, based on data in the
1993-94 Common Core of Data (CCD) file.

Middle school     A school that has a low grade
of 4 through 9 and a high grade of 4 through
9.

Northeast region     Connecticut, Delaware,
District of Columbia, Maine, Maryland,
Massachusetts, New Hampshire, New Jersey, New
York, Pennsylvania, Rhode Island, and
Vermont.

Robbery     The taking or attempting to take
anything of value that is owned by another
person or organization, under confrontational
circumstances by force or threat of force or
violence and/or by putting the victim in
fear.

Physical attack or fight     An actual and
intentional touching or striking of another
person against his or her will, or the
intentional causing of bodily harm to an
individual.  This category should be used
only when the attack is serious enough to
warrant calling the police or other law
enforcement representative.

Rural     A place with a population less than
2,500 and defined as rural by the U.S. Bureau
of the Census.

School enrollment     Total number of students
enrolled as defined by CCD.

Serious violent crime     Murder, suicide,
rape or sexual battery, physical attack or
fight with a weapon, or robbery.

Sexual battery     An incident that includes
rape, fondling, indecent liberties, child
molestation, or sodomy.

Southeast region     Alabama, Arkansas,
Florida, Georgia, Kentucky, Louisiana,
Mississippi, North Carolina, South Carolina,
Tennessee, Virginia, and West Virginia.

Theft or larceny     The unlawful taking of
another person's property without personal
confrontation, threat, violence, or bodily
harm.

Town     A place not within an MSA, but with a
population greater than or equal to 2,500 and
defined as urban by the U.S. Bureau of the
Census.

Urban fringe     A place within an MSA of a
central city, but not primarily its central
city.

Vandalism     The damage or destruction of school
property.

West region     Alaska, Arizona, California,
Colorado, Hawaii, Idaho, Montana, Nevada, New
Mexico, Oklahoma, Oregon, Texas, Utah,
Washington, and Wyoming.


Monitoring the Future

Alcoholic beverage     Drink (such as beer,
wine, wine coolers, and liquor) that contains
ethanol, which may intoxicate a person who
uses it.

Cocaine     A bitter crystalline alkaloid
obtained from coca leaves that is used
illicitly for its euphoric effects and that
may result in a compulsive psychological
need.  Cocaine can be taken in "crack" form,
where a user inhales the fumes from smoking,
heating, or burning it.

LSD     A psychedelic drug that induces
psychotic symptoms similar to those of
schizophrenia.  LSD is sometimes called
"acid."

Marijuana     Dried leaves and flowering tops of
the female hemp plant that yield THC and are
smoked in cigarettes for their intoxicating
effect.  Marijuana is sometimes called
"grass," "pot," or "dope."

Tranquilizers     Drugs prescribed by doctors to
calm people down, quiet their nerves, or relax
their muscles.  They include the following drugs:
Librium, Valium, Miltown, Equanil, Meprobamate,
Serax, Atarax, Tranxene, and Vistaril.

Weapon     Any instrument or object used with
the intent to threaten, injure, or kill.
Examples of weapons appearing in the
questionnaire include guns, knives, and
clubs.


Schools and Staffing Survey

Central city     A large central city (a
central city of an MSA with population
greater than or equal to 400,000, or a
population density greater than or equal to
6,000 per square mile) or a mid-size central
city (a central city of an MSA, but not
designated as a large central city).

Elementary school     An elementary school
teacher is one who, when asked for the grades
taught, teachers  checked: 
1) only "ungraded" and was designated as an
elementary teacher on the list of teachers
provided by the school; 
2) 6th grade or lower, or "ungraded," and no
grade higher than 6th; 
3) 6th grade or lower and 7th grade or higher, and
reported a primary assignment of prekindergarten,
kindergarten, or general elementary; 
4) 7th and 8th grades only, and reported a primary
assignment of prekindergarten, kindergarten,
or general elementary; 
5) 6th grade or lower and 7th grade or higher, and
reported a primary assignment of special education
and was designated as an elementary teacher on
the list of teachers provided by the school; or 
6) 7th and 8th grades only, and reported a primary
assignment of special education and was designated
as an elementary teacher on the list of teachers
provided by the school. 
A school that has grade 6 or lower, or one that is
"ungraded" with no grade higher than the 8th.

Rural or small town     Rural area (a place with
a population of less than 2,500 and defined as
rural by the U.S. Bureau of the Census) or a small
town (a place not within an MSA, with a population
of less than 25,000, but greater than or equal to
2,500, and defined as nonurban by the U.S. Bureau
of the Census).

Secondary school     A secondary school
teacher is one who, when asked for the grades
taught, teachers  checked: 
1) "ungraded" and was designated as a secondary
teacher on the list of teachers provided by the
school; 
2) 6th grade or lower and 7th grade or higher, and
reported a primary assignment other than
prekindergarten, kindergarten, or general
elementary; 
3) 9th grade or higher, or 9th grade or higher and
"ungraded"; 
4) 7th and 8th grades only, and reported a primary
assignment other than prekindergarten,
kindergarten, general elementary, or special
education;
5) 7th and 8th grades only, and reported a
primary assignment of special education and
was designated as a secondary teacher on the
list of teachers provided by the school; or
6) 6th grade or lower and 7th grade or higher, or
7th and 8th grades only, and was not categorized
above as either elementary or secondary.

Urban fringe or large town     Urban fringe of a
large or mid-size city (a place within an MSA of a
mid-size central city and defined as urban by the
U.S. Bureau of the Census) or a large town (a
place not within an MSA, but with a population
greater or equal to 25,000 and defined as urban by
the U.S. Bureau of the Census).


S. Patrick Kachur et al., "School-Associated
Violent Deaths in the United States, 1992 to 1994"

Homicide     An act involving a killing of one
person by another resulting from interpersonal
violence.

School-associated     A homicide or suicide in
which the fatal injury occurred on the campus
of a violent death  functioning elementary or
secondary school in the United States, while
the victim was on the way to or from regular
sessions at such a school, or while the
victim was attending or traveling to or from
an official school-sponsored event. Victims
included nonstudents as well as students and
staff members.

Suicide     An act of taking one's own life
voluntarily and intentionally.

(End of file)





