U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Programs
Bureau of Justice Statistics

Statistical Tables

National Crime Victimization Survey, 2007

Identity Theft Reported by Households, 2007 - Statistical Tables

June 2010   NCJ 230742
-------------------------------------------------------------

This file is text only without graphics and many of the
tables. A Zip archive of the tables in this report in
spreadsheet format (.csv) and the full report including
tables and graphics in .pdf format are available from:
http://bjs.ojp.usdoj.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbdetail&iid=2294.

This report is one in a series.  More recent editions            		
may be available.  To view a list of all in the series go to               		
http://bjs.ojp.usdoj.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbse&sid=60
-------------------------------------------------------------

Lynn Langton and Katrina Baum 
BJS Statisticians

In 2007, 7.9 million households, or about 6.6% of all
households in the United States, discovered that at least one
member had been a victim of one or more types of identity
theft. A 6.6% rate of identity theft represents a significant
increase from the 5.5% of households that reported identity
theft victimization in 2005. From 2005 to 2007, the number of
households that experienced the unauthorized use of a credit
card, another existing account, and multiple types of
identity theft in a single episode all increased
significantly. 

These statistical tables present data on identity theft
victimization from the National Crime Victimization Survey
(NCVS). Identity theft is defined as unauthorized use or
attempted use of a credit card, existing accounts, misuse of
personal information, or multiple types at the same time.
Data are presented from 2007 on the rate and types of
identity theft victimization, as well as the demographic
characteristics of victimized households and the monetary
losses caused by identity theft. The rate of identity theft
victimization in 2007 is compared to the rate of identity
theft in 2005. Finally, available data from the second half
of 2008 are also presented and compared to data from the same
6-month period in 2007.

-----------------------------------------------------------

Highlights

*The number of households with at least one member who
experienced one or more types of identity theft increased 23%
from 2005 to 2007.

*From 2005 to 2007, the number of households that experienced
credit card theft increased by 31% and the number that
experienced multiple types during the same episode increased
by 37%.

*During the 6-month period in 2008 for which identity theft
victimization data was collected as part of the regular NCVS,
3.3% of households discovered that at least one member had
been a victim of one or more types of identity theft.

------------------------------------------------------------

Type of identity theft

*In 2007, half of all victimized households, accounting for
nearly 4 million households, experienced the unauthorized use
or attempted use of a credit card account (table 1).

*The second-most common type of identity theft in 2007,
experienced by 1.9 million households, involved the
unauthorized use or attempted use of existing accounts, such
as a bank, checking or debit, or cellular phone account.

Head of household characteristic

*Households headed by individuals age 65 or older were less
likely than any other age groups to be victims of attempted
or successful identity theft (table 2).

*A lower percentage of Hispanic households (5.2%) experienced
identity theft or attempted identity theft than non-Hispanic
households (6.8%).

Household income

*Households with incomes of $75,000 or more experienced a
higher rate of identity theft than households in lower income
brackets (table 3). 

*Households with one person were less likely or somewhat less
likely to experience identity theft than households with two
or more persons age 12 or older.

Financial loss

*In 2007, 32% of households victimized by identity theft
reported a financial loss of $500 or more (table 4). 

*Households experiencing the theft of personal information
were more than twice as likely as households with thefts of
credit cards, other existing accounts, or multiple types to
report that no money was lost due to the identity theft.

*Among households experiencing the misuse of personal
information, those with a financial loss reported an average
household loss of $5,650

*Across all victimized households reporting a financial loss,
the average amount lost per household was $1,830.

Rate of ID theft 6-month comparison

*During the 6-month period in 2008 for which identity theft
victimization data were collected as part of the regular
NCVS, 3.3% of households discovered that at least one member
had been a victim of one or more types of identity theft
(table 5).

*There was no statistically significant difference in the
percent of households that experienced 
identity theft during the last 6 months of 2008 compared to
the last 6 months of 2007.

Methodology

Beginning in July 2004, questions were added to the National
Crime Victimization Survey (NCVS) to provide ongoing
estimates of identity theft victimization. NCVS identity
theft data are available for July-December of 2004, a full
year in 2005 and 2007, and July-December of 2008. During the
first six months of 2008, households were administered a
supplemental NCVS survey on identity theft that replaced the
regular NCVS questions. Due to changes in methodology, data
from 2006 are not included. Crime victimization rates in 2006
are not comparable to other years and cannot be used for
yearly trend comparisons. See Criminal Victimization, 2006,
<http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/abstract/cv06.htm>.

See Identity Theft, 2005,
<http://bjs.ojp.usdoj.gov/content/pub/pdf/it05.pdf>, for
additional information on the collection of identity theft
data using the NCVS, including the identity theft questions
included in the survey.

------------------------------------------------------------

List of tables

Table 1. Number and percent of households in which at least
one member was a victim of one or more types of identity
theft, 2005 and 2007

Table 2. Age, race, and Hispanic origin of head of households
experiencing identity theft, 2007

Table 3. Income, marital status, and size of households that
experienced identity theft, 2007

Table 4. Amount of financial loss due to identity theft, by
type of identity theft, 2007

Table 5. Number and percent of households in which at least
one member was a victim of one or more types of identity
theft during a 6-month period, 2007 and 2008

-------------------------------------------------------------

The Bureau of Justice Statistics is the statistical agency of
the U.S. Department of Justice. James P. Lynch is director.

These Statistical Tables were prepared and supporting text
written by Lynn Langton and Katrina Baum. Michael Rand
verified the report.

Jill Duncan edited the report, Barbara Quinn produced the
report, and Jayne E. Robinson prepared the report for final
printing under the supervision of Doris J. James.

June 2010, NCJ 230742

-------------------------------------------------------------

This report in portable document format and in ASCII and its
related statistical data and tables are available at the BJS
World Wide Web Internet site:
<http://bjs.ojp.usdoj.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbdetail&iid=2294>.

-------------------------------------------------------------

Office of Justice Programs
Innovation - Partnerships - Safer Neighborhoods
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov

-------------------------------------------------------------

6/28/2010/JER/8:05
                    