U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Programs
Bureau of Justice Statistics

Justice Assistance Grant (JAG) Program, 2012

Alexia D. Cooper, Ph.D., BJS Statistician

September 2012, NCJ 239232
------------------------------------------
This report is one in series. More recent 
editions may be available. To view a list of all 
reports in the series go to 
http://www.bjs.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbse&sid=71

This file is text without graphics and many of 
the tables. A Zip archive of the tables in this report in 
Comma-delimited format (CSV) and the full report including 
tables and graphs in PDF format are available at:
http://www.bjs.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbdetail&iid=4432
------------------------------------------

**************
Introduction
**************

As part of the Consolidated Appropriations Act 
of 2005, the 108th Congress merged the 
discretionary Edward Byrne Memorial Grant 
Program with the formula-based Local Law 
Enforcement Block Grant (LLEBG) program to 
establish the Edward Byrne Memorial Justice 
Assistance Grant (JAG) program. The Bureau of 
Justice Assistance (BJA) administers the JAG 
program, and the Bureau of Justice Statistics 
(BJS) calculates the JAG formula-based award 
amounts using specifications outlined in the 
legislation.

JAG awards may be used for the following seven 
purposes--

* law enforcement
 
* prosecution and courts

* prevention and education

* corrections and community corrections

* drug treatment

* planning, evaluation, and technology 
improvement

* crime victim and witness programs.

A total of $295,580,175 was available for the 
2012 JAG awards (figure 1). This report 
describes the steps in the JAG award 
calculation process and presents summary 
results of the 2012 JAG formula calculations.

*****************
HIGHLIGHTS
*****************

* The total 2012 allocation for the JAG 
funding was approximately $295.6 million, of 
which $288.4 million went to states and $7.2 
million to territories and the District of 
Columbia. 

* The five largest total state allocations 
included California ($32.9 million), Texas 
($22.7 million), Florida ($19.5 million), New 
York ($16.0 million), and Illinois ($12.0 
million). 

* A total of 1,606 local governments were 
eligible for awards, either directly or 
through a joint allocation with other 
governments within their county. The five 
local governments eligible to receive the 
largest awards included New York City ($4.1 
million), Chicago ($2.9 million), Philadelphia 
($1.9 million), Houston ($1.9 million), and 
Los Angeles ($1.8 million).

* Three states had around 100 or more local 
governments eligible to receive award funds 
either directly or through a joint allocation: 
California (224), Florida (130), and Texas 
(98).
*********************************************

**********************
Overview of process
**********************

Once the fiscal year JAG allocation has been 
determined, BJS begins its 
four-step award calculation process: 

* Computing an initial allocation for each 
state and territory, based on 
its share of violent crime and population 
(weighted equally).

* Reviewing the initial allocation amount to 
determine if it is less than the minimum (de 
minimus) award amount defined in the JAG 
legislation (0.25% of the total). If this is 
the case, the state or territory is funded at 
the minimum level, and the funds required for 
this are deducted from the overall pool of 
funds. Each of the remaining states receives 
the minimum award plus an additional amount 
based on its share of violent crime and 
population.

* Dividing each state’s final amount at a rate 
of 60% for state governments and 40% for local 
governments.

* Determining local award allocations, which 
are based on their proportion of the state’s 
3-year violent crime average. If a local award 
amount is less than $10,000, the funds are 
returned to the state. If it is $10,000 or 
more, then the local government is eligible to 
apply for an award.

The JAG award calculation process, with 
examples, is explained in more detail below.

******************************************
The four-step award calculation process
******************************************

Step 1: Initial allocation to states and 
territories
-------------------------------

[Legislative mandate: 42 USC 3755 (a)(1)]

Based on the congressional appropriation for 
the 2012 JAG program, BJS calculates the 
initial allocation amounts for the 50 states 
and territories. Using the congressionally 
established formula, BJS allocates half of the 
available funds based on a state’s or 
territory’s share of violent crime and half of 
the funds based on its share of the nation’s 
population. The most recent 3-year period of 
official violent crime data for states and 
territories from the Federal Bureau of 
Investigation (FBI) covered the period between 
2008 and 2010. The population shares for the 
50 states and territories were determined 
based on the results of the 2011 mid-year 
population estimates published by the U.S. 
Census Bureau.

Examples--

* California accounts for 13.12% of the 
nation’s total violent crime and 11.94% of the 
nation’s total population. Therefore, 
California’s initial allocation equals 13.12% 
of $147,790,088 (half of $295,580,175) plus 
11.94% of $147,790,088, totaling $37,035,131.

* Vermont accounts for 0.06% of the nation’s 
total violent crime and 0.20% of the nation’s 
total population. Vermont’s initial allocation 
is 0.06% of $147,790,088 plus 0.20% of 
$147,790,088, totaling $385,914. 
 
Step 2: De minimus awards
--------------------------

[Legislative mandate: 42 USC 3755 (a)(2)]

The JAG legislation requires that each state 
or territory be awarded a minimum allocation 
equal to 0.25% of the total JAG allocation 
($738,950 in 2012), regardless of its 
population or crime average. If a state’s or 
territory’s initial allocation based on crime 
and population is less than the minimum 
amount, that state or territory receives the 
minimum award amount as its total JAG 
allocation. If a state’s or territory’s 
initial allocation exceeds the minimum amount, 
it receives the minimum award plus the amount 
based on its share of the violent crime and 
population. A total of $40,642,274 was 
allocated for minimum awards in the 2012 JAG 
program.
  
Congress made one exception to this rule: 
American Samoa and the Northern Mariana 
Islands are required to split one minimum 
award, with American Samoa receiving 67% 
($495,097) and the Northern Mariana Islands 
receiving 33% ($243,854). (See Methodology for 
more information on allocation procedures for 
the territories.) 

Examples--

* Vermont’s initial allocation of $385,915 is 
less than the minimum value, so Vermont’s 
total JAG allocation will be the minimum 
amount of $738,950.

* California’s initial allocation of 
$37,035,131 exceeds the minimum value, so 
California will receive the minimum plus an 
award based on its share of total violent 
crime and population.

To compute the additional amounts, the crime 
and population data for states and territories 
receiving only the minimum award are removed 
from the pool, and the remaining JAG funds are 
reallocated to the rest of the states based on 
violent crime and population as in Step 1. 

Examples--

* Vermont received only the minimum award, so 
its crime and population data are removed from 
the pool. 

* After removing the crime and population data 
for the minimum amounts for states and 
territories, California accounts for 13.18% of 
violent crime and 12.06% of the nation’s 
population. California’s new JAG allocation is 
equal to $16,795,770 (13.18% of one half of 
$254.9 million) plus $15,369,833 (12.06% of 
one half of $254.9 million), plus the minimum 
amount of $738,950. These three components 
equal $32,904,554. ($254.9 million equals the 
$295.6 million total JAG 2012 award allocation 
minus the $40.6 million JAG 2012 minimum 
allocation.)

Step 3: 60/40 split to state and local 
government
------------------------------

[Legislative mandate: 42 USC 3755 (b)]

Except for the territories and the District of 
Columbia, 60% of the total allocation to a 
state is retained by the state government, and 
40% is set aside to be allocated to local 
governments.

Examples--

* California’s state government retains 60% of 
$32,904,554, or $19,742,732. The remaining 
40%, or $13,161,821, is set aside for 
distribution to local governments in 
California.

* Vermont’s state government retains 60% of 
the minimum award of $738,950, or $443,370. 
The remaining 40%, or $295,580, is set aside 
for distribution to local governments in 
Vermont.

Step 4: Determining local award allocations
--------------------------------------------

[Legislative Mandate: 42 USC 3755 
(c)(d)(e)(f)(g)(h)]

In order to determine local awards, BJS 
determines which jurisdictions should be 
included in the calculation of the 3-year 
violent crime averages on which local awards 
are based. These crime averages are computed 
using data published by the FBI’s Uniform 
Crime Reporting (UCR) Program. To be eligible, 
a jurisdiction must have provided to the UCR a 
count of the number of violent crimes known to 
law enforcement each year for a minimum of 3 
years in the last 10. Jurisdictions that have 
not reported data for at least 3 of the last 
10 years are excluded from the calculations 
and cannot receive an award.

The 10-year limit on the age of UCR data that 
can be used for JAG local award calculations 
was applied for the first time during the 2009 
Recovery Act.***Footnote 1 Previously, all 
years of the FBI’s UCR data could be used to 
meet the 3-year reporting requirement. 
Although the 10-year limit was stipulated in 
the 2005 legislation that created the JAG 
program, it was not implemented until 2009 per 
the “Transitional Rule.” [See 42 USC § 3755 
(d)(2)(B).] The 10-year limit was applied in 
FY 2012 and the UCR data used for the 2012 JAG 
award calculations included the 10-year period 
from 2001 to 2010.***For the 2010 JAG, the 10-
year window for eligible UCR data was waived 
because some agencies were having difficulty 
meeting the new requirements. Instead, all of 
the FBI’s UCR data dating back to 1991 were 
used to meet the 3-year reporting requirement. 
Agencies that used this waiver signed an 
agreement indicating they would begin to 
report timely data on Part I violent crimes to 
the FBI starting no later than the end of 
federal Fiscal Year 2010 (September 30, 2010). 
All agencies that used the waiver in 2010 
reported updated UCR data by the required 
deadline, making it unnecessary to authorize 
an additional waiver of the 10-year rule in 
2012.

After determining which law enforcement 
agencies have the 3 years of reported violent 
crime data required to be included in the 
calculations, BJS computes the average number 
of violent crimes reported by all law 
enforcement agencies in each jurisdiction 
(e.g., local government) for the 3 most recent 
years in which they reported data. 

Since awards to local governments are based on 
their share of all violent crimes reported by 
the law enforcement agencies in their state, 
BJS computes the sum of these averages within 
each state to determine the jurisdiction’s 
share of the total local award allocation 
local governments may receive.

Examples--

* California has $13.2 million set aside for 
local awards. The 3-year violent crime 
averages reported by local jurisdictions in 
California equal 171,591 crimes. Dividing the 
$13.2 million set aside by the state crime 
totals results in the number of dollars 
available for each crime: $13,161,821/171,591 
crimes = $76.70 per crime. Therefore, a local 
California jurisdiction needs a 3-year average 
of at least 130.37 violent crimes 
($10,000/$76.70) to be eligible for an award.

* Vermont has $295,580 set aside for local 
governments. The sum of 3-year average violent 
crimes reported is 613. The dollars per crime 
ratio in Vermont equals $295,580/613 crimes, 
or $481.92 per crime. The threshold is 20.75 
violent crimes ($10,000/$481.92) to be 
eligible for an award.

Finally, BJS calculates the initial amount of 
each local award. Each local award amount is 
equal to the product of a local jurisdiction’s 
3-year violent crime average and the “dollars 
per crime” ratio for the state in which it is 
located. By statute, the minimum award a local 
jurisdiction may receive is $10,000. 
Jurisdictions that are eligible for an initial 
award greater than or equal to $10,000 are 
eligible to apply to receive the funds for 
their own use. If the initial award is less 
than $10,000, the award funds are transferred 
to the state administering agency for 
distribution to the state police or any units 
of local government that were ineligible for a 
direct award greater than or equal to $10,000. 
(See “Pass-through requirement” [42 USC § 3755 
(c)] on page 5.)

Examples--

* The city of Oakland, California has a 3-year 
average of 6,988.33 violent crimes, or 4.1% of 
all violent crimes reported by jurisdictions 
in California. Oakland exceeds the state 
threshold of 130.37 violent crimes. It is 
eligible for 4.1% of the $13.2 million set 
aside for local governments in California, or 
about $536,000 (6,988.33 X $76.70).

* The city of Swanton, Vermont, has a 3-year 
average of 4.33 violent crimes. This does not 
meet the state threshold of 20.75, so it is 
ineligible for a JAG award. Its crimes, less 
than 1% of all violent crimes in Vermont, 
account for about $2,100 of award funds. These 
funds are transferred to the state for 
redistribution.

******************************************
Results of the calculations for the 2012 
Justice Assistance Grant Program 
******************************************

For the 2012 JAG, approximately $288.4 million 
of the $295.6 million available was allocated 
to the 50 states, with the remainder allocated 
to the District of Columbia and U.S. 
territories (table 1). As required by the 
legislation, 40% of this amount ($115.3 
million) was initially reserved for local 
governments. A total of 1,606 local 
governments had law enforcement agencies that 
provided a sufficient number of reported 
crimes to the FBI to receive a JAG award and 
were eligible for a collective total of $94.9 
million. The balance of unawarded local 
allocations ($20.4 million) was returned to 
state governments for redistribution to state 
law enforcement agencies and local 
governments.

In addition, the District of Columbia was 
eligible for $1.8 million and Puerto Rico was 
eligible for $3.2 million (table 2). Guam and 
the U.S. Virgin Islands were each eligible for 
the minimum award of $738,950. American Samoa 
($495,097) and the Northern Mariana Islands 
($243,854) split one minimum award.

***************************  
Additional JAG provision
***************************

Pass-through requirement
------------------------

[Legislative Mandate: 42 USC 3755 (c)]

According to the JAG legislation, states may 
only retain award amounts that bear the same 
ratio of “(A) total expenditures on criminal 
justice by the state government in the most 
recently completed fiscal year to (B) the 
total expenditure on criminal justice by the 
state government and units of local government 
within the state in such year.” 

After determining the amount spent on criminal 
justice expenditures by the state government, 
the state may retain that amount. The 
remainder of the funds are passed down to the 
local governments within the state. These 
criminal justice expenditure amounts are 
referred to as “variable pass-through” data 
for the purpose of JAG awards. 

During 2009, the U.S. Census Bureau finished 
compiling current criminal justice expenditure 
data in order to determine updated variable 
pass-through amounts. These pass-through 
amounts, based on data from 2006, were used 
for the 2012 JAG program and can be found on 
the BJA website at http://www.bja.gov.

Disparate jurisdictions and joint allocations
---------------------------------------------

[Legislative Mandate: 42 USC 3755 (d)(3)(4)]

In some cases, as defined by the legislation, 
a disparity may exist between the funding 
eligibility of a county and associated 
municipalities. There are three different 
types of disparities that may exist. 

The first type is referred to as a zero-county 
disparity. This situation exists when one or 
more municipalities within a county are 
eligible for a direct award and the county is 
not, yet the county is responsible for 
providing criminal justice services (such as 
prosecution and incarceration) for the 
municipality. In this case, the county is 
entitled to part of the municipality’s award 
because it shares in the cost of criminal 
justice operations, although it may not report 
crime data to the FBI.

Example--

* Decatur, Illinois, is eligible for an award 
of $52,749. Macon County, Illinois, (which 
includes the city of Decatur) is not eligible 
for a direct award, but it provides criminal 
justice services to Decatur. In this case, 
Macon County and Decatur are considered zero-
county disparate. Decatur must share its award 
funds with Macon County as mutually agreed 
upon.

A second type of disparity exists when both a 
county and a municipality within that county 
qualify for a direct award, yet the award 
amount for the municipality exceeds 150% of 
the county’s award amount.

Example--

* Pierce County, Washington, is eligible for a 
direct award of $120,738. The city of Tacoma 
in Pierce County is eligible for a direct 
award of $196,572. Tacoma’s award amount is 
more than 150% of Pierce County’s award 
amount. Consequently, the two governments’ 
awards ($317,310) are pooled together and 
shared as mutually agreed upon.

The third type of disparity occurs when a 
county and multiple municipalities within that 
county are all eligible for direct awards, but 
the sum of the awards for the individual 
municipalities exceeds 400% of the county’s 
award amount. 

Example--

* Riverside County, California, was eligible 
for a direct award of $96,085. The cities of 
Banning ($12,324), Coachella ($16,901), Corona 
($17,795), Lake Elsinore ($10,534), Hemet 
($29,915), Indio ($32,497), Palm Springs 
($24,111), Perris ($15,469), Riverside 
($125,412), San Jacinto ($10,994), Moreno 
Valley ($69,724), Cathedral ($17,719), La 
Quinta ($11,812), and Desert Hot Springs 
($25,952) were also eligible for direct 
awards. The 14 cities’ awards summed to 
$421,159. This summed amount was more than 
400% of Riverside County’s direct award amount 
of $96,085. Consequently, all of the funds 
($517,244) were pooled together and shared 
among the seven units of local government as 
mutually agreed upon.

These three types of disparity are examined in 
order, and if a municipality is found to be 
disparate in one of these three ways, its 
award is not included in calculations to test 
other disparity situations. For instance, if a 
municipality is found to be 150% disparate 
with the county, its award is set aside, and 
the rest of the municipalities within the same 
county are checked for 400% disparity. If no 
other disparity is found, the single 
municipality and county share the sum of their 
two awards. However, it is possible for a 
county to have both a 150% disparity and a 
400% disparity simultaneously. For instance, 
counties can have one or more municipalities 
whose individual awards are more than 150% of 
the county’s award and other municipalities 
whose combined award is more than 400% of the 
county’s award.

Examples--

* Maricopa County, Arizona, is eligible for an 
award of $86,540. The cities and townships of 
Avondale ($29,058), Chandler ($64,407), 
Gilbert ($18,439), Glendale ($99,265), 
Goodyear ($11,889), Mesa ($175,417), Peoria 
($26,490), Phoenix ($784,774), Scottsdale 
($34,223), and Tempe ($73,785) (all located in 
Maricopa County) are also eligible for awards. 
The awards for Mesa City and Phoenix City 
individually are more than 150% of Maricopa 
County’s award, and therefore will be pooled 
with the county. The other eight cities’ 
awards sum to $357,556. This summed amount is 
more than 400% of Maricopa County’s direct 
award of $86,540. As a result, all of the 
funds ($1,404,287) are pooled together and 
must be shared.

* Galveston County, Texas, is eligible for an 
award of $10,721. The cities of Galveston 
($31,272), La Marque ($11,052), and Texas 
($16,043) are also eligible for awards. These 
three award amounts sum to $58,367, which is 
less than 400% of the county’s award amount. 
Although no 400% disparity exists, the award 
amount for the city of Galveston is more than 
150% of the award amount for Galveston County. 
These two jurisdictions are disparate and will 
share $41,993, the pooled amount of these two 
awards. The award for the cities of La Marque 
and Texas remain separate.

For disparate situations, regardless of the 
type, the total of all award funds of the 
separate units of local governments (counties 
and municipalities) are pooled together and 
split among the units of local government as 
agreed upon by the affected jurisdictions. To 
qualify for payment, the disparate units of 
local government must submit a joint 
application for the aggregated funds.

Maximum allocation to local units of 
government
-------------------------------

[Legislative Mandate: 42 USC 3755 (e)(1)]

According to the legislation, units of local 
government may not receive a JAG award that 
“exceeds such unit’s total expenditures on 
criminal justice services for the most 
recently completed fiscal year for which data 
are available.” Award amounts in excess of 
total expenditures “shall be allocated 
proportionately among units of local 
government whose allocations do not exceed 
their total expenditures on such services.” 

Sex Offender Registration and 
Notification Act penalty 
---------------------------------

[Legislative Mandate: 42 USC 16925 (a)]

The Sex Offender Registration and Notification 
Act (SORNA), Title I of the Adam Walsh Child 
Protection and Safety Act of 2006 (AWA) 
required that the 50 states, District of 
Columbia, 5 principal territories, and some 
federally recognized tribes substantially 
implement SORNA by July 27, 2009. Two full-
year deadline extensions were provided, and a 
final statutory deadline of July 27, 2011 was 
established.

SORNA mandated a 10% reduction in JAG funding 
for any jurisdictions that failed to 
substantially implement SORNA by the deadline. 
For those jurisdictions that failed to meet 
this deadline, the SORNA penalty was 
calculated by subtracting 10% from the state 
government’s allocation (60% of the total 
award), after deducting the mandatory variable 
pass-through that states are required to send 
to local governments. The penalty applies to 
the portion of JAG funding that is returned to 
the state to be shared with local governments 
that were not eligible for a direct JAG award 
(“less than $10,000 jurisdictions”).

The penalty does not apply to the mandatory 
pass-through, which is the portion of JAG 
funds awarded directly to local law 
enforcement, as the state cannot retain any 
portion of that award. Penalizing local 
agencies would also seriously undermine the 
purpose of the statute, since doing so would 
be detrimental to local law enforcement 
efforts, which include the investigation, 
prosecution, and apprehension of sex 
offenders. An example of how the SORNA penalty 
was assessed can be found in the JAG 
frequently asked questions on the BJA website 
at https://www.bja.gov/Funding/JAGFAQ.pdf.

For additional information regarding the SORNA 
penalty, including implementation requirements 
and a list of states and territories that were 
impacted in FY 2012 by the 10% penalty, 
contact the Office of Sex Offender Sentencing, 
Monitoring, Apprehending, Registering, and 
Tracking (SMART) Policy Advisor assigned to 
assist your jurisdiction, located on the SMART 
website at 
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/smart/sorna.htm.

***************
Methodology
***************

The population data used to calculate state 
and territory JAG allocations are from the 
2011 census estimates provided by the United 
States Census Bureau (2011). Population data 
for the United States and Puerto Rico were 
drawn from the midyear estimates of the 
resident population as of July 1, 2011 and are 
available at 
http://www.census.gov/popest/data/state/totals
/2011/index.html. The other territory 
populations are midyear estimates available at 
http://www.census.gov/population/international
/data/idb/informationGateway.php.
The state-level violent crime data are 
estimates published by the FBI’s Uniform Crime 
Reporting (UCR) Program in the annual 
publication, Crime in the United States. For 
the 2012 JAG program, state-level crime data 
for the years 2008 through 2010 were used. 

The crime data used to calculate local JAG 
allocation amounts are also provided by the 
UCR program. Data for local jurisdictions are 
obtained in 
an electronic format directly from the FBI and 
processed by BJS to link each crime-reporting 
entity to a local government. For the 2012 
JAG, local crime data from 2001 through 2010 
were used.

The sum of the UCR violent crimes for all 
local governments within a state for a given 
year will not equal the estimated crime total 
reported for that state published by the FBI. 
These state-level estimates are based on 
crimes reported by all state, local, and 
special district law enforcement agencies 
within a state, plus an imputation adjustment 
to account for non-reporting agencies and 
agencies reporting less than 12 months of data 
for the year. These imputed values do not 
appear on the electronic data file provided to 
BJS and are not used in the local award 
calculations.

Allocations to U.S. territories
--------------------------------

Puerto Rico was the only territory receiving 
an initial allocation larger than the minimum 
amount, and also the only territory for which 
violent crime data were available. The JAG 
calculations for the other territories were 
based solely on population data. Because the 
other territories have relatively small 
populations (none exceeding 184,000), it is 
unlikely the inclusion of crime data would 
have changed their minimum status.
 
The current JAG legislation specifies that 40% 
of the total allocation for Puerto Rico be set 
aside for local awards; as of 2012, however, 
the local-level UCR data provided by the FBI 
did not include any crime data for local 
jurisdictions in Puerto Rico. Therefore, the 
local government JAG program allocation in 
Puerto Rico was $0. 

Sources of additional information
----------------------------------

For more information on the legal foundation 
of the allocation formula, please see 42 USC 
sec. 3754 and 42 USC sec. 3755.

The Edward Byrne Memorial Justice Assistance 
Grant (JAG) Program was established to 
streamline justice funding and grant 
administration. Administered by the Bureau of 
Justice Assistance (BJA), the JAG program 
allows states, tribes, and local governments 
to support a broad range of activities to 
prevent and control crime based on local needs 
and conditions. JAG consolidates the previous 
Byrne Formula and Local Law Enforcement Block 
Grant (LLEBG) Programs. More information about 
the JAG program and application process can be 
found on the BJA website at 
http://www.bja.gov. 

**********************************
The Bureau of Justice Statistics is the 
statistical agency 
of the U.S. Department of Justice. James P. 
Lynch is the 
director.

This technical report was prepared by Alexia 
D. Cooper. 
Matt Durose verified the report. Morgan Young 
edited the 
report, and Tina Dorsey produced the report, 
under the 
supervision of Doris J. James.

September 2012, NCJ 239232
***********************************

****************************************
Office of Justice Programs
Innovation • Partnerships • Safer 
Neighborhoods
www.ojp.usdoj.gov
*****************************************

8/28/2012/JER/10:30am



