U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Programs
Bureau of Justice Statistics

-------------------------------------------------------
This file is text only without graphics and many of the
tables. A Zip archive of the tables in this report in
spreadsheet format (.csv) and the full report including
tables and graphics in .pdf format are available on BJS
website at: 
http://www.bjs.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbdetail&iid=5089

This report is one in a series. More recent editions 
may be available. To view a list of all in the series 
go to http://bjs.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbse&sid=71
-------------------------------------------------------

*****************
Technical Report
*****************

Justice Assistance Grant (JAG) Program, 2014

Alexia D. Cooper, Ph.D., and Kimberly Martin, Ph.D., BJS 
Statisticians

**************
Introduction
**************

As part of the Consolidated Appropriations Act of 2005, the 108th 
Congress merged the discretionary Edward Byrne Memorial Grant 
Program with the formula-based Local Law Enforcement Block Grant 
(LLEBG) program to establish the Edward Byrne Memorial Justice 
Assistance Grant (JAG) program. The Bureau of Justice Assistance 
(BJA) administers the JAG program, and the Bureau of Justice 
Statistics (BJS) calculates the JAG formula-based award amounts 
using specifications outlined in the legislation.

JAG awards may be used for the following seven purposes--

* law enforcement

* prosecution and courts

* prevention and education

* corrections and community corrections

* drug treatment

* planning, evaluation, and technology improvement

* crime victim and witness programs.
A total of $290,928,252 was available for the 2014 JAG awards 
(figure 1). This report describes the steps in the JAG award 
calculation process and presents summary results of the 2014 JAG 
formula calculation.

********************************************************

************
HIGHLIGHTS
************

* The total allocation for the 2014 JAG funding was approximately 
$290.9 million, of which $283.8 million went to states and $7.2 
million to territories and the District of Columbia. 

* The five states with the largest total allocations included 
California ($32.2 million), Texas ($22.2 million), Florida ($18.5 
million), New York ($16.5 million), and Illinois ($11.4 million). 

* A total of 1,593 local governments were eligible for awards, 
either directly or through a joint award with other governments 
within their county. The five local governments eligible to receive 
the largest awards included New York City ($4.4 million), Chicago 
($2.3 million), Philadelphia ($1.8 million), Houston ($1.8 million), 
and Los Angeles ($1.6 million).

* Three states had 100 or more local governments eligible to receive 
award funds either directly or through a shared award: California 
(222), Florida (124), and Texas (100).
********************************************************

********************
Overview of process
********************

Once the fiscal year JAG allocation has been determined, BJS begins 
its four-step award calculation process: 

* Computing an initial allocation for each state and territory, 
based on its share of the nation’s violent crime and population 
(weighted equally).

* Reviewing the initial allocation amount to determine if it is less 
than the minimum (de minimus) award amount defined in the JAG 
legislation (0.25% of the total). If this is the case, the state or 
territory is funded at the minimum level, and the funds required for 
this are deducted from the overall pool of funds. Each of the 
remaining states receives the minimum award plus an additional 
amount based on its share of violent crime and population.

* Dividing each state’s final amount at a rate of 60% for state 
governments and 40% for local governments.

* Determining local award allocations, which are based on a 
jurisdiction’s proportion of the state’s 3-year violent crime 
average. If a local jurisdiction’s calculated award is less than 
$10,000, the funds are returned to the state to distribute. If the 
calculated local award is $10,000 or more, then the local government 
is eligible to apply for an award.

The JAG award calculation process, with examples, is explained in 
more detail below.

*********************
The four-step award 
calculation process
*********************

Step 1: Initial allocation to states and territories 
[Legislative mandate: 42 USC § 3755 (a)(1)]
*********************************************

Based on the congressional appropriation for the 2014 JAG program, 
BJS calculates the initial allocation amounts for the 50 states and 
U.S. territories. Using the congressionally established formula, BJS 
allocates half of the available funds based on a state’s or 
territory’s share of the nation’s violent crime and half of the 
funds based on its share of the nation’s population. The most recent 
3-year period of official violent crime data for states and 
territories from the FBI covered the period between 2010 and 2012. 
The population shares for the 50 states, the District of Columbia, 
and U.S. territories were determined based on the results of the 
2013 midyear population estimates published by the U.S. Census 
Bureau.

Examples--

* California accounts for 12.96% of the nation’s total violent crime 
and 11.97% of the nation’s total population. Therefore, California’s 
initial allocation equals 12.96% of $145,464,126 (half of 
$290,928,252) plus 11.97% of $145,464,126, totaling $36,277,474.

* Vermont accounts for 0.07% of the nation’s total violent crime and 
0.20% of the nation’s total population. Vermont’s initial allocation 
is 0.07% of $145,464,126 plus 0.20% of $145,464,126, totaling 
$388,388.

Step 2: De minimus awards 
***************************

[Legislative mandate: 42 USC § 3755 (a)(2)]

The JAG legislation requires that each state or territory be awarded 
a minimum allocation equal to 0.25% of the total JAG allocation 
($727,321 in 2014), regardless of its population or crime average. 
If a state or territory’s initial allocation based on crime and 
population is less than the minimum amount, that state or territory 
receives the minimum award amount as its total JAG allocation. If a 
state or territory’s initial allocation exceeds the minimum amount, 
it receives the minimum award plus the amount based on its share of 
the violent crime and population. 

Congress has made one exception to this rule: American Samoa and the 
Northern Mariana Islands are required to split one minimum award, 
with American Samoa receiving 67% ($487,305) and the Northern 
Mariana Islands receiving 33% ($240,016). (See Methodology for more 
information on allocation procedures for the territories.) 

In 2014, four states (North Dakota, South Dakota, Vermont, and 
Wyoming) and four U.S. territories (American Samoa, Guam, Northern 
Mariana Islands, and the Virgin Islands) received only the minimum 
award as their total JAG allocation. The remainder of the states, 
the District of Columbia, and Puerto Rico were all awarded the 
minimum award plus an additional allocation. A total of $40,002,635 
was allocated for minimum awards under the 2014 JAG program.

Examples--

* Vermont’s initial allocation of $388,388 is less than the minimum 
value, so Vermont’s total JAG allocation is the minimum amount of 
$727,321.

* California’s initial allocation of $36,277,474 exceeds the minimum 
value, so California receives the minimum plus an award based on its 
share of total violent crime and population.

To compute the additional amounts, the crime and population data for 
states and territories receiving only the minimum award are removed 
from the pool, and the remaining JAG funds are reallocated to the 
rest of the states based on violent crime and population as in Step 
1.

Examples--

* Vermont receives only the minimum award, so its crime and 
population data are removed from the pool.

* After removing the crime and population data for the states and 
U.S. territories receiving only the minimum award, California 
accounts for 13.03% of violent crime and 12.09% of the nation’s 
population. California’s new JAG allocation is equal to $16,345,555 
(13.03% of half of $250.9 million) plus $15,172,921 (12.09% of half 
of $250.9 million), plus the minimum amount of $727,321. These three 
components equal $32,245,797. ($250.9 million equals the original 
$290.9 million total JAG 2014 award allocation minus the $40.0 
million JAG 2014 minimum allocation.)

Step 3: 60%/40% split to state 
and local governments 
**************************************

[Legislative mandate: 42 USC § 3755 (b)]

Except for the U.S. territories and the District of Columbia, 60% of 
the total allocation to a state is retained by the state government, 
and 40% is set aside to be allocated to local governments.

Examples--

* California’s state government retains 60% of $32,245,797, or 
$19,347,478. The remaining 40%, or $12,898,319, is set aside for 
distribution to local governments in California.

* Vermont’s state government retains 60% of the minimum award of 
$727,321, or $436,392. The remaining 40%, or $290,928, is set aside 
for distribution to local governments in Vermont.

Step 4: Determining local 
award allocations 
***************************

[Legislative mandate: 42 USC § 3755 (c)(d)(e)(f)(g)(h)]

In order to determine local awards, BJS determines which 
jurisdictions should be included in the calculation of the 3-year 
violent crime averages on which local awards are based. These crime 
averages are computed using data reported to the FBI’s Uniform Crime 
Reporting (UCR) Program. To be eligible, a jurisdiction must have 
provided to the UCR a count of the number of Part I violent crimes 
known to law enforcement each year for a minimum of 3 years in the 
last 10 years. Jurisdictions that have not met the reporting 
requirements are excluded from the calculations and are not eligible 
to receive an award.

The 10-year limit on the age of UCR data used for JAG local award 
calculations was applied for the first time during the 2009 Recovery 
Act.***Footnote 1 Before 2009, all years of the FBI’s UCR data could 
be used to meet the 3-year reporting requirement. Although the 10-
year limit was stipulated in the 2005 legislation that created the 
JAG program, it was not implemented until 2009 per the “Transitional 
Rule.” See 42 USC § 3755 (d)(2)(B).*** For the 2010 JAG, the 10-year 
window for eligible UCR data was waived because some agencies were 
having difficulty meeting the new requirements. Instead, all of the 
FBI’s UCR data dating back to 1991 were used to meet the 3-year 
reporting requirement. Agencies that used this waiver signed an 
agreement indicating they would begin to report timely data on Part 
I violent crimes to the FBI starting no later than the end of FY 
2010 (September 30, 2010). All agencies that used the waiver in 2010 
reported updated UCR data by the required deadline, making it 
unnecessary to authorize any further waivers of the 10-year rule. 
The 10-year limit was applied for the first time in FY 2012 and has 
been in effect for each year since then.

After determining which law enforcement agencies have the 3 years of 
reported violent crime data required to be included in the 
calculations, BJS computes the average number of violent crimes 
reported by all law enforcement agencies in each jurisdiction (e.g., 
local government) for the 3 most recent years in which they reported 
data. 

Since awards to local governments are based on their share of all 
violent crimes reported by the law enforcement agencies in their 
state, BJS computes the sum of these averages within each state to 
determine the jurisdiction’s share of the total local award 
allocation. 

Examples--

* California has $12.9 million set aside for local awards. The 3-
year violent crime averages reported by local jurisdictions in 
California equal 157,358 crimes. Dividing the $12.9 million set 
aside by the state crime total results in the number of dollars 
available for each crime: $12,898,319 divided by 157,358 crimes 
equals $81.97 per crime. Therefore, a local California jurisdiction 
needs a 3-year violent crime average of at least 122.00 violent 
crimes ($10,000 divided by $81.97) to be eligible for a direct 
award.

* Vermont has $290,928 set aside for local governments. The sum of 
3-year average violent crimes reported is 639.7. The dollars per 
crime ratio in Vermont equals $290,928 divided by 639.7 crimes, or 
$454.81 per crime (after rounding). The threshold is 21.99 violent 
crimes ($10,000 divided by $454.81) to be eligible for a direct 
award.

BJS then calculates the initial amount of each local award. Each 
local award amount is equal to the product of a local jurisdiction’s 
3-year violent crime average and the “dollars per crime” ratio for 
the state in which it is located. By statute, the minimum award a 
local jurisdiction may receive is $10,000. Jurisdictions that are 
eligible for an initial award greater than or equal to $10,000 are 
eligible to apply to receive the funds for their own use. If the 
initial award is less than $10,000, the award funds are transferred 
to the state administering agency for distribution to the state 
police or any units of local government that were ineligible for a 
direct award greater than or equal to $10,000. (See “Pass-through 
requirement” [42 USC § 3755 (c)]).

Examples--

* The city of Los Angeles, California, has a 3-year average of 
20,025.33 violent crimes, or 12.7% of all violent crimes reported by 
potentially eligible jurisdictions in California. Los Angeles 
exceeds the state threshold of 122.00 violent crimes. It is eligible 
for 12.7% of the $12.9 million set aside for local governments in 
California, or about $1,641,440 (20,025.33 multiplied by $81.97).

* The city of Vergennes, Vermont, has a 3-year average of 4.00 
violent crimes. This does not meet the state threshold of 21.99, so 
it is ineligible for a direct JAG award. Its crimes, less than 1% of 
all violent crimes in Vermont, account for about $1,819 of award 
funds. These funds are transferred to the state for redistribution.

*****************************************
Results of the calculations for the 2014 
Justice Assistance Grant Program 
*****************************************

For the 2014 JAG awards, approximately $283.8 million of the $290.9 
million available was allocated to the 50 states, with the remainder 
allocated to the District of Columbia and U.S. territories (table 
1). As required by the legislation, 40% of this amount ($113.5 
million) was initially reserved for local governments. A total of 
1,593 local governments had law enforcement agencies that provided a 
sufficient number of reported crimes to the FBI to receive a JAG 
award—either directly or through a joint award with other 
governments within their county—and were eligible for a collective 
total of $92.4 million. The balance of unawarded local allocations 
($21.1 million) was returned to state governments for redistribution 
to state law enforcement agencies and local governments.

Three states had 100 or more local governments eligible to receive 
award funds either directly or through a shared award: California 
(222), Florida (124), and Texas (100). The five local governments 
eligible to receive the largest awards included New York City ($4.4 
million), Chicago ($2.3 million), Philadelphia ($1.8 million), 
Houston ($1.8 million), and Los Angeles ($1.6 million).

In addition, the District of Columbia was eligible for $1.8 million 
and Puerto Rico was eligible for $3.2 million (table 2). Guam and 
the U.S. Virgin Islands were each eligible for the minimum award of 
$727,321. American Samoa ($487,305) and the Northern Mariana Islands 
($240,016) split one minimum award. 

***************************
Additional JAG provisions
***************************

Disparate jurisdictions and joint allocations 

[Legislative mandate: 42 USC § 3755 (d)(3)(4)]

In some cases, as defined by the legislation, a disparity may exist 
between the funding eligibility of a county and associated 
municipalities. Three different types of disparities may exist.

The first type is a zero-county disparity. This situation exists 
when one or more municipalities within a county are eligible for a 
direct award and the county is not, yet the county is responsible 
for providing criminal justice services (such as prosecution and 
incarceration) for the municipality. In this case, the county is 
entitled to part of the municipality’s award because it shares in 
the cost of criminal justice operations, although it may not report 
crime data to the FBI. This is the most common type of disparity.

Example--

Decatur, Illinois, is eligible for an award of $37,653. Macon 
County, Illinois (which includes the city of Decatur), is not 
eligible for a direct award, but it provides criminal justice 
services to Decatur. In this case, Macon County and Decatur are 
considered zero-county disparate. Decatur must share its award funds 
with Macon County as mutually agreed upon.

A second type of disparity exists when both a county and a 
municipality within that county qualify for a direct award, yet the 
award amount for the municipality exceeds 150% of the county’s award 
amount.

Example--

* Bibb County, Georgia, is eligible for a direct award of $20,460. 
The city of Macon in Bibb County is eligible for a direct award of 
$57,794. Macon’s award amount is more than 150% of Bibb County’s 
award amount. Consequently, the two governments’ awards ($78,254) 
are pooled together and shared as mutually agreed upon.

The third type of disparity occurs when a county and multiple 
municipalities within that county are all eligible for direct 
awards, but the sum of the awards for the individual municipalities 
exceeds 400% of the county’s award amount. 

Example--

* San Mateo County, California, is eligible for a direct award of 
$20,301. The cities of Daly ($17,760), Redwood ($15,273), San Mateo 
($21,831), South San Francisco ($10,956), and East Palo Alto 
($23,689) are also eligible for direct awards. The five cities’ 
awards sum to $89,509. This amount is more than 400% of San Mateo 
County’s direct award amount of $20,301. Consequently, the funds 
from all of the jurisdictions ($109,810) are pooled together and 
shared among the six governments as mutually agreed upon.

These three types of disparity are examined in order. If a 
municipality is found to be disparate in one of these three ways, 
its award is not included in calculations to test other disparity 
situations. For instance, if a municipality is found to be 150% 
disparate with the county, its award is set aside, and the rest of 
the municipalities within the same county are checked for 400% 
disparity. If no other disparity is found, the single municipality 
and county share the sum of their two awards. However, it is 
possible for a county to have both a 150% disparity and a 400% 
disparity simultaneously. For instance, counties can have one or 
more municipalities whose individual awards are more than 150% of 
the county’s award and other municipalities whose combined award is 
more than 400% of the county’s award.

Examples--

* Maricopa County, Arizona, is eligible for an award of $85,768. The 
cities of Avondale ($20,828), Chandler ($61,439), Glendale 
($98,977), Goodyear ($10,598), Mesa ($166,836), Peoria ($27,002), 
Phoenix ($784,816), Scottsdale ($33,238), Tempe ($75,078), Surprise 
(12,257), and Gilbert ($18,278) (all located in Maricopa County) are 
also eligible for awards. The awards for Mesa ($166,836) and Phoenix 
($784,816) are both individually more than 150% of Maricopa County’s 
award, so they will be pooled together with the county’s award. The 
other nine cities’ awards sum to $357,695. This summed amount is 
more than 400% of Maricopa County’s direct award of $85,768. As a 
result, the funds for all twelve jurisdictions ($1,395,115) are 
pooled together and must be shared.

* Arapahoe County, Colorado, is eligible for an award of $24,354. 
The cities of Englewood ($10,080), Centennial ($17,622), and Aurora 
($158,522), are also eligible for awards. The award amount for the 
city of Aurora is more than 150% of the award amount for Arapahoe 
County. This jurisdiction is disparate with the county, and the two 
jurisdictions will share the combined total of $182,876. The 
remaining cites of Englewood and Centennial are individually less 
than 150% of the award amount for Arapahoe County, and the two 
awards combined are less than 400% of the County’s award. 
Accordingly, the awards for these two cities remain separate.

For disparate situations, regardless of the type, the total of all 
award funds of the separate units of local governments (counties and 
municipalities) are pooled together and split among the units of 
local government as agreed upon by the affected jurisdictions. To 
qualify for payment, the disparate units of local government must 
submit a joint application for the aggregated funds.

Pass-through requirement
***************************
 
[Legislative mandate: 42 USC § 3755]

According to the JAG legislation, states may only retain award 
amounts that bear the same ratio of “(A) total expenditures on 
criminal justice by the state government in the most recently 
completed fiscal year to (B) the total expenditure on criminal 
justice by the state government and units of local government within 
the state in such year.”

The determination of proportionate criminal justice spending by 
state and local governments is referred to as the variable pass-
through (VPT) process under JAG. The VPT process identifies the 
amounts each state must pass down to local governments within the 
state.

During 2013, the U.S. Census Bureau finished compiling current 
criminal justice expenditure information from FY 2010 to calculate 
updated VPT amounts. Several sources of data were used to calculate 
the percentages, including initial expenditure data from the 2010 
Annual Survey of State and Local Government Finances conducted by 
the U.S. Census Bureau 
(http://www.census.gov//govs/local/historical_data_2010.html) and 
federal justice grant data from the Federal Award Assistance Data 
System (http://www.census.gov/govs/www/faads.html). Source data were 
assigned to state and local governments. Intergovernmental 
expenditures and grants were removed from the total justice 
expenditure for the appropriate type of government. The resulting 
expenditure data were then used to calculate the VPT percentages by 
comparing the total justice expenditures of all local governments in 
a state to the expenditures of the state government itself. A simple 
percentage resulted, which represented the combined local government 
expenditures within the state divided by the total state criminal 
justice expenditures. These updated VPT percentages were used for 
the 2014 JAG program and can be found on the BJA website at 
https://www.bja.gov/. 

***********************************************
Sex Offender Registration and Notification Act 
(SORNA) penalty and compliant bonus funds 
************************************************

[Legislative mandate: 42 USC § 16925 (a)(c)]
Penalty
**********

The Sex Offender Registration and Notification Act (SORNA), Title I 
of the Adam Walsh Child Protection and Safety Act of 2006 required 
that the 50 states, the District of Columbia, the five principal 
U.S. territories, and some federally recognized tribes substantially 
implement SORNA by July 27, 2009. Two full-year deadline extensions 
were provided, and a final statutory deadline of July 27, 2011, was 
established. SORNA mandated a 10% reduction in JAG funding for any 
jurisdictions that failed to substantially implement SORNA by the 
deadline. For those jurisdictions that fail to meet this deadline, 
the SORNA penalty is calculated by subtracting 10% from the state 
government’s allocation (60% of the total award), after deducting 
the mandatory VPT that states are required to send to local 
governments. The penalty applies to the portion of JAG funding that 
is returned to the state to be shared with local governments that 
were not eligible for a direct JAG award (less than $10,000 
jurisdictions). 

The penalty does not apply to the VPT, which is the portion of JAG 
funds awarded directly to local law enforcement, as the state cannot 
retain any portion of that award. Penalizing local agencies would 
also seriously undermine the purpose of the statute, since doing so 
would be detrimental to local law enforcement efforts, including the 
investigation, prosecution, and apprehension of sex offenders. An 
example of how the SORNA penalty was assessed can be found in the 
BJA’s JAG Frequently Asked Questions on the BJA website at 
https://www.bja.gov/Funding/JAGFAQ.pdf.

In FY 2014, a total of 36 states and U.S. territories were not 
compliant with SORNA’s requirements. As a result, these 
jurisdictions suffered a combined $6,474,445 reduction to their FY 
2014 Byrne JAG award. These jurisdictions were allowed to apply to 
reallocate the 10% penalty to promote SORNA implementation. Seven 
states were SORNA noncompliant and did not apply to reallocate the 
penalty. Per the SORNA legislation, the $1,137,459 withheld from 
these jurisdictions will be reallocated to jurisdictions that did 
substantially implement SORNA [(42 USC § 16925 (c)]. These funds 
will be reallocated to compliant states in the FY 2015 JAG award as 
described below.

Bonus funds from FY 2013
*************************

Per 42 USC § 16925(c), any state or territory that has substantially 
implemented SORNA during the current fiscal year, as determined by 
the SMART Office, will be eligible to receive compliant bonus funds 
in addition to its JAG award for the following year. This bonus 
allocation is calculated based on SORNA penalty funds from 
nonimplementing states and territories during the current fiscal 
year. For example, any state that substantially implemented SORNA in 
FY 2013 would have bonus funds added to its FY 2014 state JAG award, 
comprised of SORNA penalty funds from nonimplementing states and 
territories in FY 2013. The amounts available for compliant bonus 
funds will vary from year to year, depending on the amount of SORNA 
penalty funds from the previous year. 

Bonus funds are allocated using the same general approach as the 
overall JAG award allocation calculations. First, an initial 
allocation is calculated for each eligible state and territory, 
based on its share of violent crime and population (weighted 
equally). Next, this initial allocation is reviewed to determine if 
it is less than the minimum award amount (defined as 0.25% of the 
total funds available). If this is the case, the state or territory 
is allocated 0.25% of the total funds available, and the funds 
required for this are deducted from the overall pool of funds. These 
states and territories are then removed from the calculations. Each 
of the remaining states receives the minimum award plus an 
additional amount based on its share of violent crime and population 
for the remaining states and territories.

For FY 2014, a total of $1,107,438 was available from the FY 2013 
SORNA reductions from the noncompliant states. These funds were 
distributed to the 19 states and territories that substantially 
implemented SORNA during the fiscal year. Of the 19 states eligible 
for bonus funds, Florida ($229,588) and Pennsylvania ($126,577) 
received the largest awards (table 3). Of the eligible U.S. 
territories, Guam received $2,769, the Northern Mariana Islands 
received $914, and the U.S. Virgin Islands received $2,769.(For 
additional information regarding the SORNA penalty and bonus funds, 
including implementation requirements and a list of states and 
territories that were impacted in FY 2014, contact the Office of Sex 
Offender Sentencing, Monitoring, Apprehending, Registering, and 
Tracking (SMART) Policy Advisor assigned to assist the jurisdiction 
of interest: http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/smart/sorna.htm.)

******************************************
Prison Rape Elimination Act (PREA) 
certification reduction and bonus funds
******************************************

[Legislative mandate: 42 USC § 15607 (e)]

Reduction
************

The PREA statute provides that a state whose governor does not 
certify full compliance with the DOJ National Standards to Prevent, 
Detect, and Respond to Prison Rape, 42 U.S.C. 15607(e), is subject 
to the loss of 5% of any DOJ grant funds that it would otherwise 
receive for prison purposes, unless the governor submits to the 
Attorney General an assurance that such 5% will be used only to 
enable the state to adopt and achieve full compliance with the 
National PREA Standards in future years.

For those without a certification of full compliance, the PREA 
reduction was calculated by subtracting 5% from the state 
government’s allocation (60% of the total award), after deducting 
the VPT that states are required to send to local governments. The 
reduction applies to the portion of JAG funding returned to the 
state to be shared with local governments that were not eligible for 
a direct JAG award (less than $10,000 jurisdictions). 

The reduction does not apply to the VPT, which is the portion of JAG 
funds awarded directly to local law enforcement, as the state cannot 
retain any portion of that award. An example of how the PREA 
reduction was assessed can be found in the BJA’s JAG Program 
Frequently Asked Questions regarding the PREA certification 
requirement and 5% reduction FAQ located on the BJA website at 
https://www.bja.gov/Programs/JAG-PREA-FAQ.pdf.

For FY 2014, a total of 54 states and U.S. territories were not 
compliant with PREA requirements (New Jersey and New Hampshire were 
fully certified). As a result, these jurisdictions suffered a 
combined $4,653,215 reduction to their FY 2014 Byrne JAG award. 
These jurisdictions were allowed to apply to reallocate the 5% 
reduction to achieve compliance with PREA standards and become 
certified. A total of seven states and U.S. territories were PREA 
noncompliant and did not apply to reallocate the reduction. Per the 
PREA legislation, the $753,573 withheld from these jurisdictions 
were reallocated to jurisdictions that either were certified or were 
working to achieve certification. These funds were allocated to 
compliant states and territories as described below.

Bonus funds
************

PREA bonus funds are allocated using the same general approach as 
the overall JAG award allocation calculations. First, an initial 
allocation is calculated for each eligible state and territory, 
based on its share of violent crime and population (weighted 
equally). Next, the initial allocation is reviewed to determine if 
it is less than the minimum award amount (0.25% of the total funds 
available). If this is the case, the state or territory is allocated 
0.25% of the total funds available, and the funds required for this 
are deducted from the overall pool of funds. These states and 
territories are then removed from the calculations. Each of the 
remaining states receives the minimum award plus an additional 
amount based on its share of violent crime and population for the 
remaining states and territories.

For the FY 2014 JAG awards, a total of $753,573 was available from 
PREA reductions from the seven noncompliant states and territories. 
These funds were distributed to the 44 states, 4 territories, and 
the District of Columbia that were PREA certified or were working to 
become certified. Of the 44 states eligible for bonus funds, 
California ($106,610) and New York ($54,143) received the largest 
awards (table 4). Of the eligible U.S. territories, Puerto Rico 
($10,112) received the largest bonus award. (For additional 
information regarding the PREA reduction and bonus funds, including 
implementation requirements and a list of states and U.S. 
territories that were impacted in FY 2014, contact the PREA 
Management Office at PREACompliance@usdoj.gov.) 

*****************************
Maximum allocation to local 
units of government 
*****************************

[Legislative mandate: 42 USC § 3755 (e)(1)]

According to the legislation, units of local government may not 
receive a JAG award that “exceeds such unit’s total expenditures on 
criminal justice services for the most recently completed fiscal 
year for which data are available.” Award amounts in excess of total 
expenditures “shall be allocated proportionately among units of 
local government whose allocations do not exceed their total 
expenditures on such services.” 

*************
Methodology
*************

The population data used to calculate state and U.S. territory 
Justice Assistance Grant (JAG) allocations are from the 2013 census 
estimates provided to the Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS) by the 
U.S. Census Bureau. The state-level violent crime data are estimates 
published by the FBI’s Uniform Crime Reporting (UCR) Program in the 
annual publication, Crime in the United States. For the 2014 JAG 
program, state-level crime data for the years 2010 through 2012 were 
used. 

The crime data used to calculate local JAG allocation amounts are 
also provided by the UCR program. Data for local jurisdictions are 
obtained in an electronic format directly from the FBI and processed 
by BJS to link each crime-reporting entity to a local government. 
For the 2014 JAG, local crime data from 2003 through 2012 were used.

The sum of the UCR violent crimes for all local governments within a 
state for a given year will not equal the estimated crime total 
reported for that state published by the FBI. These state-level 
estimates are based on crimes reported by all state, local, and 
special district law enforcement agencies within a state, plus an 
imputation adjustment to account for nonreporting agencies and 
agencies reporting less than 12 months of data. These imputed values 
do not appear on the electronic data file provided to BJS and are 
not used in the local award calculations.

Allocations to U.S. territories
*********************************

Puerto Rico was the only U.S. territory to receive an initial 
allocation larger than the minimum amount, and it was also the only 
territory for which violent crime data were available. The JAG 
calculations for the other territories were based solely on 
population data. Because the other territories have relatively small 
populations (none exceeding 161,000), it is unlikely the inclusion 
of crime data would have changed their minimum status. 

The current JAG legislation specifies that 40% of the total 
allocation for Puerto Rico be set aside for local awards. However, 
as of 2014, the local-level UCR data provided by the FBI did not 
include any crime data for local jurisdictions in Puerto Rico. 
Therefore, the local government JAG program allocation in Puerto 
Rico was $0.

Sources of additional information
**********************************

For more information on the legal foundation of the allocation 
formula, see 42 USC § 3754 and 42 USC § 3755.

The Edward Byrne Memorial Justice Assistance Grant (JAG ) Program 
was established to streamline justice funding and grant 
administration. Administered by the Bureau of Justice Assistance 
(BJA), the JAG program allows states, tribes, and local governments 
to support a broad range of activities to prevent and control crime 
based on local needs and conditions. JAG consolidates the previous 
Byrne Formula and Local Law Enforcement Block Grant (LLEBG) 
Programs. More information about the JAG program and application 
process can be found on the BJA website at http://www.bja.gov.

**************************************************
The Bureau of Justice Statistics of the U.S. Department of Justice 
is the principal federal agency responsible for measuring crime, 
criminal victimization, criminal offenders, victims of crime, 
correlates of crime, and the operation of criminal and civil justice 
systems at the federal, state, tribal, and local levels. BJS 
collects, analyzes, and disseminates reliable and valid statistics 
on crime and justice systems in the United States, supports 
improvements to state and local criminal justice information 
systems, and participates with national and international 
organizations to develop and recommend national standards for 
justice statistics. William J. Sabol is acting director.

This technical report was prepared by Alexia D. Cooper and Kimberly 
Martin. Christina Davis verified the report. 

Vanessa Curto and Jill Thomas edited the report. Tina Dorsey 
produced the report.

August 2014, NCJ 247137
***************************************************

**************************************************
Office of Justice Programs
Innovation * Partnerships * Safer Neighborhoods
www.ojp.usdoj.gov
**************************************************

**********************
8/6/2014/JER/11:30am
**********************

