U.S. Department of Justice 
Office of Justice Programs 
Bureau of Justice Statistics 

April 2011, NCJ 233811

Justice Assistance Grant (JAG) Program 2010

By Alexia D. Cooper and Brian A. Reaves, Ph.D., BJS
Statisticians 

----------------------------------------------------------
This file is text only without graphics and many of the
tables. A Zip archive of the tables in this report in
spreadsheet format (.csv) and the full report including
tables and graphics in .pdf format are available from
http://www.bjs.ojp.usdoj.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbse&sid=2412.

This report is one in a series. More recent editions may be
available. To view a list of all in the series go to
http://www.bjs.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbse&sid=71.
-----------------------------------------------------------
Introduction

As part of the Consolidated Appropriations Act of 2005, the
108th Congress merged the discretionary Edward Byrne Memorial
Grant Program with the formula-based Local Law Enforcement
Block Grant (LLEBG) program to establish the Edward Byrne
Memorial Justice Assistance Grant (JAG) program. The Bureau
of Justice Assistance (BJA) administers the JAG program, and
the Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS) calculates the JAG
formula-based award amounts using specifications outlined in
the legislation. 

The JAG program has seven purpose areas under which funds may
be awarded:    

* Law enforcement
* Prosecution and courts
* Prevention and education
* Corrections and community corrections
* Drug treatment
* Planning, evaluation, and technology improvement
* Crime victim and witness programs.

A total of $456,954,707 was available for the 2010 JAG
awards. This report describes the steps in the JAG award
calculation process and presents summary results of the 2010
JAG formula calculations.

-------------------------------------------------------------
HIGHLIGHTS

* The total 2010 allocation for the JAG funding was
approximately $457.0 million, of which $445.9 million went to
states and $11.1 million to territories and the District of
Columbia.  

* The five states eligible to receive the largest total state
allocation included California ($51.1 million), Texas ($33.9
million), Florida ($30.9 million), New York ($24.8 million),
and Illinois ($18.9 million).  

* 2,214 local governments were eligible for awards, either
directly or through a joint allocation with other governments
within their county. The five local governments eligible to
receive the largest awards included New York City ($6.4
million), Chicago ($4.9 million), Los Angeles ($3.1 million),
Philadelphia ($3.0 million), and Houston ($2.7 million).

* Three states had more than 100 local governments eligible
to receive awards either directly or through a joint
allocation, including California (272), Florida (152), and
Texas (145).
-------------------------------------------------------------
     
Overview of process

Once the fiscal year JAG allocation has been determined, BJS
begins its four-step award calculation process which consists
of--

* Computing an initial allocation for each state and
territory, based on its share of violent crime and population
(weighted equally). 

* Reviewing the initial allocation amount to determine if it
is less than the minimum (de minimus) award amount defined in
the JAG legislation (0.25% of the total). If this is the
case, the state or territory is funded at the minimum level,
and the funds required for this are deducted from the overall
pool of funds. Each of the remaining states receives the
minimum award plus an additional amount based on its share of
violent crime and population. 
 
* Dividing each state's final amount at a rate of 60% for
state governments and 40% for local governments.

* Determining local award allocations, which are based on
their proportion of the state's three-year violent crime
average. If a local award amount is less than $10,000, the
funds are returned to the state. If it is $10,000 or more,
then the local government is eligible to apply for an award.

The JAG award calculation process, with examples, is
explained in more detail below.

The four-step award calculation process

Step 1: Initial allocation to states and territories
[Legislative mandate: 42 USC 3755 (a)(1)]

Based on the congressional determination to appropriate
$457.0 million for the 2010 JAG program, BJS calculates the
initial allocation amounts for the 50 states and territories.
Using the congressionally established formula, BJS allocates
half of the available funds based on a state's or territory's
share of violent crime and half of the funds based on its
share of the population. The most recent three-year period of
official violent crime data for states and territories from
the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) covered the period
between 2006 and 2008. The population shares for states and
territories were determined based on 2009 population
estimates published by the U.S. Census Bureau.

Examples:

* California accounts for 13.34% of the nation's total
violent crime and 11.87% of its total population.
California's initial allocation is 13.34% of $228,477,354
(half of $456,954,707) plus 11.87% of $228,477,354, totaling
$57,596,839.

* Vermont accounts for 0.06% of total violent crime and 0.20%
of total population. Vermont's initial allocation is 0.06% of
$228,477,354 plus 0.20% of $228,477,354, totaling $592,255. 

Step 2: De minimus awards 
[Legislative mandate: 42 USC 3755 (a)(2)]

The JAG legislation requires that each state or territory be
awarded a minimum allocation equal to 0.25% of the total JAG
allocation ($1,142,387 in 2010), regardless of its population
or crime average. If a state's or territory's initial
allocation based on crime and population is less than the
minimum amount, that state or territory receives the minimum
amount as its total JAG allocation. If a state's or
territory's initial allocation exceeds the minimum amount, it
receives the minimum award plus the amount based on its share
of the violent crime and population. A total of $62,831,272
was allocated for minimum awards in the 2010 JAG program. 

Congress made one exception to this rule: American Samoa and
the Northern Mariana Islands are required to split one
minimum award, with American Samoa receiving 67% ($765,399)
and the Northern Mariana Islands receiving 33% ($376,988).
(See Methodology for more information on allocation
procedures for the territories.) 

Examples:

* Vermont's initial allocation of $592,255 is less than the
minimum value, so Vermont's total JAG allocation will be the
minimum amount of $1,142,387.
 
* California's initial allocation of $57,596,839 exceeds the
minimum value, so California will receive the minimum plus an
award based on its share of total violent crime and
population.

To compute the additional amounts, the crime and population
data for states and territories receiving only the minimum
award are removed from the pool, and the remaining JAG funds
are reallocated to the rest of the states based on violent
crime and population as in Step 1. 

Examples:

* Vermont received only the minimum award, so its crime and
population data are removed from the pool. 

* After removing the crime and population data for the
minimum amounts for states and territories, California
accounts for 13.39% of the violent crime and 11.99% of the
population. Its new JAG allocation is equal to $26,384,282
(13.39% of one half of $394 million) plus $23,621,737 (11.99%
of one half of $394 million), plus the minimum amount of
$1,142,387.
These three components equal $51,148,405.

Step 3: 60/40 split to state and local governments 

[Legislative mandate: 42 USC 3755 (b)]

Except for the territories and the District of Columbia, 60%
of the total allocation to a state is retained by the state
government, and 40% is set aside to be allocated to local
governments.

Examples:

* California's state government retains 60% of $51,148,405,
or $30,689,043. The remaining 40%, or $20,459,362, is set
aside for distribution to local governments in California.

* Vermont's state government retains 60% of the minimum award
of $1,142,387, or $685,432. The remaining 40%, or $456,955,
is set aside for distribution to local governments in
Vermont.

Step 4: Determining local award allocations

[Legislative Mandate: 42 USC 3755 (c)(d)(e)(f)(g)(h)]

In order to determine local awards, it is first necessary to
determine which jurisdictions should be included in the
calculation of the three-year violent crime averages on which
local awards are based. These crime averages are computed
using data published by the FBI's Uniform Crime Reporting
(UCR) Program. To be eligible, a jurisdiction must have
provided to the UCR a count of the number of violent crimes
known to law enforcement each year for a minimum of three
years in the last ten. Jurisdictions that have not reported
data for at least three of the last ten years are excluded
from the calculations and cannot receive an award. 

For the 2010 JAG, the ten-year limit on the age of UCR data
was waived because some agencies had difficulty meeting the
new requirements. Instead, all years of UCR data provided to
BJS by the FBI could be used to meet the three-year reporting
requirement, as had been done previously under the
"Transitional Rule." (See 505(d)(2)(B).) This waiver was
given to the agencies that agreed to begin the timely
reporting of data on Part I violent crimes of the UCR to the
FBI starting no later than the end of federal Fiscal Year
2010 (September 30, 2010). The UCR data used for the 2010 JAG
included the 18-year period from 1991 through 2008. 

After determining which law enforcement agencies have the
three years of reported violent crime data required to be
included in the calculations, BJS computes the average number
of violent crimes reported by all law enforcement agencies in
each jurisdiction (e.g., local government) for the three most
recent years in which they reported data. Since awards to
local governments are based on their share of all violent
crimes reported by the law enforcement agencies in their
state, BJS computes the sum of these averages within each
state to determine the jurisdiction's share of the total
local award allocation local governments may receive. 

Examples:

* California has $20.5 million set aside for local awards.
The three-year violent crime averages reported by local
jurisdictions in California equal 187,835. Dividing the $20.5
million set aside by the state crime totals results in the
number of dollars available for each crime: $20.5
million/187,835 crimes = $108.92 per crime. Therefore, a
local California jurisdiction needs a three-year average of
at least 91.81 violent crimes ($10,000/$108.92) to be
eligible for an award.

* Vermont has $456,955 set aside for local governments. The
sum of three-year average violent crimes reported is 615.67.
The dollars per crime ratio in Vermont equals $456,955/615.67
crimes, or $742.21 per crime. The threshold is 13.47 violent
crimes ($10,000/$742.21) to be eligible for an award.

Finally, BJS calculates the initial amount of each local
award. Each local award amount is equal to the product of a
local jurisdiction's three-year violent crime average and the
"dollars per crime" ratio for the state in which it is
located. By statute, the minimum award a local jurisdiction
may receive is $10,000. Jurisdictions that are eligible for
an initial award greater than or equal to $10,000 are
eligible to apply to receive the funds for their own use. If
the initial award is less than $10,000, the award funds are
transferred to the state administering agency for
distribution to the state police and/or any units of local
government that were ineligible for a direct award greater
than or equal to $10,000. (See "Pass-through Requirement" [42
USC 3755 (c)] on page 5.)
     
Examples: 

* The city of Oakland, California, has a three-year average
of 7,703 violent crimes, or 4.1% of all violent crimes
reported by jurisdictions in California. Oakland exceeds the
state threshold of 91.81 violent crimes. It is eligible for
4.1% of the $20.5 million set-aside for local governments in
California, or about $839,000 (7,703 X $108.92).

* The city of Swanton, Vermont, has a three-year average of
2.67 violent crimes. This does not meet the state threshold
of 13.47, so it is ineligible for a JAG award. Its crime,
less than 1% of all violent crime in Vermont, accounts for
about $1,979 of award funds. These funds are transferred to
the state for redistribution.

Results of the calculations for the 2010 Justice Assistance
Grant Program 

For the 2010 JAG, approximately $445.9 million of the $457.0
million available was allocated to the 50 states (table 1)
with the remainder allocated to the District of Columbia and
the U.S. territories. As required by the legislation, 40% of
this amount ($178.4 million) was initially reserved for local
governments. A total of 2,214 local governments had law
enforcement agencies that provided a sufficient number of
reported crimes to the FBI to receive a JAG award and were
eligible for a collective total of $155.3 million. The
balance of unawarded local allocations ($23.1 million) was
returned to the state governments for redistribution to state
law enforcement agencies and local governments.

In addition, the District of Columbia was eligible for
$2,709,606 million and Puerto Rico was eligible for
$4,942,689 million (table 2). Guam and the U.S. Virgin
Islands were each eligible for the minimum award of
$1,142,387. American Samoa ($765,399) and the Northern
Mariana Islands ($376,988) split one minimum award.

Additional JAG provision

Pass-through requirement

[Legislative Mandate: 42 USC 3755  ]

According to the JAG legislation, states may only retain
award amounts that bear the same ratio of "(A) total
expenditures on criminal justice by the state government in
the most recently completed fiscal year to (B) the total
expenditure on criminal justice by the state government and
units of local government within the state in such year." 

After determining the amount spent on criminal justice
expenditures by the state government, the state may retain
that amount. The remainder of the funds are passed down to
the local governments within the state. These criminal
justice expenditure amounts are referred to as "variable
pass-through" data for the purpose of JAG awards. 

During 2009, the U.S. Census Bureau finished compiling
current criminal justice expenditure data in order to
determine updated variable pass-through amounts. These
pass-through amounts, based on data from 2006, were utilized
for the 2010 JAG program and can be found on the BJA website:
http://www.bja.gov. 

Disparate jurisdictions and joint allocations

[Legislative Mandate: 42 USC 3755 (d)(3)(4)]

In some cases, as defined by the legislation, a disparity may
exist between the funding eligibility of a county and
associated municipalities. There are three different types of
disparities that may exist. 

The first type is referred to as a zero-county disparity.
This situation exists when a municipality within a county is
eligible for a direct award and the county is not, yet the
county is responsible for providing criminal justice services
(such as prosecution and incarceration) for the municipality.
In this case, the county is entitled to part of the
municipality's award because although it may not report crime
data to the FBI, it shares in the cost of criminal justice
operations. 

Example:

* Decatur, Illinois, is eligible for an award of $85,140.
Macon County, Illinois (which includes the city of Decatur),
is not eligible for a direct award, but it provides criminal
justice services to Decatur. In this case, Macon County and
Decatur are considered zero-county disparate. Decatur must
share its award funds with Macon County as mutually agreed
upon.

* A second type of disparity exists when both a county and a
municipality within that county qualify for a direct award,
yet the award amount for the municipality exceeds 150% of the
county's award amount.

Example: 

Pierce County, Washington, is eligible for an direct award of
$178,681. The city of Tacoma in Pierce County is eligible for
a direct award of $317,782. Tacoma's award amount is more
than 150% of Pierce County's award amount. Consequently, the
two governments' awards ($496,463) are pooled together and
shared as mutually agreed upon.

The third type of disparity occurs when a county and multiple
municipalities within that county are all eligible for direct
awards, but the sum of the awards for the individual
municipalities exceeds 400% of the county's award amount.

Example:

* San Mateo County, California, is eligible for an direct
award of $24,798. The cities of Daly ($31,406), East Palo
Alto ($33,475), Redwood ($32,168), San Bruno ($12,962), San
Mateo ($35,981), and South San Francisco ($20,296) (all
located within San Mateo County) are also eligible for direct
awards. The six cities' awards sum to $166,288. This summed
amount is more than 400% of San Mateo County's direct award
amount of $24,798. Consequently, all of the funds ($191,086)
are pooled together and must be shared among the seven units
of local government as mutually agreed upon.

* These three types of disparity are examined in order, and
if a municipality is found to be disparate in one of these
three ways, its award is not included in calculations to test
other disparity situations. For instance, if a municipality
is found to be 150% disparate with the county, its award is
set aside, and the rest of the municipalities within the same
county are checked for 400% disparity. If no other disparity
is found, the single municipality and county share the sum of
their two awards. However, it is possible for a county to
have both a 150% disparity and a 400% disparity,
simultaneously. For instance, counties can have one or more
municipalities whose individual awards are more than 150% of
the county's award and other municipalities whose combined
award is more than 400% of the county's award.

Examples: 

* Rockingham County, New Hampshire, is eligible for an award
of $15,890. The cities of Derry Town ($33,910), Londonderry
($11,303), Portsmouth ($19,166), Salem ($23,589), and
Seabrook ($10,157) (all located in Rockingham County) are
also eligible for awards. The award for Derry Town is more
than 150% of Rockingham County's award, and therefore Derry's
award will be pooled with the county. The other four cities'
awards sum to $64,215. This summed amount is more than 400%
of Rockingham County's direct award of $15,890. Consequently,
all of the funds ($114,015) are pooled together and must be
shared.

* Deschutes County, Oregon, is eligible for an award of
$16,633. The cities of Bend ($29,782) and Redmond ($15,187),
both located in Deschutes County, are also eligible for
awards. These two award amounts sum to $44,969, which is less
than 400% of the county's award amount. Although no 400%
disparity exists, the award amount for the city of Bend is
more than 150% of the award amount for Deschutes County.
These two jurisdictions are disparate and will share $46,415,
the pooled amount of these two awards. The award for Redmond
remains separate.

For disparate situations, regardless of the type, the total
of all award funds of the separate units of local governments
(counties and municipalities) are pooled together and split
among the units of local government as agreed upon by the
affected jurisdictions. To qualify for payment, the disparate
units of local government must submit a joint application for
the aggregated funds.

Maximum allocation to local units of government

[Legislative Mandate: 42 USC 3755 (e)(1)]

According to the legislation, units of local government may
not receive a JAG award that "exceeds such unit's total
expenditures on criminal justice services for the most
recently completed fiscal year for which data are available."
Award amounts in excess of total expenditures "shall be
allocated proportionately among units of local government
whose allocations... do not exceed their total expenditures
on such services."  

Methodology

The population data used to calculate state and territory JAG
allocations are estimates for 2009 provided by the U.S.
Census Bureau. The state-level violent crime data used are
estimates published by the FBI's Uniform Crime Reporting
(UCR) Program in the annual publication Crime in the United
States. For the 2010 JAG program, state-level crime data for
the years 2006 through 2008 were used. 

The crime data used to calculate local JAG allocation amounts
are also provided by the UCR program. Data for local
jurisdictions are obtained in an electronic format directly
from the FBI and processed by BJS to link each
crime-reporting entity to a local government. For the 2010
JAG, local crime data from 1991 through 2008 were used.

The sum of the UCR violent crimes for all local governments
within a state for a given year will not equal the estimated
crime total reported for that state published by the FBI.
These state-level estimates are based on crimes reported by
all state, local, and special district law enforcement
agencies within a state, plus an imputation adjustment to
account for non-reporting agencies and agencies reporting
less than 12 months of data for the year. These imputed
values do not appear on the electronic data file provided to
BJS and are not used in the local award calculations.

Territory allocations

Puerto Rico was the only territory receiving an initial
allocation larger than the minimum amount, and also the only
territory for which violent crime data were available. The
JAG calculations for the other territories were based solely
on population data. Because the other territories have
relatively small populations (none exceeding 180,000), it is
unlikely the inclusion of crime data would have changed their
minimum status. 

The current JAG legislation specifies that 40% of the total
allocation for Puerto Rico be set aside for local awards;
however, as of 2010, the local-level UCR data provided by the
FBI did not include any crime data for local jurisdictions in
Puerto Rico. Therefore, the local government JAG program
allocation in Puerto Rico was $0.

Sources of additional information

For more information on the legal foundation of the
allocation formula, please see 42 USC sec. 3754 and 42 USC
sec. 3755.

The Edward Byrne Memorial Justice Assistance Grant (JAG)
Program was established to streamline justice funding and
grant administration. Administered by the Bureau of Justice
Assistance (BJA), the JAG program allows states, tribes, and
local governments to support a broad range of activities to
prevent and control crime based on local needs and
conditions. JAG consolidates the previous Byrne Formula and
Local Law Enforcement Block Grant (LLEBG) Programs. More
information about the JAG program and application process can
be found on the BJA website: http://www.bja.gov. 

-------------------------------------------------------------
Office of Justice Programs * Innovation * Partnerships *
Safer Neighborhoods * http://www.ojp.gov
--------------------------------------------------------

-------------------------------------------------------------
The Bureau of Justice Statistics is the statistical agency of
the U.S. Department of Justice. James P. Lynch is the
director.

This technical report was prepared by Alexia Cooper and Brian
Reaves. Josephine Palma and Sheri Simmons verified the
report. Vanessa Curto and Jill Thomas edited the report,
Barbara Quinn produced the report, and Jayne Robinson
prepared the report for final printing, under the supervision
of Doris J. James.

April 2011, NCJ 233811

This report in PDF and in ASCII and its related statistical
data and tables are available at the BJS website:
http://www.bjs.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbdetail&iid=2412.
-------------------------------------------------------------

4/7/2011/tld/2:30



                         