U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Programs
Bureau of Justice Statistics

March 2012, NCJ  237732

Justice Assistance Grant (JAG) Program 2011

Alexia D. Cooper, Ph.D., BJS Statistician
---------------------------------------------------
This file is text without graphics and many of the
tables. A Zip archive of the tables in this report in
spreadsheet format (.cvs) and the full report including
tables and graphs in .pdf format are available at:
http://www.bjs.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbdetail&iid=4237

This reports is one in series. More recent editions 
may be available. To view a list of all reports in the 
series go to http://www.bjs.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbse&sid-71
---------------------------------------------------

***********************************************     
Introduction

As part of the Consolidated Appropriations Act of 2005, the
108th Congress merged the discretionary Edward Byrne Memorial
Grant Program with the formula-based Local Law Enforcement
Block Grant (LLEBG) program to establish the Edward Byrne
Memorial Justice Assistance Grant (JAG) program. The Bureau
of Justice Assistance (BJA) administers the JAG program, and
the Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS) calculates the JAG
formula-based award amounts using specifications outlined in
the legislation. 

JAG awards may be used for the following seven purposes--
  
* law enforcement

* prosecution and courts

* prevention and education

* corrections and community 

* corrections

* drug treatment

* planning, evaluation, and technology improvement

* crime victim and witness programs.

A total of $368,268,838 was available for the 2011 JAG awards
(figure 1). This report describes the steps in the JAG award
calculation process and presents summary results of the 2011
JAG formula calculations.


****************************************************
Highlights

* The total 2011 allocation for the JAG funding was
approximately $368.3 million, of which $359.4 million went to
states and $8.9 million to territories and the District of
Columbia. 

* The five largest total state allocations included
California ($41.1 million), Texas ($27.8 million), Florida
($24.8 million), New York ($19.7 million), and Illinois
($15.2 million). 

* A total of 1,909 local governments were eligible for
awards, either directly or through a joint allocation with
other governments within their county. The five local
governments eligible to receive the largest awards included
New York City ($5.1 million), Chicago ($3.8 million), Los
Angeles ($2.4 million), Philadelphia ($2.4 million), and
Houston ($2.3 million).

* Three states had more than 100 local governments eligible
to receive award funds either directly or through a joint
allocation, including California (253), Florida (136), and
Texas (120).

*****************************************************

Overview of process

* Once the fiscal year JAG allocation has been determined,
BJS begins its four-step award calculation process:

* Computing an initial allocation for each state and
territory, based on its share of violent crime and population
(weighted equally).

* Reviewing the initial allocation amount to determine if it
is less than the minimum (de minimus) award amount defined in
the JAG legislation (0.25% of the total). If this is the
case, the state or territory is funded at the minimum level,
and the funds required for this are deducted from the overall
pool of funds. Each of the remaining states receives the
minimum award plus an additional amount based on its share of
violent crime and population.

* Dividing each state's final amount at a rate of 60% for
state governments and 40% for local governments.

* Determining local award allocations, which are based on
their proportion of the state's 3-year violent crime average.
If a local award amount is less than $10,000, the funds are
returned to the state. If it is $10,000 or more, then the
local government is eligible to apply for an award.

The JAG award calculation process, with examples, is
explained in more detail below.

The four-step award calculation process

Step 1: Initial allocation to states and territories

[Legislative mandate: 42 USC 3755 (a)(1))

Based on the congressional appropriation of $368.3 million
for the 2011 JAG program, BJS calculates the initial
allocation amounts for the 50 states and territories. Using
the congressionally established formula, BJS allocates half
of the available funds based on a state's or territory's
share of violent crime and half of the funds based on its
share of the nation's population. The most recent 3-year
period of official violent crime data for states and
territories from the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI)
covered the period between 2007 and 2009. The population
shares for the 50 states and Puerto Rico were based on the
2010 census conducted by the U.S. Census Bureau. The
remaining territories' population shares were based on the
2010 mid-year population estimates published by the U.S.
Census Bureau.

Examples:

* California accounts for 13.23% of the nation's total
violent crime and 11.91% of the nation's total population.
Therefore, California's initial allocation equals 13.23% of
$184,134,419 (half of $368,268,838) plus 11.91% of
$184,134,419, totaling $46,278,471.

* Vermont accounts for 0.06% of the nation's total violent
crime and 0.20% of the nation's total population. Vermont's
initial allocation is 0.06% of $184,134,419 plus 0.20% of
$184,134,419, totaling $478,286. 

Step 2: De minimus awards

[Legislative mandate: 42 USC 3755 (a)(2)]

The JAG legislation requires that each state or territory be
awarded a minimum allocation equal to 0.25% of the total JAG
allocation ($920,672 in 2011), regardless of its population
or crime average. If a state's or territory's initial
allocation based on crime and population is less than the
minimum amount, that state or territory receives the minimum
award amount as its total JAG allocation. If a state's or
territory's initial allocation exceeds the minimum amount, it
receives the minimum award plus the amount based on its share
of the violent crime and population. A total of $50,636,965
was allocated for minimum awards in the 2011 JAG program. 

Congress made one exception to this rule: American Samoa and
the Northern Mariana Islands are required to split one
minimum award, with American Samoa receiving 67% ($616,850)
and the Northern Mariana Islands receiving 33% ($303,822).
(See Methodology for more information on allocation
procedures for the territories.) 

Examples:

* Vermont's initial allocation of $478,286 is less than the
minimum value, so Vermont's total JAG allocation will be the
minimum amount of $920,672. 

* California's initial allocation of $46,278,471 exceeds the
minimum value, so California will receive the minimum plus an
award based on its share of total violent crime and
population.

To compute the additional amounts, the crime and population
data for states and territories receiving only the minimum
award are removed from the pool, and the remaining JAG funds
are reallocated to the rest of the states based on violent
crime and population as in Step 1. 

Examples:

* Vermont received only the minimum award, so its crime and
population data are removed from the pool. 

* After removing the crime and population data for the
minimum amounts for states and territories, California
accounts for 13.28% of violent crime and 12.03% of the
nation's population. California's new JAG allocation is equal
to $21,090,027 (13.28% of one half of $317.6 million) plus
$19,098,172 (12.03% of one half of $317.6 million), plus the
minimum amount of $920,672. These three components equal
$41,108,871. ($317.6 million equals the $368.3 million total
JAG 2011 award allocation minus the $50.6 million JAG 2011
minimum allocation.)

Step 3: 60/40 split to state and local governments 

[Legislative mandate: 42 USC 3755 (b)]

Except for the territories and the District of Columbia, 60%
of the total allocation to a state is retained by the state
government, and 40% is set aside to be allocated to local
governments.

Examples:

* California's state government retains 60% of $41,108,871,
or $24,665,323. The remaining 40%, or $16,443,548, is set
aside for distribution to local governments in California.

* Vermont's state government retains 60% of the minimum award
of $920,672, or $552,403. The remaining 40%, or $368,269, is
set aside for distribution to local governments in Vermont.

Step 4: Determining local award allocations

[Legislative Mandate: 42 USC 3755 (c)(d)(e)(f)(g)(h)]

In order to determine local awards, BJS determines which
jurisdictions should be included in the calculation of the
3-year violent crime averages on which local awards are
based. These crime averages are computed using data published
by the FBI's Uniform Crime Reporting (UCR) Program. To be
eligible, a jurisdiction must have provided to the UCR a
count of the number of violent crimes known to law
enforcement each year for a minimum of 3 years in the last
10. Jurisdictions that have not reported data for at least 3
of the last 10 years are excluded from the calculations and
cannot receive an award.

The 10-year limit on the age of UCR data that can be used for
JAG local award calculations was applied for the first time
during the 2009 Recovery Act.***Footnote 1For the 2010 JAG,
the 10-year window for eligible UCR data was waived because
some agencies were having difficulty meeting the new
requirements. Instead, all of the FBI's UCR data dating back
to 1991 were used to meet the 3-year reporting requirement.
Agencies that used this waiver signed an agreement indicating
they would begin to report timely data on Part I violent
crimes to the FBI starting no later than the end of federal
Fiscal Year 2010 (September 30, 2010). All agencies that used
the waiver in 2010 reported updated UCR data by the requried
deadline, making it unnecessary to authorize an additional
waiver of the 10-year rule in 2011.***  Previously, all years
of the FBI's UCR data could be used to meet the 3-year
reporting requirement. Although the 10-year limit was
stipulated in the 2005 legislation that created the JAG
program, it was not implemented until 2009 per the
"Transitional Rule." [See 42 USC 3755 (d)(2)(B).] The 10-year
limit was applied in FY 2011 and the UCR data used for the
2011 JAG award calculations included the 10-year period from
2000 to 2009.

After determining which law enforcement agencies have the 3
years of reported violent crime data required to be included
in the calculations, BJS computes the average number of
violent crimes reported by all law enforcement agencies in
each jurisdiction (e.g., local government) for the 3 most
recent years in which they reported data. 

Since awards to local governments are based on their share of
all violent crimes reported by the law enforcement agencies
in their state, BJS computes the sum of these averages within
each state to determine the jurisdiction's share of the total
local award allocation local governments may receive. 

Examples:

* California has $16.4 million set aside for local awards.
The 3-year violent crime averages reported by local
jurisdictions in California equal 181,216. Dividing the $16.4
million set aside by the state crime totals results in the
number of dollars available for each crime:
$16,443,548/181,216 crimes = $90.74 per crime. Therefore, a
local California jurisdiction needs a 3-year average of at
least 110.20 violent crimes ($10,000/$90.74) to be eligible
for an award.

* Vermont has $368,269 set aside for local governments. The
sum of 3-year average violent crimes reported is 603. The
dollars per crime ratio in Vermont equals $368,269/603
crimes, or $610.73 per crime. The threshold is 16.37 violent
crimes ($10,000/$610.73) to be eligible for an award.

Finally, BJS calculates the initial amount of each local
award. Each local award amount is equal to the product of a
local jurisdiction's 3-year violent crime average and the
"dollars per crime" ratio for the state in which it is
located. By statute, the minimum award a local jurisdiction
may receive is $10,000. Jurisdictions that are eligible for
an initial award greater than or equal to $10,000 are
eligible to apply to receive the funds for their own use. If
the initial award is less than $10,000, the award funds are
transferred to the state administering agency for
distribution to the state police or any units of local
government that were ineligible for a direct award greater
than or equal to $10,000. (See "Pass-through requirement" [42
USC 3755 (c)] on page 5.)

Examples: 

* The city of Oakland, California has a 3-year average of
7,434.33 violent crimes, or 4.1% of all violent crimes
reported by jurisdictions in California. Oakland exceeds the
state threshold of 110.20 violent crimes. It is eligible for
4.1% of the $16.4 million set aside for local governments in
California, or about $674,600 (7,434.33 X $90.74).

* The city of Swanton, Vermont, has a 3-year average of 3.00
violent crimes. This does not meet the state threshold of
16.37, so it is ineligible for a JAG award. Its crimes, less
than 1% of all violent crimes in Vermont, account for about
$1,832 of award funds. These funds are transferred to the
state for redistribution.

Results of the calculations for the 2011 Justice Assistance
Grant Program 

For the 2011 JAG, approximately $359.4 million of the $368.3
million available was allocated to the 50 states, with the
remainder allocated to the District of Columbia and U.S.
territories (table 1). As required by the legislation, 40% of
this amount ($143.8 million) was initially reserved for local
governments. A total of 1,909 local governments had law
enforcement agencies that provided a sufficient number of
reported crimes to the FBI to receive a JAG award and were
eligible for a collective total of $122.3 million. The
balance of unawarded local allocations ($21.5 million) was
returned to state governments for redistribution to state law
enforcement agencies and local governments.

In addition, the District of Columbia was eligible for $2.2
million and Puerto Rico was eligible for $3.9 million (table
2). Guam and the U.S. Virgin Islands were each eligible for
the minimum award of $920,672. American Samoa ($616,850) and
the Northern Mariana Islands ($303,822) split one minimum
award. 

Additional JAG provision

Pass-through requirement

[Legislative Mandate: 42 USC 3755  ]

According to the JAG legislation, states may only retain
award amounts that bear the same ratio of "(A) total
expenditures on criminal justice by the state government in
the most recently completed fiscal year to (B) the total
expenditure on criminal justice by the state government and
units of local government within the state in such year." 

After determining the amount spent on criminal justice
expenditures by the state government, the state may retain
that amount. The remainder of the funds are passed down to
the local governments within the state. These criminal
justice expenditure amounts are referred to as "variable
pass-through" data for the purpose of JAG awards. 

During 2009, the U.S. Census Bureau finished compiling
current criminal justice expenditure data in order to
determine updated variable pass-through amounts. These
pass-through amounts, based on data from 2006, were used for
the 2011 JAG program and can be found on the BJA website at
http://www.bja.gov.
 
Disparate jurisdictions and joint allocations

[Legislative Mandate: 42 USC 3755 (d)(3)(4)]

In some cases, as defined by the legislation, a disparity may
exist between the funding eligibility of a county and
associated municipalities. There are three different types of
disparities that may exist. 

The first type is referred to as a zero-county disparity.
This situation exists when one or more municipalities within
a county are eligible for a direct award and the county is
not, yet the county is responsible for providing criminal
justice services (such as prosecution and incarceration) for
the municipality. In this case, the county is entitled to
part of the municipality's award because it shares in the
cost of criminal justice operations, although it may not
report crime data to the FBI.

Example:

Decatur, Illinois, is eligible for an award of $67,170. Macon
County, Illinois, (which includes the city of Decatur) is not
eligible for a direct award, but it provides criminal justice
services to Decatur. In this case, Macon County and Decatur
are considered zero-county disparate. Decatur must share its
award funds with Macon County as mutually agreed upon.

A second type of disparity exists when both a county and a
municipality within that county qualify for a direct award,
yet the award amount for the municipality exceeds 150% of the
county's award amount.

Example: 

* Pierce County, Washington, is eligible for a direct award
of $146,220. The city of Tacoma in Pierce County is eligible
for a direct award of $255,429. Tacoma's award amount is more
than 150% of Pierce County's award amount. Consequently, the
two governments' awards ($401,649) are pooled together and
shared as mutually agreed upon.

The third type of disparity occurs when a county and multiple
municipalities within that county are all eligible for direct
awards, but the sum of the awards for the individual
municipalities exceeds 400% of the county's award amount. In
2011, there were no counties and municipalities that were
exclusively 400% disparate. The following example is taken
from the 2010 JAG calculations.

Example:

* In 2010, San Mateo County, California, was eligible for a
direct award of $24,798. The cities of Daly ($31,406), East
Palo Alto ($33,475), Redwood ($32,168), San Bruno ($12,962),
San Mateo ($35,981), and South San Francisco ($20,296) (all
located within San Mateo County) were also eligible for
direct awards. The six cities' awards summed to $166,288.
This summed amount was more than 400% of San Mateo County's
direct award amount of $24,798. Consequently, all of the
funds ($191,086) were pooled together and shared among the
seven units of local government as mutually agreed upon.

These three types of disparity are examined in order, and if
a municipality is found to be disparate in one of these three
ways, its award is not included in calculations to test other
disparity situations. For instance, if a municipality is
found to be 150% disparate with the county, its award is set
aside, and the rest of the municipalities within the same
county are checked for 400% disparity. If no other disparity
is found, the single municipality and county share the sum of
their two awards. However, it is possible for a county to
have both a 150% disparity and a 400% disparity
simultaneously. For instance, counties can have one or more
municipalities whose individual awards are more than 150% of
the county's award and other municipalities whose combined
award is more than 400% of the county's award.

Examples: 
                                                   
* Essex County, New Jersey, is eligible for an award of
$11,689. The cities and townships of Belleville ($13,413),
Bloomfield ($14,170), East Orange ($63,030), Irvington
($145,149), Montclair ($11,437), Newark ($322,590), Orange
City ($45,201), and West Orange ($10,764) (all located in
Essex County), are also eligible for awards. The awards for
East Orange City, Irvington Township, Newark, and Orange City
Township individually are more than 150% of Essex County's
award, and therefore will be pooled with the county. The
other four cities' awards sum to $49,784. This summed amount
is more than 400% of Essex County's direct award of $11,689.
As a result, all of the funds ($637,443) are pooled together
and must be shared.


* Calcasieu Parish, Louisiana, is eligible for an award of
$24,675. The cities of Lake Charles ($59,121) and Sulphur
($17,549), both located in Calcasieu Parish, are also
eligible for awards. These two award amounts sum to $76,670,
which is less than 400% of the county's award amount.
Although no 400% disparity exists, the award amount for the
city of Lake Charles is more than 150% of the award amount
for Calcasieu Parish. These two jurisdictions are disparate
and will share $83,796, the pooled amount of these two
awards. The award for Sulphur remains separate. 

For disparate situations, regardless of the type, the total
of all award funds of the separate units of local governments
(counties and municipalities) are pooled together and split
among the units of local government as agreed upon by the
affected jurisdictions. To qualify for payment, the disparate
units of local government must submit a joint application for
the aggregated funds.

Maximum allocation to local units of government

[Legislative Mandate: 42 USC 3755 (e)(1)]

According to the legislation, units of local government may
not receive a JAG award that "exceeds such unit's total
expenditures on criminal justice services for the most
recently completed fiscal year for which data are available."
Award amounts in excess of total expenditures "shall be
allocated proportionately among units of local government
whose allocations do not exceed their total expenditures on
such services." 

Methodology

The population data used to calculate state and territory JAG
allocations are from the 2010 census provided by the U.S.
Census Bureau. The state-level violent crime data are
estimates published by the FBI's Uniform Crime Reporting
(UCR) Program in the annual publication, Crime in the United
States. For the 2011 JAG program, state-level crime data for
the years 2007 through 2009 were used. 

The crime data used to calculate local JAG allocation amounts
are also provided by the UCR program. Data for local
jurisdictions are obtained in an electronic format directly
from the FBI and processed by BJS to link each
crime-reporting entity to a local government. For the 2011
JAG, local crime data from 2000 through 2009 were used.

The sum of the UCR violent crimes for all local governments
within a state for a given year will not equal the estimated
crime total reported for that state published by the FBI.
These state-level estimates are based on crimes reported by
all state, local, and special district law enforcement
agencies within a state, plus an imputation adjustment to
account for non-reporting agencies and agencies reporting
less than 12 months of data for the year. These imputed
values do not appear on the electronic data file provided to
BJS and are not used in the local award calculations.

Allocations to U.S. territories

Puerto Rico was the only territory receiving an initial
allocation larger than the minimum amount, and also the only
territory for which violent crime data were available. The
JAG calculations for the other territories were based solely
on population data. Because the other territories have
relatively small populations (none exceeding 181,000), it is
unlikely the inclusion of crime data would have changed their
minimum status. 

The current JAG legislation specifies that 40% of the total
allocation for Puerto Rico be set aside for local awards;
however, as of 2011, the local-level UCR data provided by the
FBI did not include any crime data for local jurisdictions in
Puerto Rico. Therefore, the local government JAG program
allocation in Puerto Rico was $0.

Sources of additional information

For more information on the legal foundation of the
allocation formula, please see 42 USC sec. 3754 and 42 USC
sec. 3755.

The Edward Byrne Memorial Justice Assistance Grant (JAG)
Program was established to streamline justice funding and
grant administration. Administered by the Bureau of Justice
Assistance (BJA), the JAG program allows states, tribes, and
local governments to support a broad range of activities to
prevent and control crime based on local needs and
conditions. JAG consolidates the previous Byrne Formula and
Local Law Enforcement Block Grant (LLEBG) Programs. More
information about the JAG program and application process can
be found on the BJA website at http://www.bja.gov. 

**************************************************

Office of Justice Programs * Innovation * Partnerships *
Safer Neighborhoods * http://www.ojp.gov


The Bureau of Justice Statistics is the statistical agency of
the U.S. Department of Justice. James P. Lynch is the
director.

This technical report was prepared by Alexia Cooper. Jessica
Rexroat verified the report. Catherine Bird, Vanessa Curto,
and Jill Thomas edited the report, and Tina Dorsey produced
the report, under the supervision of Doris J. James.

March 2012, NCJ 237732

The full text of each report is available in PDF and ASCII
formats on the BJS website at www.bjs.gov. Tables are also
available in PDF and CSV formats. Related datasets are made
available on the National Archive of Criminal Justice Data
website at
http://www.icpsr.umich.edu/icpsrweb/NACJD/index.jsp.

***************************************************

----------------------------------------
March 19, 2012/ JER. /11:04am
----------------------------------------
