U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Programs
Bureau of Justice Statistics

********************************************************
This file is text only without graphics and many of the
tables. A Zip archive of the tables in this report in
spreadsheet format (.csv) and the full report including
tables and graphics in .pdf format are available on BJS
website at: http://www.bjs.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbdetail&iid=5413

This report is one in a series. More recent editions 
may be available. To view a list of all in the series 
go to http://bjs.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbse&sid=71


*********************************************************

Technical Report

Justice Assistance Grant (JAG) Program, 2015

Alexia D. Cooper, Ph.D., and Shelley S. Hyland, Ph.D., 
BJS Statisticians

****************
Introduction
****************

As part of the Consolidated Appropriations Act of 2005, the 
108th Congress merged the discretionary Edward Byrne Memorial 
Grant Program with the formula-based Local Law Enforcement 
Block Grant program to establish the Edward Byrne Memorial 
Justice Assistance Grant (JAG) program. The Bureau of Justice 
Assistance (BJA) administers the JAG program, and the Bureau of 
Justice Statistics (BJS) calculates the JAG formula-based award 
amounts using specifications outlined in the legislation.

JAG awards may be used for the following seven purposes--

* law enforcement

* prosecution and courts

* prevention and education

* corrections and community corrections

* drug treatment

* planning, evaluation, and technology improvement

* crime victim and witness programs.

A total of $255,795,278 was available for the 2015 JAG awards 
(figure 1). This report describes the steps in the JAG award 
calculation process and presents summary results of the 2015 
JAG formula calculations.

*************************************************
*************
Highlights
**************
* The total allocation for the 2015 JAG funding was 
approximately $255.8 million, of which $249.5 million went to 
states and $6.3 million went to U.S. territories and the 
District of Columbia. 

* The five states with the largest total allocations included 
California ($28.4 million), Texas ($19.7 million), Florida 
($16.2 million), New York ($14.6 million), and Illinois ($9.9 
million). 

* A total of 1,408 local governments were eligible for awards, 
either directly or through a joint award with other governments 
within their county. The five local governments eligible to 
receive the largest awards included New York City ($4.0 
million), Chicago ($2.0 million), Philadelphia ($1.6 million), 
Houston ($1.6 million), and Los Angeles ($1.4 million).

* Two states had 100 or more local governments eligible to 
receive award funds either directly or through a shared award: 
California (214) and Florida (114).
*************************************************

*********************
Overview of process
*********************

Once the fiscal year JAG allocation has been determined, BJS 
begins its four-step award calculation process:

* Computing an initial allocation for each state and territory, 
based on its share of violent crime and population (weighted 
equally).

* Reviewing the initial allocation amount to determine if it is 
less than the minimum (de minimus) award amount defined in the 
JAG legislation (0.25% of the total). If this is the case, the 
state or territory is funded at the minimum level, and the 
funds required for this are deducted from the overall pool of 
funds. Each of the remaining states receives the minimum award 
plus an additional amount based on its share of violent crime 
and population.

* Dividing each state’s final amount at a rate of 60% for state 
governments and 40% for local governments.

* Determining local award allocations, which are based on a 
jurisdiction’s proportion of the state’s 3-year violent crime 
average. If a local jurisdiction’s calculated award is less 
than $10,000, the funds are returned to the state to 
distribute. If the calculated local award is $10,000 or more, 
then the local government is eligible to apply for an award.

****************************************
The four-step award calculation process
****************************************

Step 1: Initial allocation to states and territories

[Legislative mandate: 42 USC § 3755 (a)(1)]

Based on the congressional appropriation for the 2015 JAG 
program, BJS calculates the initial allocation amounts for the 
50 states and U.S. territories. Using the congressionally 
established formula, BJS allocates half of the available funds 
based on a state’s or territory’s share of violent crime and 
half of the funds based on its share of the nation’s 
population*** Footnote 1 For purposes of the initial 
calculations for the 2015 state and territory allocations, the 
FBI legacy definition of rape was used for the 2014 violent 
crime total to maintain consistency within the 3-year violent 
crime average. See Methodology***. The most recent 3-year 
period of official violent crime data for states and 
territories from the FBI covered from 2011 to 2013. The 
population shares for the 50 states, the District of Columbia, 
and U.S. territories were determined based on results of the 
2014 midyear population estimates published by the U.S. Census 
Bureau.

Examples--

* California accounts for 12.94% of the nation’s total violent 
crime and 12.02% of the nation’s total population. Therefore, 
California’s initial allocation equals 12.94% of $127,897,639 
(half of $255,795,278) plus 12.02% of $127,897,639, totaling 
$31,919,362.

* Vermont accounts for 0.07% of the nation’s total violent 
crime and 0.19% of the nation’s total population. Vermont’s 
initial allocation is 0.07% of $127,897,639 plus 0.19% of 
$127,897,639, totaling $337,965.

Step 2: De minimus awards

[Legislative mandate: 42 USC § 3755 (a)(2)]

The JAG legislation requires that each state or territory be 
awarded a minimum allocation equal to 0.25% of the total JAG 
allocation ($639,488 in 2015), regardless of its population or 
crime average. If a state or territory’s initial allocation 
based on crime and population is less than the minimum amount, 
that state or territory receives the minimum award amount as 
its total JAG allocation. If a state or territory’s initial 
allocation exceeds the minimum amount, it receives the minimum 
award plus the amount based on its share of violent crime and 
population.

Congress has made one exception to this rule: American Samoa 
and the Northern Mariana Islands are required to split one 
minimum award, with American Samoa receiving 67% ($428,457) and 
the Northern Mariana Islands receiving 33% ($211,031). (See 
Methodology for more information on allocation procedures for 
the territories.)

In 2015, four states (North Dakota, South Dakota, Vermont, and 
Wyoming) and four U.S. territories (American Samoa, Guam, 
Northern Mariana Islands, and the Virgin Islands) received only 
the minimum award as their total JAG allocation. The remainder 
of the states, the District of Columbia, and Puerto Rico were 
all awarded the minimum award plus an additional allocation. A 
total of $35,171,851 was allocated for minimum awards under the 
2015 JAG program.

Examples--

* Vermont’s initial allocation of $337,965 is less than the 
minimum value, so Vermont’s total JAG allocation will be the 
minimum amount of $639,488.

* California’s initial allocation of $31,919,362 exceeds the 
minimum value, so California will receive the minimum plus an 
award based on its share of total violent crime and population.

To compute the additional amounts, the crime and population 
data for states and territories receiving only the minimum 
award are removed from the pool, and the remaining JAG funds 
are reallocated to the rest of the states based on violent 
crime and population as in Step 1. 

Examples--

* Vermont receives only the minimum award, so its crime and 
population data are removed from the pool.

* After removing the crime and population data for the states 
and U.S. territories receiving only the minimum award, 
California accounts for 13.00% of violent crime and 12.14% of 
the nation’s population. California’s new JAG allocation is 
equal to $14,343,532 (13.00% of half of $220.6 million) plus 
$13,392,811 (12.14% of half of $220.6 million), plus the 
minimum amount of $639,488. These three components equal 
$28,375,832. (The total amount of $220.6 million equals the 
original $255.8 million total JAG 2015 award allocation minus 
the $35.2 million JAG 2015 minimum allocation.)

Step 3: 60%/40% split to state and local governments

[Legislative mandate: 42 USC § 3755 (b)]

Except for the U.S. territories and the District of Columbia, 
60% of the total allocation to a state is retained by the state 
government, and 40% is set aside to be allocated to local 
governments.

Examples--

* California’s state government retains 60% of $28,375,832, or 
$17,025,499. The remaining 40%, or $11,350,333, is set aside 
for distribution to local governments in California.

* Vermont’s state government retains 60% of the minimum award 
of $639,488, or $383,693. The remaining 40%, or $255,795, is 
set aside for distribution to local governments in Vermont.

Step 4: Determining local award allocations

[Legislative mandate: 42 USC § 3755 (c)(d)(e)(f)(g)(h)]

In order to determine local awards, BJS determines which 
jurisdictions should be included in the calculation of the 3-
year violent crime averages on which local awards are based. 
These crime averages are computed using data reported to the 
FBI’s Uniform Crime Reporting (UCR) program. To be eligible, a 
jurisdiction must have provided to the UCR a count of the 
number of Part I violent crimes known to law enforcement each 
year for a minimum of 3 years in the past 10 years*** Footnote 
2 For purposes of the 2015 local award calculations, Part I 
violent crime totals included the definition of rape (legacy or 
2013 revised) that an agency reported to the FBI. See 
Methodology***. Jurisdictions that have not met the reporting 
requirements are excluded from the calculations and are not 
eligible to receive an award.

The 10-year limit on the age of UCR data used for JAG local 
award calculations was applied for the first time during the 
2009 Recovery Act *** Footnote 33Before 2009, all years of the 
FBI’s UCR data could be used to meet the 3-year reporting 
requirement. Although the 10-year limit was stipulated in the 
2005 legislation that created the JAG program, it was not 
implemented until 2009 per the “Transitional Rule.” See 42 USC 
§ 3755(d)(2)(B)***. For the 2010 JAG, the 10-year window for 
eligible UCR data was waived because some agencies were having 
difficulty meeting the new requirements. Instead, all of the 
FBI’s UCR data dating back to 1991 were used to meet the 3-year 
reporting requirement. Agencies that used this waiver signed an 
agreement indicating they would begin to report timely data on 
Part I violent crimes to the FBI starting no later than the end 
of FY 2010 (September 30, 2010). All agencies that used the 
waiver in 2010 reported updated UCR data by the required 
deadline, making it unnecessary to authorize any further 
waivers of the 10-year rule. The 10-year limit was applied for 
the first time in FY 2012 and has been in effect 
for each year since.

After determining which law enforcement agencies have the 3 
years of reported violent crime data required to be included in 
the calculations, BJS computes the average number of violent 
crimes reported by all law enforcement agencies in each 
jurisdiction (e.g., local government) for the 3 most recent 
years in which they reported data.

Since awards to local governments are based on their share of 
all violent crimes reported by the law enforcement agencies in 
their state, BJS computes the sum of these averages within each 
state to determine the jurisdiction’s share of the total local 
award allocation.

Examples--

* California has $11.4 million set aside for local awards. The 
3-year violent crime averages reported by local jurisdictions 
in California equal 153,562.67 crimes. Dividing the $11,350,333 
set-aside by the state crime total (153,562.67) results in the 
number of dollars available for each crime ($73.91). Therefore, 
a local California jurisdiction needs a 3-year violent crime 
average of at least 135.29 violent crimes ($10,000 divided by 
$73.91) to be eligible for a direct award.

* Vermont has $255,795 set aside for local governments. The sum 
of 3-year average violent crimes reported is 629.67. The 
dollars per crime ratio in Vermont equals $255,795 divided by 
629.67 crimes, or $406.24 per crime (after rounding). The 
threshold is 24.62 violent crimes ($10,000 divided by $406.24) 
to be eligible for a direct award.

BJS then calculates the initial amount of each local award. 
Each local award amount is equal to the product of a local 
jurisdiction’s 3-year violent crime average and the dollars per 
crime ratio for the state in which it is located. By statute, 
the minimum award a local jurisdiction may receive is $10,000. 
Jurisdictions that are eligible for an initial award greater 
than or equal to $10,000 are eligible to apply to receive the 
funds for their own use. If the initial award is less than 
$10,000, the award funds are transferred to the state 
administering agency for distribution to the state police or 
any units of local government that were ineligible for a direct 
award greater than or equal to $10,000. (See “Pass-through 
requirement” [42 USC § 3755(c)].)

Examples--

* The city of Los Angeles, California, has a 3-year average of 
18,372.00 violent crimes, or about 12.0% of all violent crimes 
reported by potentially eligible jurisdictions in California. 
Los Angeles exceeds the state threshold of 135.29 violent 
crimes and is eligible for 12.0% of the $11.4 million set aside 
for local governments in California, or about $1,357,936 
(18,372.00 multiplied by $73.91).

* The city of Vergennes, Vermont, has a 3-year average of 4.00 
violent crimes. This does not meet the state threshold of 
24.62, so it is ineligible for a direct JAG award. Its crimes, 
less than 1% of all violent crimes in Vermont, account for 
about $1,625 of award funds. These funds are transferred to the 
state for redistribution.

***************************************
Results of the calculations for the 
2015 Justice Assistance Grant program
***************************************

For the 2015 JAG awards, approximately $249.5 million of the 
$255.8 million available was allocated to the 50 states, with 
the remainder allocated to the District of Columbia and U.S. 
territories (table 1). As required by the legislation, 40% of 
this amount ($99.8 million) was initially reserved for local 
governments. A total of 1,408 local governments had law 
enforcement agencies that provided a sufficient number of 
reported crimes to the FBI to receive a JAG award—either 
directly or through a joint award with other governments within 
their county—and were eligible for a collective total of $79.5 
million. The balance of unawarded local allocations ($20.3 
million) was returned to state governments for redistribution 
to state law enforcement agencies and local governments.

Two states had 100 or more local governments eligible to 
receive award funds either directly or through a shared award: 
California (214) and Florida (114). The five local governments 
eligible to receive the largest awards included New York City 
($4.0 million), Chicago ($2.0 million), Philadelphia ($1.6 
million), Houston ($1.6 million), and Los Angeles ($1.4 
million).

In addition, the District of Columbia was eligible for $1.6 
million and Puerto Rico was eligible for $2.8 million (table 
2). Guam and the U.S. Virgin Islands were each eligible for the 
minimum award of $639,488. American Samoa ($428,457) and the 
Northern Mariana Islands ($211,031) split one minimum award.

***************************
Additional JAG provisions
************************** 

Disparate jurisdictions and joint allocations
***********************************************

[Legislative mandate: 42 USC § 3755 (d)(3)(4)]

In some cases, as defined by the legislation, a disparity may 
exist between the funding eligibility of a county and 
associated municipalities. Three different types of disparities 
may exist.

The first type is a zero-county disparity. This situation 
exists when one or more municipalities within a county are 
eligible for a direct award and the county is not, yet the 
county is responsible for providing criminal justice services 
(such as prosecution and incarceration) for the municipality. 
In this case, the county is entitled to part of the 
municipality’s award because it shares in the cost of criminal 
justice operations, although it may not report crime data to 
the FBI. This is the most common type of disparity.

Example--

* Sioux Falls, South Dakota, is eligible for an award of 
$62,365. Minnehaha County, South Dakota (which includes the 
city of Sioux Falls), is not eligible for a direct award, but 
it provides criminal justice services to Sioux Falls. In this 
case, Minnehaha County and Sioux Falls are considered zero-
county disparate. Sioux Falls must share its award funds with 
Minnehaha County as mutually agreed upon.

A second type of disparity exists when both a county and a 
municipality within that county qualify for a direct award, yet 
the award amount for the municipality exceeds 150% of the 
county’s award amount.

Example--

Montgomery County, Ohio, is eligible for a direct award of 
$23,383. The city of Dayton in Montgomery County is eligible 
for a direct award of $126,403. Dayton’s award amount is more 
than 150% of Montgomery County’s award amount. Consequently, 
the two governments’ awards ($149,786) are pooled together and 
shared as mutually agreed upon.

The third type of disparity occurs when a county and multiple 
municipalities within that county are all eligible for direct 
awards, but the sum of the awards for the individual 
municipalities exceeds 400% of the county’s award amount. In 
the 2015 JAG calculations, this type of disparity only occurred 
with another type of disparity within the same county. An 
example of a situation in which this was the only type of 
disparity within a county is available in Justice Assistance 
Grant (JAG) Program, 2014 (NCJ 247137, BJS web, August 2014).

These three types of disparity are examined in order. If a 
municipality is found to be disparate in one of these three 
ways, its award is not included in calculations to test other 
disparity situations. For instance, if a municipality is found 
to be 150% disparate with the county, its award is set aside, 
and the rest of the municipalities within the same county are 
checked for 400% disparity. If no other disparity is found, the 
single municipality and county share the sum of their two 
awards. However, it is possible for a county to have both a 
150% disparity and a 400% disparity simultaneously. For 
instance, counties can have one or more municipalities whose 
individual awards are more than 150% of the county’s award and 
other municipalities whose combined award is more than 400% of 
the county’s award.

Examples--

* King County, Washington, is eligible for an award of $39,737. 
The cities of Auburn ($26,950), Bellevue ($13,967), Burien 
($21,868), Federal Way ($27,344), Kent ($47,212), Renton 
($27,409), Seatac ($14,819), Seattle ($367,401), and Tukwila 
($18,229) (all located in King County) are also eligible for 
awards. The award for Seattle ($367,401) is individually more 
than 150% of King County’s award, so Seattle’s award will be 
pooled together with the county’s award. The other eight 
cities’ awards sum to $197,798. This summed amount is more than 
400% of King County’s direct award of $39,737. As a result, the 
funds for all 12 jurisdictions ($604,936) are pooled together 
and must be shared.

* Jefferson County, Alabama, is eligible for an award of 
$54,178. The cities of Bessemer ($43,703), Birmingham 
($257,052), and Fairfield ($14,586) are also eligible for 
awards. The award amount for the city of Birmingham is more 
than 150% of the award amount for Jefferson County. This 
jurisdiction is disparate with the county, and the two 
jurisdictions will share the combined total of $311,230. The 
remaining cities of Bessemer and Fairfield are individually 
less than 150% of the award amount for Jefferson County, and 
the two awards combined are less than 400% of the county’s 
award. Accordingly, the awards for these two cities remain 
separate.

For disparate situations, regardless of the type, the total of 
all award funds of the separate units of local governments 
(counties and municipalities) are pooled together and split 
among the units of local government as agreed upon by the 
affected jurisdictions. To qualify for payment, the disparate 
units of local government must submit a joint application for 
the aggregated funds.

***************************
Pass-through requirement
***************************

[Legislative mandate: 42 USC § 3755]

According to the JAG legislation, states may only retain award 
amounts that bear the same ratio of “(A) total expenditures on 
criminal justice by the state government in the most recently 
completed fiscal year to (B) the total expenditure on criminal 
justice by the state government and units of local government 
within the state in such year.”

The determination of proportionate criminal justice spending by 
state and local governments is referred to as the variable 
pass-through (VPT) process under JAG. The VPT process 
identifies the amounts each state must pass down to local 
governments within the state.

During 2014, the U.S. Census Bureau finished compiling current 
criminal justice expenditure information from FY 2010 to 
calculate updated VPT amounts. Several sources of data were 
used to calculate the percentages, including initial 
expenditure data from the 2010 Annual Survey of State and Local 
Government Finances conducted by the U.S. Census Bureau 
(http://www.census.gov//govs/local/historical_data_2010.html) 
and federal justice grant data from the Federal Award 
Assistance Data System 
(http://www.census.gov/govs/www/faads.html). Source data 
were assigned to state and local governments. Intergovernmental 
expenditures and grants were removed from the total justice 
expenditure for the appropriate type of government. The 
resulting expenditure data were then used to calculate the VPT 
percentages by comparing the total justice expenditures of all 
local governments in a state to the expenditures of the state 
government itself. A simple percentage resulted, which 
represented the combined local government expenditures within 
the state divided by the total state criminal justice 
expenditures. These updated VPT percentages were used for the 
2015 JAG program and can be found on the BJA website.

***********************************************
Sex Offender Registration and Notification Act 
(SORNA) penalty and compliance bonus funds
***********************************************

[Legislative mandate: 42 USC § 16925 (a)(c)]

**********
Penalty
*********

The Sex Offender Registration and Notification Act (SORNA), 
Title I of the Adam Walsh Child Protection and Safety Act of 
2006, required that the 50 states, the District of Columbia, 
the five principal U.S. territories, and some federally 
recognized tribes substantially implement SORNA by July 27, 
2009. Two full-year deadline extensions were provided, and a 
final statutory deadline of July 27, 2011, was established. 
SORNA mandated a 10% reduction in JAG funding for any 
jurisdictions that failed to substantially implement SORNA by 
the deadline. For those jurisdictions that failed to meet this 
deadline, the SORNA penalty was calculated by subtracting 10% 
from the state government’s allocation (60% of the total ward), 
after deducting the mandatory VPT that states are required to 
send to local governments. The penalty applies to the portion 
of JAG funding that is returned to the state to be shared with 
local governments that were not eligible for a direct JAG award 
(less than $10,000 jurisdictions).

The penalty does not apply to the VPT, which is the portion of 
JAG funds awarded directly to local law enforcement, as the 
state cannot retain any portion of that award. Penalizing local 
agencies would also seriously undermine the purpose of the 
statute, since doing so would be detrimental to local law 
enforcement efforts, including the investigation, prosecution, 
and apprehension of sex offenders. An example of how the SORNA 
penalty was assessed can be found in BJA’s JAG Frequently Asked 
Questions (FAQ) on the BJA website at 
https://www.bja.gov/Funding/JAGFAQ.pdf.

In FY 2015, a total of 36 states and U.S. territories were not 
compliant with SORNA’s requirements. As a result, these 
jurisdictions suffered a combined $5,812,248 reduction to their 
FY 2015 Byrne JAG award. These jurisdictions were allowed to 
apply to reallocate the 10% penalty to promote SORNA 
implementation. Seven states were SORNA noncompliant and did 
not apply to reallocate the penalty. Per the SORNA legislation, 
the $1,038,781 withheld from these jurisdictions will be 
reallocated to jurisdictions that did substantially implement 
SORNA [(42 USC § 16925(c)]. These funds will be reallocated to 
compliant states in the FY 2016 JAG award.

***************************
Bonus funds from FY 2014
***************************

Per 42 USC § 16925(c), any state or territory that has 
substantially implemented SORNA during the current fiscal year, 
as determined by the Office of Sex Offender Sentencing, 
Monitoring, Apprehending, Registering, and Tracking (SMART), 
will be eligible to receive compliant bonus funds in addition 
to its JAG award for the following year. This bonus allocation 
is calculated based on SORNA penalty funds from nonimplementing 
states and territories during the current fiscal year. For 
example, any state that substantially implemented SORNA in FY 
2014 would have bonus funds added to its FY 2015 state JAG 
award, made up of SORNA penalty funds from nonimplementing 
states and territories in FY 2014. The amounts available for 
compliant bonus funds will vary from year to year, depending on 
the amount of SORNA penalty funds from the previous year.

Bonus funds are allocated using the same general approach as 
the overall JAG award allocation calculations. First, an 
initial allocation is calculated for each eligible state and 
territory, based on its share of violent crime and population 
(weighted equally). Next, this initial allocation is reviewed 
to determine if it is less than the minimum award amount 
(defined as 0.25% of the total funds available). If this is the 
case, the state or territory is allocated 0.25% of the total 
funds available, and the funds required for this are deducted 
from the overall pool of funds. These states and territories 
are then removed from the calculations. Each of the remaining 
states receives the minimum award plus an additional amount 
based on its share of violent crime and population for the 
remaining states and territories.

For FY 2015, a total of $1,137,459 was available from the FY 
2014 SORNA reductions from the noncompliant states. These funds 
were distributed to the 20 states and territories that 
substantially implemented SORNA during the fiscal year. Of the 
20 states eligible for bonus funds, Florida ($222,906) and 
Pennsylvania ($124,748) received the largest awards (table 3). 
Of the eligible U.S. territories, Guam received $2,844, the 
Northern Mariana Islands received $938, and the U.S. Virgin 
Islands received $2,844.

For additional information regarding the SORNA penalty and 
bonus funds, including implementation requirements and a list 
of states and territories that were impacted in FY 2015, 
contact the SMART Office Policy Advisor assigned to assist the 
jurisdiction of interest at 
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/smart/sorna.htm.

*****************************************
Prison Rape Elimination Act (PREA) 
certification reduction and bonus funds
*****************************************

[Legislative mandate: 42 USC § 15607 (e)]

Reduction
***********

The PREA statute provides that a state whose governor does not 
certify full compliance with the U.S. Department of Justice 
(DOJ) National Standards to Prevent, Detect, and Respond to 
Prison Rape, 42 U.S.C. 15607(e), is subject to the loss of 5% 
of any DOJ grant funds that it would otherwise receive for 
prison purposes, unless the governor submits to the Attorney 
General an assurance that such 5% will be used only to enable 
the state to adopt and achieve full compliance with the 
National PREA Standards in future years.

For those without a certification of full compliance, the PREA 
reduction was calculated by subtracting 5% from the state 
government’s allocation (60% of the total award), after 
deducting the VPT that states are required to send to local 
governments. The reduction applies to the portion of JAG 
funding returned to the state to be shared with local 
governments that were not eligible for a direct JAG award (less 
than $10,000 jurisdictions).

The reduction does not apply to the VPT, which is the portion 
of JAG funds awarded directly to local law enforcement, as the 
state cannot retain any portion of that award. An example of 
how the PREA reduction was assessed can be found in BJA’s JAG 
Program FAQ regarding the PREA certification requirement and 5% 
reduction FAQ located on the BJA website at 
https://www.bja.gov/Programs/JAG-PREA-FAQ.pdf.

For FY 2015, a combination of 45 states and U.S. territories 
were not compliant with PREA requirements. As a result, these 
jurisdictions suffered a combined $3,641,486 reduction to their 
FY 2015 Byrne JAG award. These jurisdictions were allowed to 
apply to reallocate the 5% reduction to achieve compliance with 
PREA standards and become certified. A combination of five 
states and U.S. territories were PREA noncompliant and did not 
apply to reallocate the reduction. Per the PREA legislation, the 
$166,341 withheld from these jurisdictions were reallocated to 
jurisdictions that either were certified or were working to 
achieve certification. These funds were allocated to compliant 
states and territories.

Bonus funds
************

PREA bonus funds are allocated using the same general approach 
as the overall JAG award allocation calculations. First, an 
initial allocation is calculated for each eligible state and 
territory, based on its share of violent crime and population 
(weighted equally). Next, the initial allocation is reviewed to 
determine if it is less than the minimum award amount (0.25% of 
the total funds available). If this is the case, the state or 
territory is allocated 0.25% of the total funds available, and 
the funds required for this are deducted from the overall pool 
of funds. These states and territories are then removed from 
the calculations. Each of the remaining states receives the 
minimum award plus an additional amount based on its share of 
violent crime and population for the remaining states and 
territories.

For the FY 2015 JAG awards, a total of $166,341 was available 
from PREA reductions from the five noncompliant states and 
territories. These funds were distributed to the 46 states, 4 
territories, and the District of Columbia that were PREA 
certified or were working to become certified. Of the 46 states 
eligible for bonus funds, California ($19,133) and Texas 
($13,254) received the largest awards (table 4). Of the 
eligible U.S. territories, Puerto Rico ($1,862) received the 
largest bonus award.For additional information regarding the 
PREA reduction and bonus funds, including implementation 
requirements and a list of states and U.S. territories that 
were impacted in FY 2015, contact the PREA Management Office at 
PREACompliance@usdoj.gov.

******************************
Maximum allocation to local 
units of government
******************************

[Legislative mandate: 42 USC § 3755 (e)(1)]

According to the legislation, units of local government may not 
receive a JAG award that “exceeds such unit’s total 
expenditures on criminal justice services for the most recently 
completed fiscal year for which data are available.” Award 
amounts in excess of total expenditures “shall be allocated 
proportionately among units of local government whose 
allocations do not exceed their total expenditures on such 
services.”

***************
Methodology
***************

The population data used to calculate state and U.S. territory 
Justice Assistance Grant (JAG) allocations are from the 2014 
census estimates provided to the Bureau of Justice Statistics 
(BJS) by the U.S. Census Bureau. The state-level violent crime 
data are estimates published by the FBI’s Uniform Crime 
Reporting (UCR) program in the annual publication, Crime in the 
United States. For the 2015 JAG program, state-level crime data 
from 2011 to 2013 were used.

The crime data used to calculate local JAG allocation amounts 
are also provided by the UCR program. Data for local 
jurisdictions are obtained in an electronic format directly 
from the FBI and processed by BJS to link each crime-reporting 
entity to a local government. For the 2015 JAG, local crime 
data from 2004 through 2013 were used.

The sum of the UCR violent crimes for all local governments 
within a state for a given year will not equal the estimated 
crime total reported for that state published by the FBI. These 
state-level estimates are based on crimes reported by all 
state, local, and special district law enforcement agencies 
within a state, plus an imputation adjustment to account for 
nonreporting agencies and agencies reporting less than 12 
months of data. These imputed values do not appear on the 
electronic data file provided to BJS and are not used in the 
local award calculations.

UCR modification to the definition of rape
*******************************************

Historically, the UCR program defined rape as “the carnal 
knowledge of a female forcibly and against her will.” Many 
agencies recognized that this definition excludes a long list 
of sex offenses that are criminal in most jurisdictions, such 
as offenses involving oral or anal penetration, penetration 
with objects, and rapes of males. Because these sex offenses 
were excluded, the UCR rape data represented an undercount of 
rape known to law enforcement.

To be more inclusive and increase accuracy in the scope and 
volume of rape, in December 2011, FBI Director Robert S. 
Mueller, III approved revisions to the UCR’s 80-year-old 
definition of rape. The new definition (referred to as the 
“revised” definition) was broadened to “penetration, no matter 
how slight, of the vagina or anus with any body part or object, 
or oral penetration by a sex organ of another person, without 
the consent of the victim Footnote 4 Frequently asked questions 
about the revised definition of rape are available at 
https://www.fbi.gov/about-us/cjis/ucr/recent-program-
updates/new-rape-definition-frequently-asked-questions***.”

The new definition was approved in 2011, and the FBI encouraged 
agencies to begin reporting data using the revised definition 
starting on January 1, 2013. However, in 2013, some agencies 
reported rape counts using only the legacy definition while 
other agencies reported data using only the revised definition. 
Accordingly, the FBI chose to report rape counts collected 
under both definitions in the Crime in the United States (CIUS) 
publication. The published 2013 violent crime totals were 
created using the revised definition. However, to be consistent 
with prior years, the legacy definition of rape was used to 
calculate the violent crime counts in any tables that showed 
trend data (i.e., multiyear estimates).

For the initial part of the JAG calculations, which determines 
the initial allocation to each state and how much is available 
for local awards within each state, the formula uses the most 
recent 3 years of crime data as published by the FBI. 
Therefore, to be consistent with the totals published in CIUS, 
BJS used the FBI’s legacy rape counts for the first part of the 
formula.

For local award allocations, BJS uses an electronic data file 
provided by the FBI. The file includes agency-level counts of 
homicide, rape, robbery, and aggravated assault that are summed 
together to create the violent crime total used in the formula. 
Unlike the estimates published in CIUS, the electronic file has 
only a single category for “rape” for each agency. This 
category reflects the counts provided by the agency but does 
not indicate which definition of rape was reported. This 
variable was used in the 2015 JAG calculations for local 
awards.

For additional information on the UCR program changes to the 
definition of rape and how the changes impact CIUS, contact the 
FBI’s UCR program via email at crimestatsinfo@ic.fbi.gov.

*********************************
Allocations to U.S. territories
*********************************

Puerto Rico was the only U.S. territory to receive an initial 
allocation larger than the minimum amount, and it was also the 
only territory for which violent crime data were available. The 
JAG calculations for the other territories were based solely on 
population data. Because the other territories have relatively 
small populations (none exceeding 162,000), it is unlikely the 
inclusion of crime data would have changed their minimum 
status.

The current JAG legislation specifies that 40% of the total 
allocation for Puerto Rico be set aside for local awards. 
However, as of 2015, the local-level UCR data provided by the 
FBI did not include any crime data for local jurisdictions in 
Puerto Rico. Therefore, the local government JAG program 
allocation in Puerto Rico was $0.

************************************
Sources of additional information
***********************************

For more information on the legal foundation of the allocation 
formula, see 42 USC § 3754 and 42 USC § 3755.

The Edward Byrne Memorial Justice Assistance Grant program was 
established to streamline justice funding and grant 
administration. Administered by the Bureau of Justice 
Assistance (BJA), the JAG program allows states, tribes, and 
local governments to support a broad range of activities to 
prevent and control crime based on local needs and conditions. 
JAG consolidates the previous Byrne Formula and Local Law 
Enforcement Block Grant Programs. More information about the 
JAG program and application process can be found on the BJA 
website at http://www.bja.gov.

***********************************************
The Bureau of Justice Statistics of the U.S. Department of 
Justice is the principal federal agency responsible for 
measuring crime, criminal victimization, criminal offenders, 
victims of crime, correlates of crime, and the operation of 
criminal and civil justice systems at the federal, state, 
tribal, and local levels. BJS collects, analyzes, and 
disseminates reliable and valid statistics on crime and justice 
systems in the United States, supports improvements to state 
and local criminal justice information systems, and 
participates with national and international organizations to 
develop and recommend national standards for justice 
statistics. William J. Sabol is director.

This technical report was prepared by Alexia D. Cooper and 
Shelley S. Hyland. Marshay Lentini verified the report. 
Irene Cooperman and Jill Thomas edited the report. Tina Dorsey 
produced the report.

October 2015, NCJ 249105
***********************************************

*************************************************
Office of Justice Programs
Innovation * Partnerships * Safer Neighborhoods
www.ojp.usdoj.gov
*************************************************

***********************
9/28/2015 1:00pm JER 
***********************
