U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Programs
Bureau of Justice Statistics

-------------------------------------------------------
This report is one in a series. More recent editions 
may be available. To view a list of all reports in the 
series go to http://www.bjs.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbse&sid=71

This file is text only without graphics and many of the
tables. A Zip archive of the tables in this report in
spreadsheet format (.csv) and the full report including
tables and graphics in .pdf format are available on BJS
website at:http://www.bjs.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbdetail&iid=4717
--------------------------------------------------------

*******************
Technical Report
*******************

Justice Assistance Grant (JAG) Program, 2013

Alexia D. Cooper, Ph.D., BJS Statistician

**************
Introduction
**************

As part of the Consolidated Appropriations Act of 2005, the 108th Congress 
merged the discretionary Edward Byrne Memorial Grant Program with the 
formula-based Local Law Enforcement Block Grant (LLEBG) program to establish 
the Edward Byrne Memorial Justice Assistance Grant (JAG) program. The Bureau 
of Justice Assistance (BJA) administers the JAG program, and the Bureau of 
Justice Statistics (BJS) calculates the JAG formula-based award amounts using 
specifications outlined in the legislation.

JAG awards may be used for the following seven purposes--

* law enforcement

* prosecution and courts

* prevention and education

* corrections and community corrections drug treatment

* planning, evaluation, and technology improvement

* crime victim and witness programs.

A total of $278,392,240 was available for the 2013 JAG awards (figure 1). 
This report describes the steps in the JAG award calculation process and 
presents summary results of the 2013 JAG formula calculations.

*********************
Highlights
*********************

* The total allocation for the 2013 JAG funding was approximately $278.4 
million, of which $271.5 million went to states and $6.9 million to territories 
and the District of Columbia.
 
* The five states with the largest total allocations included California 
($30.8 million), Texas ($21.4 million), Florida ($18.0 million), New York 
($15.4 million), and Illinois ($11.2 million).
 
* A total of 1,541 local governments were eligible for awards, either directly 
or through a joint award with other governments within their county. The five 
local governments eligible to receive the largest awards included New York City 
($4.0 million), Chicago ($2.7 million), Philadelphia ($1.8 million), Houston 
($1.7 million), and Los Angeles ($1.7 million).

* Three states had around 100 or more local governments eligible to receive 
award funds either directly or through a shared award: California (221), Florida 
(126), and Texas (94).


*********************
Overview of process
*********************

Once the fiscal year JAG allocation has been determined, BJS begins its four-
step award calculation process: 

** Computing an initial allocation for each state and territory, based on its 
share of violent crime and population (weighted equally).

** Reviewing the initial allocation amount to determine if it is less than 
the minimum (de minimus) award amount defined in the JAG legislation (0.25% 
of the total). If this is the case, the state or territory is funded at the 
minimum level, and the funds required for this are deducted from the overall 
pool of funds. Each of the remaining states receives the minimum award plus 
an additional amount based on its share of violent crime and population.

** Dividing each state’s final amount at a rate of 60% for state governments 
and 40% for local governments.

** Determining local award allocations, which are based on a jurisdiction’s 
proportion of the state’s 3-year violent crime average. If a local 
jurisdiction’s calculated award is less than $10,000, the funds are returned 
to the state to distribute. If the calculated local award is $10,000 or more, 
then the local government is eligible to apply for an award.

The JAG award calculation process, with examples, is explained in more detail 
below.

****************************************
The four-step award calculation process
****************************************

Step 1: Initial allocation to states and territories 
*****************************************************

[Legislative mandate: 42 USC § 3755 (a)(1)]

Based on the congressional appropriation for the 2013 JAG program, BJS 
calculates the initial allocation amounts for the 50 states and U.S. 
territories. Using the congressionally established formula, BJS allocates 
half of the available funds based on a state’s or territory’s share of 
violent crime and half of the funds based on its share of the nation’s 
population. The most recent 3-year period of official violent crime data for 
states and territories from the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) covered 
the period between 2009 and 2011. The population shares for the 50 states, 
the District of Columbia, and U.S. territories were determined based on the 
results of the 2012 midyear population estimates published by the U.S. Census 
Bureau.

Examples--
***********

** California accounts for 12.96% of the nation’s total violent crime and 
11.96% of the nation’s total population. Therefore, California’s initial 
allocation equals 12.96% of $139,196,120 (half of $278,392,240) plus 11.96% 
of $139,196,120, totaling $34,693,113.

** Vermont accounts for 0.07% of the nation’s total violent crime and 0.20% 
of the nation’s total population. Vermont’s initial allocation is 0.07% of 
$139,196,120 plus 0.20% of $139,196,120, totaling $365,495. 

Step 2: De minimus awards 
**************************

[Legislative mandate: 42 USC § 3755 (a)(2)]

The JAG legislation requires that each state or territory be awarded a 
minimum allocation equal to 0.25% of the total JAG allocation ($695,981 in 
2013), regardless of its population or crime average. If a state’s or 
territory’s initial allocation based on crime and population is less than the 
minimum amount, that state or territory receives the minimum award amount as 
its total JAG allocation. If a state’s or territory’s initial allocation 
exceeds the minimum amount, it receives the minimum award plus the amount 
based on its share of the violent crime and population. 
Congress has made one exception to this rule: American Samoa and the Northern 
Mariana Islands are required to split one minimum award, with American Samoa 
receiving 67% ($466,307) and the Northern Mariana Islands receiving 33% 
($229,674). (See Methodology for more information on allocation procedures 
for the territories.)
 
In 2013, four states (North Dakota, South Dakota, Vermont, and Wyoming) and 
four of the territories (American Samoa, Guam, Northern Mariana Islands, and 
the Virgin Islands) received only the minimum award as their total JAG 
allocation. The remainder of the states, Washington, DC, and Puerto Rico were 
all awarded the minimum award plus an additional allocation. A total of 
$38,278,933 was allocated for minimum awards under the 2013 JAG program.

Examples--
***********

** Vermont’s initial allocation of $365,495 is less than the minimum value, 
so Vermont’s total JAG allocation will be the minimum amount of $695,981.
California’s initial allocation of $34,693,113 exceeds the minimum value, so 
** California will receive the minimum plus an award based on its share of 
total violent crime and population.

After removing the $38.3 million allocated to minimum awards, $240.1 million 
remained for additional awards. To compute the additional amounts, the crime 
and population data for states and territories receiving only the minimum 
award are removed from the pool, and the remaining JAG funds are reallocated 
to the rest of the states based on violent crime and population as in Step 1. 

Examples--
**********

Vermont received only the minimum award, so its crime and population data are 
removed from the pool.

After removing the crime and population data for the states and territories 
receiving only the minimum award, California accounts for 13.02% of violent 
crime and 12.08% of the nation’s population. California’s new JAG allocation 
is equal to $15,628,704 (13.02% of one half of $240.1 million) plus 
$14,505,920 (12.08% of one half of $240.1 million), plus the minimum amount 
of $695,981. These three components equal $30,830,605.
Step 3: 60/40 split to state and local governments
****************************************************

[Legislative mandate: 42 USC § 3755 (b)]

Except for the territories and the District of Columbia, 60% of the total 
allocation to a state is retained by the state government, and 40% is set 
aside to be allocated to local governments.

Examples--
***********

** California’s state government retains 60% of $30,830,605, or $18,498,363. 
The remaining 40%, or $12,332,242, is set aside for distribution to local 
governments in California.

** Vermont’s state government retains 60% of the minimum award of $695,981, 
or $417,588. The remaining 40%, or $278,392, is set aside for distribution to 
local governments in Vermont.

Step 4: Determining local award allocations 
********************************************

[Legislative mandate: 42 USC § 3755 (c)(d)(e)(f)(g)(h)]

In order to determine local awards, BJS determines which jurisdictions should 
be included in the calculation of the 3-year violent crime averages on which 
local awards are based. These crime averages are computed using data reported 
to the FBI’s Uniform Crime Reporting (UCR) Program. To be eligible, a 
jurisdiction must have provided to the UCR a count of the number of violent 
crimes known to law enforcement each year for a minimum of 3 years in the 
last 10. Jurisdictions that have not reported data for at least 3 of the last 
10 years are excluded from the calculations and are not eligible to receive 
an award.

The 10-year limit on the age of UCR data used for JAG local award 
calculations was applied for the first time during the 2009 Recovery Act. For 
the 2010 JAG, the 10-year window for eligible UCR data was waived because 
some agencies were having difficulty meeting the new requirements. Instead, 
all of the FBI’s UCR data back to 1991 were used to meet the 3-year reporting 
requirement. Agencies that used this waiver signed an agreement indicating 
they would begin to report timely data on Part I violent crimes to the FBI 
starting no later than the end of the federal fiscal year 2010 (September 30, 
2010). All agencies that used the waiver in 2010 reported updated UCR data by 
the required deadline, making it unnecessary to authorize any further waivers 
of the 10-year rule.***Footnote 1 Before 2009, all years of the FBI’s UCR 
data could be used to meet the 3-year reporting requirement. Although the 10-
year limit was stipulated in the 2005 legislation that created the JAG 
program, it was not implemented until 2009 per the “Transitional Rule.” [See 
42 USC § 3755 (d)(2)(B).].*** The 10-year limit was applied in FY 2013 and 
the UCR data used for the 2013 JAG award calculations included the 10-year 
period from 2002 to 2011.

After determining which law enforcement agencies have the 3 years of reported 
violent crime data required to be included in the calculations, BJS computes 
the average number of violent crimes reported by all law enforcement agencies 
in each jurisdiction (e.g., local government) for the 3 most recent years in 
which they reported data. 

Since awards to local governments are based on their share of all violent 
crimes reported by the law enforcement agencies in their state, BJS computes 
the sum of these averages within each state to determine the jurisdiction’s 
share of the total local award allocation. 

Examples--
**********

** California has $12.3 million set aside for local awards. The 3-year 
violent crime averages reported by local jurisdictions in California sum to 
161,997 crimes. Dividing the $12.3 million set aside by the state crime total 
results in the number of dollars available for each crime: 
$12,332,242/161,997 crimes = $76.13 per crime. Therefore, a local California 
jurisdiction needs a 3-year average of at least 131.36 violent crimes 
($10,000/$76.13) to be eligible for an award.

** Vermont has $278,392 set aside for local governments. The sum of 3-year 
average violent crimes reported is 623. The dollars per crime ratio in 
Vermont equals $278,392/623 crimes, or $446.86 per crime. The threshold is 
22.38 violent crimes ($10,000/$446.86) to be eligible for an award.

BJS then calculates the initial amount of each local award. Each local award 
amount is equal to the product of a local jurisdiction’s 3-year violent crime 
average and the “dollars per crime” ratio for the state in which it is 
located. By statute, the minimum award a local jurisdiction may receive is 
$10,000. Jurisdictions that are eligible for an initial award greater than or 
equal to $10,000 are eligible to apply to receive the funds for their own 
use. If the initial award is less than $10,000, the award funds are 
transferred to the state administering agency for distribution to the state 
police or any units of local government that were ineligible for a direct 
award greater than or equal to $10,000. (See “Pass-through requirement” [42 
USC § 3755 (c)] on page 5.)

Examples--
**********

The city of Oakland, California, has a 3-year average of 6,570.67 violent 
crimes, or 4.1% of all violent crimes reported by jurisdictions in 
California. Oakland exceeds the state threshold of 131.36 violent crimes. It 
is eligible for 4.1% of the $12.3 million set aside for local governments in 
California, or about $500,200 (6,570.67 X $76.13).

The city of Swanton, Vermont, has a 3-year average of 4.00 violent crimes. 
This does not meet the state threshold of 22.38, so it is ineligible for a 
JAG award. Its crimes, less than 1% of all violent crimes in Vermont, account 
for about $1,787 of award funds. These funds are transferred to the state for 
redistribution.

*****************************************
Results of the calculations for the 2013 
Justice Assistance Grant Program 
*****************************************

For the 2013 JAG awards, approximately $271.5 million of the $278.4 million 
available was allocated to the 50 states, with the remainder allocated to the 
District of Columbia and U.S. territories (table 1). As required by the 
legislation, 40% of this amount ($108.6 million) was initially reserved for 
local governments. A total of 1,541 local governments had law enforcement 
agencies that provided a sufficient number of reported crimes to the FBI to 
receive a JAG award either directly or through a joint award with other 
governments within their county. These goverments were eligible for a 
collective total of $88.4 million. The balance of unawarded local allocations 
($20.2 million) was returned to state governments for redistribution to state 
law enforcement agencies and local governments.

Three states had around 100 or more local governments eligible to receive 
award funds either directly or through a shared award: California (221), 
Florida (126), and Texas (94). The five local governments eligible to receive 
the largest awards included New York City ($4.0 million), Chicago ($2.7 
million), Philadelphia ($1.8 million), Houston ($1.7 million), and Los 
Angeles ($1.7 million). 

In addition, the District of Columbia was eligible for $1.7 million and 
Puerto Rico was eligible for $3.1 million (table 2). Guam and the U.S. Virgin 
Islands were each eligible for the minimum award of $695,981. American Samoa 
($466,307) and the Northern Mariana Islands ($229,674) split one 
minimum award. 

**************************
Additional JAG provisions
**************************

Disparate jurisdictions and joint allocations 
************************************************

[Legislative mandate: 42 USC § 3755 (d)(3)(4)]

In some cases, as defined by the legislation, a disparity may exist between 
the funding eligibility of a county and associated municipalities. There are 
three different types of disparities that may exist. 

The first type is referred to as a zero-county disparity. This situation 
exists when one or more municipalities within a county are eligible for a 
direct award and the county is not, yet the county is responsible for 
providing criminal justice services (such as prosecution and incarceration) 
for the municipality. In this case, the county is entitled to part of the 
municipality’s award because it shares in the cost of criminal justice 
operations, although it may not report crime data to the FBI. This is the 
most common type of disparity.

Example--
**********

** Decatur, Illinois, is eligible for an award of $46,084. Macon County, 
Illinois, (which includes the city of Decatur) is not eligible for a direct 
award, but it provides criminal justice services to Decatur. In this case, 
Macon County and Decatur are considered zero-county disparate. Decatur must 
share its award funds with Macon County as mutually agreed upon.

A second type of disparity exists when both a county and a municipality 
within that county qualify for a direct award, yet the award amount for the 
municipality exceeds 150% of the county’s award amount.

Example-- 
**********

** Pierce County, Washington, is eligible for a direct award of $110,859. The 
city of Tacoma in Pierce County is eligible for a direct award of $175,760. 
Tacoma’s award amount is more than 150% of Pierce County’s award amount. 
Consequently, the two governments’ awards ($286,619) are pooled together and 
shared as mutually agreed upon.

The third type of disparity occurs when a county and multiple municipalities 
within that county are all eligible for direct awards, but the sum of the 
awards for the individual municipalities exceeds 400% of the county’s award 
amount. 

Example--
**********

** Riverside County, California, was eligible for a direct award of $79,831. 
The cities of Banning ($12,053), Coachella ($18,372), Corona ($15,555), Hemet 
($28,014), Indio ($33,267), Palm Springs ($21,188), Perris ($13,068), 
Riverside ($108,937), Moreno Valley ($60,317), Cathedral ($17,205), La Quinta 
($ 11,368), and Desert Hot Springs ($26,238) were also eligible for direct 
awards. The 12 cities’ awards summed to $445,413. This summed amount was more 
than 400% of Riverside County’s direct award amount of $79,831. Consequently, 
the funds from all of the jurisdictions ($445,413) were pooled together and 
shared among the 13 units of local government as mutually agreed upon.

These three types of disparity are examined in order, and if a municipality 
is found to be disparate in one of these three ways, its award is not 
included in calculations to test other disparity situations. For instance, if 
a municipality is found to be 150% disparate with the county, its award is 
set aside, and the rest of the municipalities within the same county are 
checked for 400% disparity. If no other disparity is found, the single 
municipality and county share the sum of their two awards. However, it is 
possible for a county to have both a 150% disparity and a 400% disparity 
simultaneously. For instance, counties can have one or more municipalities 
whose individual awards are more than 150% of the county’s award and other 
municipalities whose combined award is more than 400% of the county’s award.

Example--
**********

** King County, Washington, is eligible for an award of $50,183. The cities 
of Auburn ($26,846), Bellevue ($14,990), Kent ($53,999), Renton ($30,185), 
Seattle ($376,118), Tukwila ($17,375), Seatac ($12,844), Federal Way 
($31,990), and Burien ($21,088) (all located in King County), are also 
eligible for awards. The award for Seattle ($376,118) is more than 150% of 
King County’s award, so it will be pooled together with the county’s award. 
The other eight cities’ awards sum to $209,317. This amount is more than 400% 
of King County’s direct award of $50,183. As a result, the funds for all ten 
jurisdictions ($635,618) are pooled together and must be shared.

** Pulaski County, Arkansas, is eligible for an award of $33,226. The cities 
of Jacksonville ($20,079), Little Rock ($258,635), North Little Rock 
($58,623), and Sherwood ($12,758) are also eligible for awards. The award 
amounts for the cities of Little Rock and North Little Rock are each 
individually more than 150% of the award amount for Pulaski County. These two 
jurisdictions are disparate with the county and the three jurisdictions will 
share the combined total of $350,484. The remaining cites of Jacksonville and 
Sherwood are individually less than 150% of the award amount for Pulaski 
County and the two awards combined are less than 400% of the County’s award. 
Accordingly, the awards for these two cities remain separate. 

For disparate situations, regardless of the type, the total of all award 
funds of the separate units of local governments (counties and 
municipalities) are pooled together and split among the units of local 
government as agreed upon by the affected jurisdictions. To qualify for 
payment, the disparate units of local government must submit a joint 
application for the aggregated funds.

Pass-through requirement 
*************************

[Legislative mandate: 42 USC § 3755]

According to the JAG legislation, states may only retain award amounts that 
bear the same ratio of “(A) total expenditures on criminal justice by the 
state government in the most recently completed fiscal year to (B) the total 
expenditure on criminal justice by the state government and units of local 
government within the state in such year.”

After determining the amount spent on criminal justice expenditures by the 
state government, the state may retain that amount. The remaining funds are 
passed down to the local governments within the state. These criminal justice 
expenditure amounts are referred to as “variable pass-through” data for the 
purpose of JAG awards. 

During 2009, the U.S. Census Bureau finished compiling current criminal 
justice expenditure data in order to determine updated variable pass-through 
amounts. These pass-through amounts, based on data from 2006, were used for 
the 2013 JAG program and can be found on the BJA website at 
http://www.bja.gov. 

Sex Offender Registration and Notification Act Penalty and Compliant Bonus 
Funds 

[Legislative mandate: 42 USC § 16925 (a)(c)]

*********
Penalty
*********

The Sex Offender Registration and Notification Act (SORNA), Title I of the 
Adam Walsh Child Protection and Safety Act of 2006 (AWA) required that the 50 
states, the District of Columbia (DC), five principal U.S. territories, and 
some federally recognized tribes substantially implement SORNA by July 27, 
2009. Two full-year deadline extensions were provided, and a final statutory 
deadline of July 27, 2011 was established. SORNA mandated a 10% reduction in 
JAG funding for any jurisdictions that failed to substantially implement 
SORNA by the deadline. For those jurisdictions that failed to meet this 
deadline, the SORNA penalty was calculated by subtracting 10% from the state 
government’s allocation (60% of the total award), after deducting the 
mandatory “variable pass-through” that states are required to send to local 
governments. The penalty also applies to the portion of JAG funding that is 
returned to the state to be shared with local governments that were not 
eligible for a direct JAG award (“less than $10,000 jurisdictions”). 

The penalty does not apply to the mandatory pass-through, which is the 
portion of JAG funds awarded directly to local law enforcement, as the state 
cannot retain any portion of that award. Penalizing local agencies would also 
seriously undermine the purpose of the statute, since doing so would be 
detrimental to local law enforcement efforts, which include the 
investigation, prosecution, and apprehension of sex offenders. An example of 
how the SORNA penalty was assessed can be found in the Bureau of Justice 
Assistance’s JAG Frequently Asked Questions on the BJA website at 
https://www.bja.gov/Funding/JAGFAQ.pdf.

For FY 2013, 34 states, two U.S. territories, and the District of Columbia 
were not compliant with SORNA’s requirements. As a result, these 
jurisdictions suffered a combined $6,564,559 reduction to their FY 2013 Byrne 
JAG award. These jurisdictions were allowed to apply to reallocate the 10% 
penalty to promote SORNA implementation. A total of six states that were 
SORNA noncompliant did not apply to reallocate the penalty. Per the SORNA 
legislation, the $1,062,609 withheld from these jurisdictions will be 
reallocated to jurisdictions that substantially implemented SORNA [(42 USC § 
16925 (c)]. These funds will be reallocated to compliant states and added to 
their FY 2014 JAG award as described below.

************
Bonus funds
************

Per 42 USC § 16925(c), any state or territory that has substantially 
implemented SORNA during the current fiscal year (FY), as determined by the 
SMART Office, will be eligible to receive compliant bonus funds in addition 
to its JAG award for the following year. This bonus allocation is calculated 
based on SORNA penalty funds from nonimplementing states and territories 
during that current fiscal year. For example, any state that substantially 
implemented SORNA in FY 2012 would have bonus funds added to its FY 2013 
State JAG award, comprised of SORNA penalty funds from nonimplementing states 
and territories in FY 2012. The amounts available for compliant bonus funds 
will vary from year to year, depending on the amount of SORNA penalty funds 
from the previous year. 

Bonus funds are allocated using the same general approach as the overall JAG 
award allocation calculations. First, an initial allocation is calculated for 
each eligible state and territory, based on its share of violent crime and 
population (weighted equally). Next, this initial allocation is reviewed to 
determine if it is less than the minimum award amount (defined as 0.25% of 
the total funds available). If this is the case, the state or territory is 
allocated 0.25% of the total funds available and the funds required for this 
are deducted from the overall pool of funds. These states and territories are 
then removed from the calculations. Each of the remaining states receives the 
minimum award plus an additional amount based on its share of violent crime 
and population for the remaining states and territories.

For the FY 2013 JAG awards, a total of $1,775,811 was available from the FY 
2012 SORNA reductions from the five noncompliant states. These funds were 
distributed to the 17 states and territories that substantially implemented 
SORNA during the fiscal year. Of the 17 states eligible for bonus funds, 
Florida ($418,204) and Michigan ($203,600) received the largest awards (table 
3). In addition, Guam received $4,440 and the Northern Mariana Islands 
received $1,465.

For additional information regarding the SORNA penalty and bonus funds, 
including implementation requirements and a list of states and territories 
that were impacted in FY 2013, contact the Office of Sex Offender Sentencing, 
Monitoring, Apprehending, Registering, and Tracking (SMART) Policy Advisor 
assigned to assist the jurisdiction of interest: 
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/smart/pdfs/PolicyAdvisorAssignmentsState2013.pdf.

*************************************************
Maximum allocation to local units of government
************************************************
 
[Legislative mandate: 42 USC § 3755 (e)(1)]

According to the legislation, units of local government may not receive a JAG 
award that “exceeds such unit’s total expenditures on criminal justice 
services for the most recently completed fiscal year for which data are 
available.” Award amounts in excess of total expenditures “shall be allocated 
proportionately among units of local government whose allocations do not 
exceed their total expenditures on such services.” 

*************
Methodology
*************

The population data used to calculate state and U.S. territory JAG 
allocations are from the 2012 census estimates provided by the U.S. Census 
Bureau. The state-level violent crime data are estimates published by the 
FBI’s Uniform Crime Reporting (UCR) Program in the annual publication, Crime 
in the United States. For the 2013 JAG program, state-level crime data for 
the years 2009 through 2011 were used. 

The crime data used to calculate local JAG allocation amounts are also 
provided by the UCR program. Data for local jurisdictions are obtained in an 
electronic format directly from the FBI and processed by BJS to link each 
crime-reporting entity to a local government. For the 2013 JAG, local crime 
data from 2002 through 2011 were used.

The sum of the UCR violent crimes for all local governments within a state 
for a given year will not equal the estimated crime total reported for that 
state and published by the FBI. These state-level estimates are based on 
crimes reported by all state, local, and special district law enforcement 
agencies within a state, plus an imputation adjustment to account for 
nonreporting agencies and agencies reporting less than 12 months of data for 
the year. These imputed values do not appear on the electronic data file 
provided to BJS and are not used in the local award calculations.

Allocations to U.S. territories
*********************************
Puerto Rico was the only U.S. territory receiving an initial allocation 
larger than the minimum amount, and also the only territory for which violent 
crime data were available. The JAG calculations for the other territories 
were based solely on population data. Because the other territories have 
relatively small populations (none exceeding 160,000), it is unlikely the 
inclusion of crime data would have changed their minimum status. 

The current JAG legislation specifies that 40% of the total allocation for 
Puerto Rico be set aside for local awards. As of 2013, however, the local-
level UCR data provided by the FBI did not include any crime data for local 
jurisdictions in Puerto Rico. Therefore, the local government JAG program 
allocation in Puerto Rico was $0. 

Sources of additional information
***********************************

For more information on the legal foundation of the allocation formula, 
please see 42 USC § 3754 and 42 USC § 3755.

The Edward Byrne Memorial Justice Assistance Grant (JAG) Program was 
established to streamline justice funding and grant administration. 
Administered by the Bureau of Justice Assistance (BJA), the JAG program 
allows states, tribes, and local governments to support a broad range of 
activities to prevent and control crime based on local needs and conditions. 
JAG consolidates the previous Byrne Formula and Local Law Enforcement Block 
Grant (LLEBG) Programs. More information about the JAG program and 
application process can be found on the BJA website at http://www.bja.gov.

************************************************************************
The Bureau of Justice Statistics is the statistical agency of the U.S. 
Department of Justice. William J. Sabol is acting director.
This technical report was prepared by Alexia D. Cooper. Tara Martin verified 
the report. Vanessa Curto edited the report, and Barbara Quinn produced the 
report, under the supervision of Doris J. James.
July 2013, NCJ 242412
************************************************************************

****************************************************
Office of Justice Programs
Innovation * Partnerships * Safer Neighborhoods
www.ojp.usdoj.gov
****************************************************

7/9/13/JER/4:00pm







