U.S. Department of Justice 
Office of Justice Programs 
Bureau of Justice Statistics 

February 2011, NCJ 232223

Jail in Indian Country, 2009

Todd D. Minton, BJS Statisticians 

----------------------------------------------------------
This file is text only without graphics and many of the
tables. A Zip archive of the tables in this report in
spreadsheet format (.csv) and the full report including
tables and graphics in .pdf format are available from
http://bjs.ojp.usdoj.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbse&sid=32

This report is one in a series. More recent editions may be
available. To view a list of all in the series go to
http://bjs.ojp.usdoj.gov/index.cfm?ty=dcdetail&iid=2223.    
-----------------------------------------------------------
     
At midyear 2009, a total of 2,176 inmates were confined in
Indian country jails, a 1.9% increase from the 2,135 inmates
confined  at midyear 2008 (figure 1). This count was based on
data from 80 facilities, including jails, confinement
facilities, detention centers, and other correctional
facilities, that were in operation in Indian country at
midyear 2009. For 2008, the number of inmates was based on
data for 82 facilities in operation at midyear 2008. The
number of inmates held in Indian country jails between 2004
and 2009 increased by 25% from 1,745 to 2,176. On June 30,
2009, the number of American Indians and Alaska Natives
confined in jails outside of Indian country (9,400) was more
than 4 times the number held in jails in Indian country. (See
box on page 2.)

The number of jails in Indian country has increased between
2004 and 2009

The Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS) collected data from 68
correctional facilities in Indian country in 2004, from 79 in
2007, from 82 in 2008, and from 80 in 2009. The survey was
not conducted in 2005 and 2006. Over the 5-year period, a
number of facilities closed   and new facilities became
operational. Eleven facilities permanently closed between
2004 and 2009 and a total of 21 facilities were newly
constructed. BJS estimated inmate population counts for 7
facilities in 2004 and 4 facilities in 2007 that did not
respond to the surveys. All known operating facilities
responded to the 2008 and2009 surveys. See Methodology for
additional details on facility counts and participation in
the surveys.

---------------------------------------------------------
HIGHLIGHTS

* The number of inmates confined in Indian country jails
increased by 1.9% between midyear 2008 and 2009, reaching
2,176 inmates.

* Nationwide, American Indians and Alaska Natives under
correctional supervision in the U.S. increased 5.6 percent,
from an estimated 75,400 offenders in 2008 to 79,600 in 2009.
Nearly two-thirds of the population (63 percent or 50,200)
was under supervision in the community on probation or parole
in 2009, and about a third (29,400 or 37 percent) was in
prison or jail.

* Over the 12 months ending June 2009, the average daily jail
population in Indian country increased by 12%, and the
percentage of occupied bed space increased from 64.2% to
73.5%.

* Eleven jails (14% of all facilities) held 51% of inmates
confined at midyear 2009.

* During June 2009, the number of inmates admitted into
Indian country jails (11,357) was about 5 times the size of
the average daily population (2,124).

* The expected average length of stay increased by a half day
from 5.1 days during June 2008 to 5.6 days during June 2009.

* Indian country jail authorities reported no deaths in
custody between July 1, 2008, and June 30, 2009, down from 4
reported deaths during the 12-month period ending June 30,
2008; attempted suicides by inmates declined from 78 in 2008
to 56 in 2009.

* Indian country jails held fewer inmates for domestic
violence at midyear 2009 (252), continuing the downward trend
in the number held for this offense since 2007 (362).

* The percentage of certified correctional officers working
in Indian country jails increased steadily, from 63% at
midyear 2007 to 79% at midyear 2009.
--------------------------------------------------------

--------------------------------------------------------
American Indian and Alaska Natives Under Correctional
Supervision

The number of American Indians and Alaska Natives on
probation or parole, or incarcerated in jail or prison
reached 79,600 at midyear 2009, up nearly 6% from midyear
2008 and 12% from midyear 2007.

According to the U.S. Census Bureau's National Population
Estimates, 3,151,284 American Indians and Alaska Natives
lived in the United States on July 1, 2009, accounting for
about 1% of the U.S. resident population. The number of
American Indians and Alaska Natives in jail or prison
accounted for 1.3% (29,400) of all inmates in custody in jail
or prison in the U.S.

The local governing authority on Indian lands is typically a
tribal government or council. Jurisdiction over crimes in
Indian country depends on several factors, including the
identity of the victim and the offender, the severity of the
crime, and the location where the crime was committed. Tribal
jurisdiction includes crimes committed by Indians in Indian
country. Tribal rights to sentence offenders are limited to 1
year of imprisonment, a $5,000 fine, or both (25 U.S.C. &
1302(7)). Federal jurisdiction over crime in Indian country
includes 14 crimes under the Major Crimes Act of 1885 (18
U.S.C. & 1153), and state jurisdiction includes all crimes on
tribal lands specified under Public Law 280 (18 U.S.C. 7
1162).

At midyear 2009, tribal, federal, state, and local jail
correctional authorities held 932 American Indians per
100,000 American Indian U.S. residents. (American Indians in
this report include Alaska Natives.) The incarceration rate
for American Indians was about 25% higher than the overall
national incarceration rate of 747 per 100,000 persons other
than American Indians or Alaska Natives. Federal, state,
local, and tribal correctional authorities supervised an
estimated 79,600 American Indians in 2009, up from 75,400 in
2008 (figure 2). Between 2000 and 2009, the number of
American Indians confined in jails and prisons nationwide
grew on average by about 4.3% annually.

Among American Indians under any form of correctional
supervision in 2009, most (63% or 50,200) were supervised in
the community on probation or parole (table 1). A total of
29,400 American Indians were in jail or prison at midyear
2009. Almost 50% (14,646) were held in state prison, and
about 11% were held in federal prison (3,154). The remaining
11,576 American Indians were confined in Indian country jails
(2,176) and local jails (9,400). Some American Indians
confined in local jails may have been adjudicated by a tribal
criminal justice system and housed in jails under contracts
with tribal, city, or county governments.

Between midyear 2008 and 2009, the number of American Indians
under correctional supervision increased by 5.6%. The number
of American Indians confined in jails and prisons nationwide
grew by approximately 3.5% from 2008 to 2009. Over the
12-month period, the largest growth in the confined American
Indian population occurred in federal prison (5.5%) followed
by local jails (4.4%), state prisons (2.7%), and Indian
country jails (1.9%).
----------------------------------------------------------

On an average day in June, the percentage of occupied bed
space increased from 64.2% to 73.5%

At midyear 2009, the 80 jail facilities in Indian country
were rated to hold 2,891 inmates, down from 2,963 in 82
facilities during the same period in 2008 (table 2). The
average daily population (ADP) in June the population measure
used to calculate percent of capacity occupied increased by
nearly 12%, from 1,903 (June 2008) to 2,124 inmates (June
2009), while the capacity to hold inmates decreased by 2%.
Consequently, the percentage of rated capacity occupied in
Indian country jails increased from 64% to 73% during the
12-month period. On June 30, 2009, the 80 facilities held a
total of 2,176 inmates and were operating at 75% of rated
capacity, remaining relatively stable since 2007. From June
2004 to June 2009, the overall number of beds (or rated
capacity) grew at a faster rate (34%) than the the inmate
population (25%).

About 9 in 10 inmates were confined in the larger Indian
country jails rated to hold 25 or more inmates

Of the 2,176 inmates confined in 80 Indian country jails at
midyear 2009, about 87% (1,884) were held in 45 facilities
rated to hold 25 or more inmates (table 3). Nearly equal
shares of inmates were held in 30 facilities rated to hold 25
to 49 inmates (42%) and in 15 facilities rated to hold 50 or
more inmates (44%). The 35 facilities with a rated capacity
of fewer than 25 inmates accounted for about 44% of all
facilities and held about 13% of all jail inmates in Indian
country.

At midyear 2009, Indian country jails held an average of 27
inmates per facility. The confined jail population ranged
from a low of no inmates in 7 facilities to a high of 192
inmates in the Tohono O'odham Adult Detention Center. This
facility held nearly 9% of the total population in Indian
country jails at midyear 2009.

Eleven jails held more than half (51%) of the total inmate
population at midyear 2009 (table 4). Between midyear 2008
and midyear 2009, the population in these jails increased by
247 inmates (29%). In 2008, 9 of the 11 facilities held the
majority of jail inmates in Indian country. 

Over the 365-day period, 6 jails that held the majority of
inmates in Indian country in 2008 experienced large declines
in their jail populations. The combined decrease in the size
of the jail population in these facilities was 33% (90
inmates) from midyear 2008 to midyear 2009.

Among the 11 facilities holding the majority of inmates in
2009, the Gila River Department of Corrections and
Supervision-Adult facility reported the largest decline (30
inmates or 17%) in the number of jail inmates. The jail
population in this facility has decreased by 92 inmates (38%)
from its peak of 241 inmates reported at midyear 2007.

Two facilities, the Truxton Canyon Adult Detention Center and
the Laguna Tribal Police and Detention Center, were among the
11 facilities holding the majority of jail inmates in 2009.
These two facilities were not among the 11 facilities holding
the majority of inmates in 2008 (See Jails in Indian Country,
2008, NCJ 228271, BJS website, December 2008). 

The Truxton Canyon Adult Detention Center reported the
largest increase in the inmate population (66 inmates or
169%) between midyear 2008 and midyear 2009. The Laguna
Tribal Police and Detention Center increased by 58% (19
inmates) between 2008 and 2009.

Based on the 80 facilities responding to the survey in both
2008 and 2009, the overall change in the inmate population
(up 45 inmates) was relatively small. Thirty-three
facilities, mostly the larger facilities, accounted for this
increase (not shown in table).

Change in the size of the jail population in Indian country
was varied. More than half of the 80 jails experienced either
a decline (40 jails) or no change (7 jails) in the size of
their inmate population over the 12-month period ending
midyear 2009. Overall, the 50% increase (415 inmates) in the
jail population in 33 jails was offset by a 30% decline (370
inmates) in 40 jails.

The use of jail space varied by facility size

Indian country jails rated to hold 25 to 49 inmates were
operating at 89% of their rated capacity on June 30, 2009,
and at 79% on an average day in June. An average day in June
was based on the average daily population, or the sum of the
numbers held on each day in June, divided by 30. In contrast,
the lowest percentage of capacity occupied during June 2009
was among the 11 small jails rated to hold fewer than 10
inmates. These facilities were operating at 21% of rated
capacity at midyear and at 17% of capacity on an average day
in June 2009 (figure 3).

Compared to facilities in all other size categories, the
large jails with a rated capacity of 50 or more inmates
reported the only increase in occupied bed space between 2008
and 2009. The percentage of capacity occupied in these jails
increased from 51% to 69% during the 12 months ending at
midyear 2009, and from 49% to 73% on an average day in June
2008 and 2009.

The amount of bed space occupied was also measured based on a
facility's most crowded day in June. Nearly half (38
facilities) of the 80 facilities in Indian country were
operating above rated capacity on the most crowded day in
June (table 5). Of those facilities, 18 were operating above
rated capacity on June 30, and 13 were operating above rated
capacity on an average day during June 2009.

Thirteen jails were operating at more than 50% over capacity
on their most crowded day in June 2009

At midyear 2009, 13 jails in Indian country reported
operating at more than 50% over rated capacity on the
facility's most crowded day in June 2009, down from 18
facilities during June 2008 (table 6). Eight of these 13
jails were rated to hold 25 or more inmates, and 5 were rated
to hold fewer than 25 inmates.     

Tohono O'odham Adult Detention Center (AZ), with a rated
capacity of 107 inmates, was the largest of these jails and
operated at 86% over capacity on its peak day in June 2009.
Between July 2008 and June 2009, this facility was renovated
to accommodate 73 additional beds. As a result, the percent
of occupied space declined from 429% on the facility's most
crowded day in June 2008 to 186% in June 2009.

Among the 13 facilities operating at more than 50% over rated
capacity on their most crowded day in June, 7 were also
operating at more than 50% over capacity at midyear 2009 and
5 on an average day in June 2009. Four facilities were
operating at more than 50% over capacity on all three
measures (midyear, most crowed day, and the average day in
June 2009): White Mountain Apache Detention Center, Truxton
Canyon Adult Detention Center, Northern Cheyenne Adult
Detention Center, and the Tohono O'odham Adult Detention
Center.

High volumes inmates were processed through Indian country
jails

Eighty Indian country jails admitted 11,357 persons during
June 2009, up slightly from 11,149 admissions in 81
facilities during June 2008 (table 7). The number of
admissions grew by 1.6% in the 79 facilities that reported
data on admissions in both June 2009 (11,323) and June 2008
(11,147) (not shown in a table).

Admissions to facilities rated to hold between 25 to 49
inmates accounted for about 48% (5,503) of all admissions in
June 2009, down from 59% of all admissions in June 2008. The
largest Indian country jails accounted for less than 20% of
all facilities and reported a total increase of nearly 75% in
the number of jail admissions during the 12-month period.
Admissions to the largest Indian country jails increased from
1,915 to 3,342 from June 2008 to June 2009. The 15 jails
rated to hold 50 or more inmates had the highest average
number of admissions per month (233), compared to jails in
all other size categories (not shown).

Inmate deaths and attempted suicides in Indian country jails
declined

Indian country jail authorities reported no deaths in custody
between July 1, 2008, and June 30, 2009, down from 4 reported
deaths during the 12-month period ending June 30, 2008.
Attempted suicides by inmates declined from 78 in 2008 to 56
in 2009.

Expected length of stay was 5.6 days for Indian country jail
inmates in June 2009

During June 2009, the expected averagelength of stay for
inmates confined in Indian country jails was 5.6 days, up
from 5.1 days during June 2008. Length of stay is the time
held in custody from admission to release. The expected
length of stay for inmates was the highest (9.1 days) in
facilities that were rated to hold 50 or more inmates, down
from 10.3 days in June 2008. Inmates held in jails rated to
hold less than 10 inmates experienced the shortest expected
length of stay (2.1 days).

Inmate characteristics remain relatively unchanged; the
number held for domestic violence declined

Inmate characteristics by sex, age, and offense have changed
in absolute numbers since 2000 (table 8). However, the
distribution within most categories remained stable between
2000 and 2008, with a change in the distribution of inmates
by sex, conviction status, and offense type at midyear 2009.

Adult males have accounted for the largest portion of the
inmate population in Indian country jails during the decade.
The female jail population has had small but steady increases
from midyear 2000 to 2008, with a nearly 8% decrease in the
size of this population between midyear 2008 and midyear
2009. Except for one juvenile female inmate, the decline was
entirely among the adult female jail population.

The percentage of convicted inmates increased from 57% in
2002 to 69% in 2009. Inmates confined for a violent offense
made up about 37% of the jail population at midyear 2009,
down from 41% at midyear 2008. Most (75%) of this decline was
among the population held for domestic violence. Domestic
violence (12%) and simple or aggravated assault (15%)
accounted for the largest percentage of violent offenders
held in 2009, followed by unspecified violent offenses (8%)
and rape or sexual assault (2%). Since peaking at midyear
2007, the percentage of inmates held for domestic violence
has steadily declined, from 20% in 2007 to 12% in 2009. The
Gila River Department of Corrections-Adult accounted for a
large portion of the decline in domestic violence offenders
between 2007 and 2009. It reported a 38% decrease in the
confined inmate population between midyear 2007 (241) and
midyear 2009 (149), and a 74% decline in the number of
inmates held for a domestic violence (from 180 in 2007 to 46
in 2009).

Steady increase in the number of certified correctional
officers and in-service training

Seventy-nine Indian country jails employed 1,332 persons at
midyear 2009 (table 9). About 69% (916) of all personnel were
jail operations staff, including correctional officers and
other staff who spent more than 50% of their time supervising
inmates. The remaining 416 jail personnel included
administrative employees, educational staff, technical or
professional staff, clerical, maintenance, or food service
staff, and other job functions. Overall, the ratio of inmates
to jail operations employees was 2.4 inmates to 1 employee at
midyear 2009, remaining relatively stable since 2008 (2.3 to
1) and 2004 (2.5 to 1).

Seventy-six facilities reported that 710 (79%) correctional
officers had received basic detention officer certification,
up from 69% in 2008 and 63% in 2007 (not shown). Seventy-four
facilities reported that 750 (84%) correctional officers had
received 40 hours of in-service training, up from 74% in 2008
and 70% in 2007.
                         
Methodology

The Annual Survey of Jails in Indian Country (SJIC) includes
all known Indian country correctional facilities operated by
tribal authorities or the Bureau of Indian Affairs (BIA),
U.S. Department of the Interior. The survey was conducted in
June 2009 and included the number of inmates and percent of
capacity occupied based on the ADP, midyear population, and
peak population in facilities in June 2009 (table 10).

Through a cooperative agreement with BJS, Westat, Inc.
conducted the SJIC to describe all adult and juvenile jail
facilities and detention centers in Indian country. For this
report, Indian country includes reservations, pueblos,
rancherias, and other appropriate areas (18 U.S.C. & 1151).
The reference date for the survey is June 30, 2009.

Annually, BIA provides BJS a list of Indian country jail
facilities, including detention centers, jails, and other
correctional facilities operated by tribal authorities or
BIA. BJS uses this list to update its existing roster of
jails in Indian country. BJS obtains data from administrators
of Indian country jails by mailed questionnaires and through
follow-up phone calls and facsimiles.

In 2004, BJS contacted administrators in 70 facilities to
participate in the survey. BJS received responses from 61
facilities; 7 did not respond, and 2 facilities were
non-operational. In 2007, the BJS roster consisted of 86
facilities. Seventy-nine of the facility administrators
responded to the survey; 4 did not respond, and BJS found
that 3 facilities were non-operational. In 2008, BJS's roster
of Indian country jails consisted of 85 facilities. BJS
received responses from 82 facility administrators; there
were no nonrespondents, and 3 facilities were
non-operational. For 2009, the BJS roster consisted of 86
facilities. BJS received responses from 80 facility
administrators; there were no nonrespondents, and 6
facilities were non-operational.

For comparison over time, BJS estimated data on inmate
populations for the 7 facilities in 2004 and 4 facilities in
2008 that did not respond to the surveys.'

Expected length of stay

The stock-flow ratio method was used to measure the expected
average length of stay for inmates held during June 2009 in
the 80 Indian country jails that responded to stock and flow
items in the survey:

Stock--average daily population

Flow--inmate admissions during June 2009

Stock-flow ratio in June 2009 (2,124/11,357=0.187)

Expected length of stay in days (0.187   30) is the average
number of days held in custody from admission to release.

Indian country is a statutory term that includes all lands
within an Indian reservation,dependent Indian communities,
and Indian trust allotments (18 U.S.C. & 1151). Courts
interpret Section 1151 to include all lands held in trust for
tribes or their members. (See United States v. Roberts, 185
F.3d 1125 (10th Cir. 1999).) Tribal authority to imprison
American Indian offenders is limited to one year per offense
by statute (25 U.S.C. & 1302), a $5,000 fine, or both.

Tribal law enforcement agencies act as first responders to
both felony and misdemeanor crimes. For most of Indian
country, the federal government provides felony law
enforcement concerning crimes by or against Indians. Certain
areas of Indian country are under Public Law 83-280, as
amended. P.L. 280 conferred jurisdiction on certain states
over Indian country and suspended enforcement of the Major
Crimes Act (18 U.S.C. & 1153) and the General Crimes Act (18
U.S.C. & 1152) in those areas. Indian tribes retain
concurrent jurisdiction to enforce laws in Indian country
where P.L. 280 applies. 

---------------------------------------------------------
Office of Justice Programs * Innovation * Partnerships *
Safer Neighborhoods * http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov
----------------------------------------------------------

----------------------------------------------------------
The Bureau of Justice Statistics is the statistical agency of
the U.S. Department of Justice. James P. Lynch is the
director.

This Bulletin was written by Todd D. Minton. Paul Guerino and
Tracy Snell provided statistical review and verification 
of the report.

At Westat, Karla Eisen carried out the data collection and
processing with the assistance of Melissa Wilson. Mary Ann
Deak produced table 10 and the appendix tables.

Georgette Walsh and Jill Duncan edited the report, Tina
Dorsey produced the report, and Jayne Robinson prepared the
report for final printing under the supervision of Doris J.
James.

February 2011, NCJ 232223

This report in portable document format and in ASCII and its
related statistical data and tables are available at the BJS
website:
http://bjs.ojp.usdoj.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbdetail&iid=2223.

----------------------------------------------------------
2/17/2011/JER