U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Programs
Bureau of Justice Statistics

-----------------------------------------------------------
This report is one in series. More recent editions may be 
available. To view a list of all reports in the series go to 
http://www.bjs.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbse&sid=32

This file is text only without graphics and many of the 
tables. A Zip archive of the tables in this report in spreadsheet 
format (.csv) and the full report including tables and graphics in 
.pdf format is available on BJS website at: 
http://www.bjs.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbdetail&iid=4678
---------------------------------------------------------

**********************************************************
Jails in Indian Country, 2012

Todd D. Minton, BJS Statistician

June 2013, NCJ 242187
**********************************************************

A total of 2,364 inmates were confined in 79 Indian country 
jails at midyear 2012, a 5.6% increase from the 2,239 inmates 
confined in 80 operating facilities at midyear 2011 (figure 
1). During the 12-month period between June 2011 and 2012, 
the average number of inmates per operating facility 
increased slightly, from 28 jail inmates at midyear 2011 to 
30 inmates at midyear 2012. Since 2000, the average number of 
inmates per operating facility increased nearly 15%.

**********************************
Jails operating in Indian country 
increased from 68 facilities in 
2004 to 79 in 2012
**********************************

The Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS) has conducted the 
Annual Survey of Jails in Indian Country (SJIC) since 2004, 
although the survey was not conducted in 2005 or 2006. The 
number of known operating jail facilities in Indian country 
increased from 68 in 2004 to 79 in 2012. Over the 8-year 
period, 11 facilities permanently closed and 21 facilities 
were newly constructed. Two facilities in 2011 (one adult and 
one juvenile) were treated as one respondent in 2010. Two 
facilities in 2011 merged into one facility in 2012. A number 
of facilities were also determined to be out of scope for the 
survey, including one that was included in the 2009 survey, 
four in the 2010 survey, and three in the 2011 survey.

BJS estimated inmate population counts for seven facilities 
in 2004 and four facilities in 2007 that did not respond to 
the surveys. All known operating facilities responded to the 
2008 through 2012 surveys. (See Methodology for information 
on jails in Indian country, including details on facility 
counts and participation in the surveys.)

**********************************************************

***********
HIGHLIGHTS
***********

* At midyear 2012, a total of 2,364 inmates were confined in 
Indian country jails—a 5.6% increase from the 2,239 inmates 
confined at midyear 2011.

* The number of inmates admitted into Indian country jails 
during June 2012 (12,502) was more than five times the size 
of the average daily population (2,253).

* Fourteen jails held 51% of the total inmate population in 
Indian country at midyear 2012.

* For the 79 facilities operating in June 2012, the average 
expected length of stay at admission for inmates was five 
days.

* Nearly a third of inmates in Indian country jails were 
confined for a violent offense at midyear 2012. Domestic 
violence (15%) and aggravated or simple assault (9%) 
accounted for the largest percentage of violent offenders.
**********************************************************

**************************************
Percentage of occupied bed space on an 
average day in June increased slightly 
from 67% to 70%
*************************************

At midyear 2012, the jail facilities in Indian country were 
rated to hold 3,221 inmates, up from 3,136 in 2011, an 
overall increase in rated capacity by 85 beds (table 1). 
Based on the 73 facilities that reported rated capacity in 
both 2011 and 2012, the amount of bed space remained the same 
in 63 facilities, increased by 64 beds in 7 facilities, and 
declined by 11 beds in 3 facilities (not shown in table).

When measured relative to the average daily population (ADP), 
the percentage of rated capacity occupied in Indian country 
jails went up slightly from 67% in June 2011 to 70% in June 
2012. This increase was the result of a larger increase in 
the ADP (up 7%) compared to rated capacity (up 3%).

When measured relative to the midyear inmate count (2,364), 
Indian country jails operated at 73% of rated capacity in 
2012, up slightly from 71% at midyear 2011. From June 2000 to 
June 2012, the overall rated capacity grew at a faster rate 
(up 55% from 2,076 to 3,221 between 2000 and 2012) than the 
midyear inmate population (up 33% from 1,775 to 2,364 during 
the same period).

**************************************
Fourteen jails held more than half 
of all inmates
**************************************

Fourteen jails held 51% of the total Indian country jail 
inmate population at midyear 2012 (table 2). Between midyear 
2011 and midyear 2012, the population in the 14 jails 
reporting data in both years increased by 180 inmates (up 
18%). Over the 12-month period, 10 of these facilities 
experienced an increase of 197 inmates in their midyear jail 
population and 3 facilities experienced a decrease of 17 
inmates. The population in one facility did not change.

Among the 14 facilities holding the majority of inmates, the 
White Mountain Apache Detention Center reported the largest 
increase in absolute numbers and percentage change of jail 
inmates from midyear 2011 to midyear 2012 (up 86% or 44 
inmates). Three of the 14 facilities reported a decline in 
their inmate population from midyear 2011 to midyear 2012—The 
Gila River Department of Rehabilitation and Supervision - 
Adult (down about 6% or 10 inmates), the Nisqually Adult 
Corrections Center (down about 9% or 6 inmates), and the 
Menominee Tribal Detention Facility (down 2.0% or 1 inmate).

Based on the 77 facilities responding to the survey in both 
2011 and 2012, the inmate population increased by 191 
inmates, from 2,125 inmates at midyear 2011 to 2,316 in 2012 
(not shown in table). Between midyear 2011 and midyear 2012, 
over half (41) of the 77 jails experienced an increase in the 
size of their inmate population. Thirty-six jails experienced 
either a decrease (34 jails) or no change (2 jails) in the 
size of their inmate population over the 12-month period 
ending midyear 2012.

**************************************
Jail inmates were concentrated in 
facilities rated to hold 25 or more 
inmates
**************************************

Of the inmates confined in the 79 Indian country jails at 
midyear 2012, 86% (2,022) were held in 49 facilities rated to 
hold 25 or more inmates (table 3). The 30 facilities with a 
rated capacity of fewer than 25 inmates accounted for about 
38% of all facilities and held 14% of all jail inmates in 
Indian country. The overall jail population ranged from a low 
of no inmates in 2 facilities to a high of 229 inmates in the 
Tohono O’odham Adult Detention Center, which held nearly 10% 
of the total population in Indian country jails at midyear 
2012.


**************************************
Jails holding 50 or more inmates 
reported stability in their use of 
jail space in June 2012
**************************************

The 17 jails with a rated capacity of 50 or more inmates 
reported no change in the use of their bed space at midyear 
2012 and on an average day in June 2012 (figure 2). These 
jails were operating at 70% of capacity during this period. 
On their most crowded day in June 2012, the 17 largest jails 
were operating at 85% of their rated capacity. The 62 
facilities rated to hold fewer than 50 inmates reported less 
stability at midyear 2012 (76% of rated capacity), on an 
average day in June 2012 (70%), and on their most crowded day 
in June 2012 (109%).

About 44% (35 facilities) of the 79 facilities in 2012 were 
operating above rated capacity on the most crowded day in 
June—similar to 2011 (table 4). Of these 35 facilities, 21 
were operating above rated capacity on June 29, 2012, and 15 
were operating above rated capacity on an average day in June 
2012.

**************************************
Sixteen jails were operating at more 
than 50% over capacity on their most 
crowded day in June 2012
**************************************

Sixteen jails in Indian country reported operating at more 
than 50% over rated capacity on the facility’s most crowded 
day in June 2012—no change from June 2011 (table 5). Half (8) 
of these jails were rated to hold 25 or more inmates. The 
Tohono O’odham Adult Detention Center (rated capacity of 107) 
was the largest of these jails and operated at 114% or 122 
inmates over capacity on their peak day in June 2012.

Among the 16 facilities operating at more than 50% over rated 
capacity on their most crowded day in June 2012, six were 
also operating at more than 50% over capacity at midyear 2012 
and four on an average day in June 2012. Two facilities—
Tohono O’odham Adult Detention Center and the Fort Belknap 
Adult Detention Center—were operating at more than 50% over 
capacity on all three measures (midyear, most crowed day, and 
the average day in June 2012).

**************************************
Jail admissions declined in about half 
of Indian country jails; one facility 
reported large increases
**************************************

During 2012, the 79 Indian country jails admitted 12,502 
persons—similar to the 12,784 persons admitted to the 80 
operating facilities in June 2011 (table 6). In 2012, 
admissions to facilities rated to hold from 25 to 49 inmates 
accounted for about 55% (6,831) of all admissions. The 
remaining jail admissions occurred in facilities rated to 
hold 50 or more inmates (27%), 10 to 24 inmates (16%), and 
fewer than 10 inmates (2%) in June 2012.

Despite the overall stability in Indian country jail 
admissions, the 70 facilities that provided data in both 
years reported a 10% increase, from 10,463 admissions in June 
2011 to 11,474 in June 2012 (table 7). Specifically, 40 
facilities reported either a decline (36) or no change (4) in 
their admissions, and 30 facilities reported an increase in 
their admissions. Over half of the increase in admissions 
came from the Navajo Department of Corrections - Chinle. 
Despite the increase in ADP and admissions in the 70 
facilities, the average expected length of stay (the time 
held in custody from admission to release) remained stable 
(5.5 days) in June 2011 and June 2012.

**************************************
A third of inmates were held for 
a violent offense
**************************************

While the number of inmates confined in Indian country jails 
increased between 2004 and 2012, the distribution of inmates 
by sex and age remained relatively stable (table 8). Males 
accounted for the largest portion of the inmate population in 
Indian country jails throughout the decade, as nearly 8 in 10 
inmates were male. The female jail population had small 
increases through midyear 2012 and has represented about 20% 
of the jail population every year since 2000. The juvenile 
population in Indian country jails remained relatively stable 
between 2007 and 2012, representing 11% of the jail 
population in 2012.

The distribution of inmates by conviction status and offense 
type experienced some change. After the percentage of 
convicted inmates peaked in 2009 at 69%, it declined at 
midyear 2010 (down to 59%), midyear 2011 (down to 57%), and 
midyear 2012 (down to 56%). Between midyear 2010 and 2012, 
about 3 in 10 (32%) inmates in Indian country jails were 
confined for a violent offense, including rape or sexual 
assault, aggravated or simple assault, domestic violence, and 
other violence—down from about 4 in 10 inmates each year 
between midyear 2004 and midyear 2009.

Between midyear 2011 and 2012, the number of inmates charged 
with domestic violence and other unspecified violent offenses 
increased, while the number of inmates held for aggravated or 
simple assault declined slightly. At midyear 2012, domestic 
violence (15%) and aggravated or simple assault (9%) 
accounted for the largest percentage of violent offenders. 
Inmates held for unspecified violence (7%) and rape or sexual 
assault (2%) accounted for about 9% of the jail population.

Forty-nine facilities held at least one inmate for domestic 
violence. Four facilities accounted for over half of the 
inmates held for domestic violence, and 14 facilities held 
nearly three-quarters of all inmates confined for domestic 
violence. Eight facilities held around half and 19 held an 
estimated three-quarters of the inmates confined for 
aggravated or simple assault. In total, 45 facilities (60% of 
facilities reporting inmate offense) held at least one inmate 
for aggravated or simple assault.

**************************************
Slight decline in correctional staff
**************************************

The 76 Indian country jails that reported information on 
staff employed 1,519 persons at midyear 2012 (table 9). About 
73% (1,102) of these personnel were jail operations staff, 
including correctional officers and other staff who spent 
more than 50% of their time supervising inmates. This was up 
from 69% of all staff during the same period in 2010 and 
stable since 2011. (Overall, the ratio of inmates to jail 
operations employees was 2.1 inmates to 1 jail operations 
employee at midyear 2012, up from 1.8 to 1 in 2011, and down 
from 2.5 to 1 in 2004.)

In 2012, 417 jail personnel in these 76 Indian country jails 
were administrative employees; educational staff; technical 
or professional staff; clerical, maintenance, or food service 
staff; and staff performing other job functions. Based on the 
74 facilities that reported on staffing in both 2011 and 
2012, the number of jail operations staff declined nearly 2% 
(18 persons) (not shown in table). 

**************************************
Attempted suicides in Indian country 
jails declined since 2002
**************************************

Indian country jail authorities reported two deaths in 
custody during the 12-month period ending June 30, 2012—one 
was reported as a suicide. One death was reported during the 
12-month period ending June 30, 2011, two deaths were 
reported during the 12-month period ending June 30, 2010, no 
deaths were reported during the 12-month period ending June 
30, 2009, and four deaths were reported during the 12-month 
period ending June 30, 2008 (not shown in table).

During the 12-month period ending June 30, 2012, 75 
facilities reported a total of 38 attempted suicides. The 
number of attempted suicides by inmates increased slightly, 
from 32 in 2011 to 37 in 2012, based on 71 facilities 
reporting valid data on attempted suicide in both years. 
Since 2002, when attempted suicides peaked, the number of 
attempted suicides declined by nearly 86%. The number of 
attempted suicides declined from 230 in 2002 to 33 in 2012, 
based on facilities reporting in both years.*
Footnote***The number of attempted suicides may differ from 
previously published counts, see Methodology for details.***

************
Methodology
************

The Bureau of Justice Statistics’ (BJS) Annual Survey of 
Jails in Indian Country (SJIC) includes all known Indian 
country correctional facilities operated by tribal 
authorities or the Bureau of Indian Affairs (BIA), U.S. 
Department of the Interior. The survey was conducted in June 
2012 and included the number of inmates and percentage of 
capacity occupied based on the average daily population 
(ADP), midyear population, and peak population in facilities 
in June 2012 (appendix table 1). The midyear count is the 
number of inmates held on the last weekday in June, ADP is 
the number of inmates confined each day in June divided by 
30, and the peak population is the number of inmates held on 
the day in June in which the custody population of a facility 
was the largest.

Through a cooperative agreement with BJS, Westat, Inc. 
conducted the SJIC to describe all adult and juvenile jail 
facilities and detention centers in Indian country. For this 
report, Indian country includes reservations, pueblos, 
rancherias, and other appropriate areas (18 U.S.C. § 1151). 
The reference date for the survey is June 29, 2012.

Indian country is a statutory term that includes all lands 
within an Indian reservation, dependent Indian communities, 
and Indian trust allotments (18 U.S.C. § 1151). Courts 
interpret Section 1151 to include all lands held in trust for 
tribes or their members. (See United States v. Roberts, 185 
F.3d 1125 (10th Cir. 1999).) Tribal authority to imprison 
American Indian offenders had been limited to one year per 
offense by statute (25 U.S.C. § 1302), a $5,000 fine, or 
both. On July 29, 2010, the Tribal Law and Order Act of 2010 
(TLOA) was signed into law, expanding tribal court sentencing 
authority. As a result, offenders may serve potentially 
lengthier sentences (up to 3 years) in Indian country 
correctional facilities (P.L. 111-211, H.R. 725, 124 Stat. 
2258).

Tribal law enforcement agencies act as first responders to 
both felony and misdemeanor crimes. For most of Indian 
country, the federal government provides felony law 
enforcement concerning crimes by or against American Indians 
and Alaska Natives. Certain areas of Indian country are under 
Public Law 83-280, as amended. Public Law 280 conferred 
jurisdiction over Indian country to certain states and 
suspended enforcement of the Major Crimes Act (18 U.S.C. § 
1153) and the General Crimes Act (18 U.S.C. § 1152) in those 
areas. Indian tribes retain concurrent jurisdiction to 
enforce laws in Indian country where Public Law 280 applies.

Annually, BJS updates its existing roster of jails in Indian 
country. BJS obtains data from administrators of Indian 
country jails by faxed questionnaires and through follow-up 
phone calls and facsimiles. The survey universe and response 
rates have changed over time. Over the 8-year period, a 
number of facilities have closed and new facilities have been 
constructed (table 10). For comparison over time, data on 
inmate population were estimated for the seven facilities in 
2004 and four facilities in 2007 that did not respond to the 
surveys. The rated capacity for two facilities at midyear 
2012 was based on their rated capacity in 2011. The peak 
population for four facilities during June 2012 was based on 
their reported midyear count or ADP, whichever was greater.

**************************************
Attempted suicides in 2002 and 2012
**************************************

When analyzing data on attempted suicides, an analysis of the 
number of facilities reporting in both years is necessary to 
draw a meaningful comparison. For 2002, data on attempted 
suicides (282) were reported from 64 of the 70 facilities in 
operation. For 2012, data on attempted suicides (38) were 
reported from 75 of the 79 facilities in operation. Over this 
period, a number of facilities were closed, newly 
constructed, or built to house juvenile inmates only. 
Facilities reporting attempted suicides in both years (59) 
included 53 matching facilities and an additional 6 tribes 
that operated 6 juvenile-only facilities in 2011 that were 
not in operation in 2002; however, those 6 tribes previously 
included 6 facilities that held both adult and juvenile 
inmates in 2002. Four facilities either did not respond in 
2002 or did not respond in 2012. Eleven facilities in 2002 
were closed in 2012, and 16 facilities in 2012 were not in 
operation in 2002.

**************************
Expected length of stay
**************************

The stock-flow ratio method was used to measure the expected 
average length of stay for inmates held during June 2012 in 
the 79 facilities that responded to the survey. Data were 
estimated for four facilities in 2012 that did not report 
their ADP and admissions.

Stock—average daily population = 2,253

Flow—inmate admissions during June 2012 = 12,502

Stock-flow ratio in June 2012 = 0.180 (2,253/12,502 = 0.180)

Expected length of stay in days (the average number of days 
held in custody from admission to release) = 5.4 days (0.180 
x 30 days = 5.4)

The Bureau of Justice Statistics is the statistical agency of 
the U.S. Department of Justice. William Sabol is the acting 
director.

This report was written by Todd D. Minton. E. Ann Carson, 
Ph.D., provided statistical review and verification of the 
report. Sheri Simmons verified the appendix tables.


At Westat, Karla Eisen carried out the data collection and 
processing with the assistance of Mary Ann Deak, Melissa 
Wilson, and Jasmine Folz.

Morgan Young edited the report, and Barbara Quinn produced 
the report under the supervision of Doris J. James.

June 2013, NCJ 242187
**********************************************************

************************************************
Office of Justice Programs
Innovation • Partnerships • Safer Neighborhoods
www.ojp.usdoj.gov
*************************************************

*************************
6/18/2013/ JER/ 9:19
*************************

