U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Programs
Bureau of Justice Statistics

December 2011, NCJ 236073
Jails in Indian Country, 2010 
Todd D. Minton, BJS Statistician

---------------------------------------------------
This file is text without graphics and many of the
tables. A Zip archive of the tables in this report in
spreadsheet format (.cvs) and the full report including
tables and graphs in .pdf format are available at:
http://bjs.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbdetail&iid=2373

This reports is one in series. More recent editions 
may be available. To view a list of all reports in the series 
go  to http://bjs.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbse&sid-32
---------------------------------------------------

At midyear 2010, a total of 2,119 inmates were confined in
Indian country jails, a 2.6% decrease from the 2,176 inmates
confined at midyear 2009 (figure 1). This count was based on
data from 75 facilities, including jails, confinement
facilities, detention centers, and other correctional
facilities that were operating in Indian country at midyear
2010. For 2009, the number of inmates was based on data for
79 facilities in operation at midyear 2009. Between 2004 and
2010, the number of inmates held in Indian country jails
increased by 21%, from 1,745 to 2,119. On June 30, 2010, the
number of American Indians and Alaska Natives confined in
jails outside of Indian country (9,900) was nearly 5 times
the number held in jails in Indian country.

The number of operating jails in Indian country increased
between 2004 and 2010

Through the Annual Survey of Jails in Indian Country (SJIC),
the Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS) collected data from
correctional facilities between 2004 and 2010. The survey was
not conducted in 2005 or 2006. The number of facilities
increased from 68 in 2004 to 75 in 2010. Over the 6-year
period, 11 facilities permanently closed and 21 facilities
were newly constructed. A number of facilities were also
determined to be out of scope of the survey, including 4
facilities that were included in the 2009 survey. BJS
estimated inmate population counts for 7 facilities in 2004
and 4 facilities in 2007 that did not respond to the surveys.
All known operating facilities responded to the 2008, 2009,
and 2010 surveys. (See Methodology for information on jails
in Indian country, including details on facility counts and
participation in the surveys.)

************************************************
HIGHLIGHTS

* Nationwide, 78,900 American Indians and Alaska Natives were
under correctional supervision in the United States.

* About 62% of these offenders (48,700) were under
supervision in the community on probation or parole in 2010,
and 38% (30,200) were in prison or jail.

* At midyear 2010, a total of 2,119 inmates were confined in
Indian country jails, a 2.6% decrease from the 2,176 inmates
confined at midyear 2009.

* Fourteen jails held more than half (51%) of the total
inmate population in Indian country at midyear 2010.

* The number of inmates admitted into Indian country jails
(12,545) during June 2010 was about 6 times the size of the
average daily population (2,009).

*  For the 75 facilities operating in June 2010, the expected
average length of stay for inmates was 4.8 days.

* The expected average length of stay during June 2010 was
the highest (12.5 days) in facilities rated to hold 50 or
more inmates and the lowest (2.3 days) for jails rated to
hold 10 to 24 inmates.

* After a peak in the percentage of convicted inmates in 2009
(69%), the percentage of convicted inmates in 2010 declined
to 59%.

* About 3 in 10 inmates in Indian country jails were confined
for a violent offense at midyear 2010, down from about 4 in
10 inmates in each year between midyear 2004 and midyear
2009.
************************************************
------------------------------------------------
American Indians and Alaska Natives under correctional
supervision

The number of American Indians and Alaska Natives on
probation or parole, or incarcerated in jail or prison
reached 78,900 at midyear 2010, down from 79,600 in 2009
(figure 2). According to the U.S. Census Bureau, nearly 3.2
million American Indians and Alaska Natives lived in the
United States on July 1, 2010, accounting for about 1% of the
U.S. resident population. The number of American Indians and
Alaska Natives in jail or prison accounted for 1.4% (30,200)
of all inmates in custody in jail or prison in the United
States. American Indians and Alaska Natives held in Indian
country jails accounted for 7% of all American Indians and
Alaska Natives confined in jail or prison nationwide.

At midyear 2010, tribal, federal, state, and local jail
correctional authorities held about 950 American Indians per
100,000 American Indian U.S. residents, up from a rate of
about 930 during the same period in 2009. (American Indians
in this report include Alaska Natives.) The incarceration
rate for American Indians was higher than the overall
national incarceration rate of about 700 per 100,000 persons
other than American Indians or Alaska Natives. Between 2000
and 2010, the number of American Indians confined in jails
and prisons nationwide grew on average by about 4.1%
annually.

Among American Indians under any form of correctional
supervision in 2010, most (62% or 48,700) were supervised in
the community on probation or parole (table 1). A total of
30,200 American Indians were in jail or prison at midyear
2010. Almost half (14,940) were held in state prison, and
about 11% were held in federal prison (3,258). The remaining
12,019 American Indians were confined in Indian country jails
(2,119) and local jails (9,900). Some American Indians
confined in local jails may have been adjudicated by a tribal
criminal justice system and housed in jails under contracts
with tribal, city, or county governments.

Between midyear 2009 and 2010, the number of American Indians
under correctional supervision declined by less than 1%. The
number of American Indians supervised in the community on
probation or parole declined by 3.0%. The overall decline in
the number of American Indians under correctional supervision
was offset by an increase (up 2.7%) in the number of American
Indians confined in jails and prisons between midyear 2009
and 2010. Over the 12-month period, the largest growth in the
confined American Indian population occurred in local jails
(up 5.3%), followed by federal prisons (up 3.3%), and state
prisons (up 2.0%). The inmate population in Indian country
jails declined by 2.6% between midyear 2009 and 2010.

------------------------------------------------------
Jurisdiction over crimes committed in Indian country

The local governing authority on Indian lands is typically a
tribal government or council. Jurisdiction over crimes in
Indian country depends on several factors, including the
identity of the victim and the offender, the severity of the
crime, and the location where the crime was committed. Tribal
jurisdiction includes crimes committed by Indians in Indian
country. Tribal rights to sentence offenders are limited to 1
year of imprisonment, a $5,000 fine, or both (25 U.S.C. &
1302(7)). Federal jurisdiction over crime in Indian country
includes 14 crimes under the Major Crimes Act of 1885 (18
U.S.C. & 1153), and state jurisdiction includes all crimes on
tribal lands specified under Public Law 280 (18 U.S.C. 7
1162).
------------------------------------------------------

On an average day in June, the percentage of occupied bed
space decreased from 71% to 67%

At midyear 2010, the 75 jail facilities in Indian country
were rated to hold 3,001 inmates, an overall rated capacity
that remained relatively stable from the level measured in
2009, when 79 operating facilities reported 3,009 beds (table
2). Based on the 74 facilities that reported rated capacity
in both 2009 and 2010 (one facility was not operating in
2009), the amount of bed space remained the same in 57
facilities, increased by 190 beds in 10 facilities, and
declined by 156 beds in 7 facilities.

When measured relative to the average daily population (ADP),
the percentage of rated capacity occupied in Indian country
jails decreased from 71% in June 2009 to 67% in June 2010.
This change was a result of the decline in the ADP and
stability in the total number of beds. The ADP in June
decreased by 5%, from 2,124 inmates in June 2009 to 2,009 in
June 2010, while the total capacity to hold inmates remained
stable.

When measured relative to the midyear inmate count on June
30, 2010, Indian country jails held a total of 2,119 inmates
and were operating at 71% of rated capacity, remaining
relatively stable since 2008. From June 2000 to June 2010,
the overall number of beds (or rated capacity) grew at a
faster rate (up 45%) than the midyear inmate population grew
(up 19%).

Fourteen jails held more than half of all inmates

Based on the 74 facilities responding to the survey in both
2009 and 2010, the overall change in the inmate population
was small (down 67 inmates). Thirty-one facilities accounted
for this decrease (not shown in table). Change in the size of
the jail population in Indian country varied. More than half
of the 74 jails experienced either an increase (36 jails) or
no change (7 jails) in the size of their inmate population
over the 12-month period ending midyear 2010. Overall, the
28% decrease (349 inmates) in the jail population in 31 jails
was offset by a 33% increase (282 inmates) in 36 jails.

Fourteen jails held 51% of the total inmate population at
midyear 2010 (table 3). Between midyear 2009 and midyear
2010, the population in these 14 jails decreased by 32
inmates (down 3%). Over the 12-month period, 5 of these
facilities experienced a decline of 142 inmates in their
populations, 8 facilities experienced an increase (110
inmates), and one facility was not operating in 2009.

Among the 14 facilities holding the majority of inmates, the
Oglala Sioux Tribal Offenders facility reported the largest
decline (down 41 inmates or 43%) in the number of jail
inmates. The Gila River Department of Corrections and
Supervision-Adult had the second largest decline in absolute
numbers (down 34 inmates). The midyear jail population in
this facility decreased by 126 inmates (52%) from its peak of
241 inmates reported at midyear 2007.

The Fort Hall Police Department and Adult Detention Center
reported the largest increase in the inmate population (up 40
inmates) between midyear 2009 and midyear 2010. In 2010, this
jail moved into a new facility rated to hold 80 inmates, up
from 28 at midyear 2009.

Five facilities were not among the facilities holding the
majority of inmates in 2009: the Choctaw Justice Complex
Adult Detention, Warm Springs Police Department and Adult
Detention Center, Chief Ignacio Justice Center Adult
Detention, Fort Hall Police Department and Adult Detention
Center, and the Colorado River Indian Tribes Adult Detention
Center. (See Jails in Indian Country, 2009, BJS Web, NCJ
232223, February 2011.)

Of the inmates confined in Indian country jails at midyear
2010, about 87% (1,840) were held in 47 facilities rated to
hold 25 or more inmates (table 4). The 28 facilities with a
rated capacity of fewer than 25 inmates accounted for about
37% of all facilities and held about 13% of all jail inmates
in Indian country. The overall jail population ranged from a
low of no inmates in 2 facilities to a high of 178 inmates in
the Tohono O'odham Adult Detention Center. This facility held
more than 8% of the total population in Indian country jails
at midyear 2010.

Jails holding 50 or more inmates reported stability in their
use of jail space in June 2010

The jails with a rated capacity of 50 or more inmates
reported stability in use of their bed space in June 2010
(figure 3). The percentage of capacity occupied in these
jails was similar at midyear (63%) and on an average day in
June (62%). On their most crowded day in June 2010, the 15
largest jails were operating at 71% of their rated capacity.
The 60 facilities rated to hold less than 50 inmates reported
stable space use at midyear 2010 (78%) and on an average day
in June 2010 (72%). In comparison, these 60 facilities were
operating at 124% of their rated capacity on their most
crowded day in June 2010.

About 39% (29 facilities) of the 74 facilities reporting on
their peak population in 2010 were operating above rated
capacity on the most crowded day in June, down from nearly
half of the jails in 2009 (table 5). Of those 29 facilities,
16 were operating above rated capacity on June 30, and 15
were operating above rated capacity on an average day during
June.

Fifteen jails were operating at more than 50% over capacity
on their most crowded day in June 2010

Fifteen jails in Indian country reported operating at more
than 50% over rated capacity on the facility's most crowded
day in June 2010, up from 13 facilities during June 2009
(table 6). Eight of these 15 jails were rated to hold 25 or
more inmates, and 7 were rated to hold fewer than 25 inmates.
Tohono O'odham Adult Detention Center (AZ), with a rated
capacity of 107 inmates, was the largest of these jails and
operated at 74% over capacity on its peak day in June 2010,
down from 86% on its peak day in June 2009. Between July 2008
and June 2009, this facility was renovated to add 73 beds. As
a result, the percentage of occupied space declined from 429%
on the facility's most crowded day in June 2008 to 174% in
June 2010.

Among the 15 facilities operating at more than 50% over rated
capacity on their most crowded day in June 2010, five were
also operating at more than 50% over capacity at midyear 2010
and on an average day in June 2010. Three facilities--Oglala
Sioux Tribal Offenders Facility, Northern Cheyenne Adult
Detention, and the Tohono O'odham Adult Detention Center--
were operating at more than 50% over capacity on all three
measures (midyear, most crowed day, and the average day in
June 2010).

Jail admissions increased in Indian country jails

The 75 Indian country jails admitted 12,545 persons during
June 2010, up from 11,325 admissions in 79 facilities
operating in June 2009 (table 7). In 2010, admissions to
facilities rated to hold between 25 and 49 inmates accounted
for about 60% (7,518) of all admissions. A nearly equal share
of the jail admissions were measured in facilities rated to
hold 10 to 24 inmates (21%) and 50 or more inmates (18%). The
small facilities rated to hold less than 10 inmates accounted
for less than 1% of all admissions in June 2010.

The number of admissions grew by 8.1% in the 73 facilities
that reported data in both June 2010 (11,970) and June 2009
(11,074) (table 8). Based on the facility size category in
2009, the same facilities rated to hold between 25 to 49
inmates accounted for nearly half of all admissions in 2009
(49.7%) and 2010 (47.1%).

During June 2010, the expected average length of stay (the
time held in custody from admission to release) for inmates
confined in all 75 facilities in Indian country jails was 4.8
days. The expected length of stay for inmates was the highest
(12.5 days) in facilities that were rated to hold 50 or more
inmates. Inmates held in jails rated to hold between 10 and
24 inmates experienced the shortest expected length of stay
(2.3 days).

Attempted suicides in Indian country jails declined
Indian country jail authorities reported 2 deaths in custody
during the 12-month period ending June 30, 2010. No deaths
were reported during the 12-month period ending June 30,
2009, and 4 deaths were reported during the 12-month period
ending June 30, 2008 (not shown in a table). Attempted
suicides by inmates declined from 36 in 2009 to 24 in 2010,
based on 68 facilities reporting valid data on attempted
suicide in both years.

The share of inmates held for a violent offense declined

Although the number of inmates confined in Indian country
jails increased from 2004 to 2010, the distribution of
inmates by sex, age, and offense remained relatively stable
between 2004 and 2009 (table 9). There was some change in the
distribution of inmates by conviction status, offense type,
and sex at midyear 2010.

After a peak in the percentage of convicted inmates in 2009
(69%), the percentage of convicted inmates in 2010 declined
to 59%. About 3 in 10 inmates in Indian country jails were
confined for a violent offense--domestic violence, assault,
rape or sexual assault, and other violence at midyear 2010,
down from about 4 in 10 inmates in each year between midyear
2004 and midyear 2009. With the exception of domestic
violence, declines were reported in the number of inmates
held for violent offenses (simple or aggravated assault and
unspecified violent offenses). The number of inmates held for
rape or sexual assault remained relatively stable.

At midyear 2010, domestic violence (13.1%) and simple or
aggravated assault (10.7%) accounted for the largest
percentage of violent offenders. Overall, 50 facilities held
at least one inmate for domestic violence. Seven facilities
(or 9% of all 75 facilities) accounted for over half (51.1%)
of the inmates held for domestic violence. Sixteen facilities
(or 21% of all facilities) accounted for 75% of all inmates
held for domestic violence.

Similar patterns were observed among facilities holding
inmates for simple or aggravated assault. Six facilities held
over half (53.1%) and 15 held three-quarters of the inmates
held for simple or aggravated assault. In total, 45
facilities (60% of all facilities) held at least one inmate
for simple or aggravated assault.

Adult males accounted for the largest portion of the inmate
population in Indian country jails throughout the decade.
Nearly 8 in 10 inmates were male. Between midyear 2009 and
2010, the male inmate population declined by nearly 7%. The
female jail population had small but steady increases from
midyear 2004 to midyear 2009, with a nearly 14% increase in
this population between midyear 2009 and midyear 2010.

The number of jail operations staff increased

The 75 Indian country jails employed 1,469 persons at midyear
2010 (table 10). About 69% (1,010) of all personnel were jail
operations staff, including correctional officers and other
staff who spent more than 50% of their time supervising
inmates. This was up from 916 during the same period in 2009.

The remaining 459 jail personnel included administrative
employees, educational staff, technical or professional
staff, clerical, maintenance or food service staff, and staff
performing other job functions. Overall, the ratio of inmates
to jail operations employees was 2.1 inmates to 1 jail
operations employee at midyear 2010, down from 2.4 to 1 in
2009 and 2.5 to 1 in 2004.

Methodology

BJS's Annual Survey of Jails in Indian Country (SJIC)
includes all known Indian country correctional facilities
operated by tribal authorities or the Bureau of Indian
Affairs (BIA), U.S. Department of the Interior. The survey
was conducted in June 2010 and included the number of inmates
and percent of capacity occupied based on the average daily
population, midyear population, and peak population in
facilities in June 2010 (appendix table 1). The midyear count
is the number of inmates held on the last weekday in June,
the average daily population is the number of inmates
confined each day in June divided by 30, and the peak
population is the number of inmates held on the day in June
in which the custody population of a facility was the
largest.

Through a cooperative agreement with BJS, Westat, Inc.
conducted the SJIC to describe all adult and juvenile jail
facilities and detention centers in Indian country. For this
report, Indian country includes reservations, pueblos,
rancherias, and other appropriate areas (18 U.S.C. & 1151).
The reference date for the survey is June 30, 2010.

Indian country is a statutory term that includes all lands
within an Indian reservation, dependent Indian communities,
and Indian trust allotments (18 U.S.C. & 1151). Courts
interpret Section 1151 to include all lands held in trust for
tribes or their members. (See United States v. Roberts, 185
F.3d 1125 (10th Cir. 1999).) Tribal authority to imprison
American Indian offenders is limited to one year per offense
by statute (25 U.S.C. & 1302), a $5,000 fine, or both.
Tribal law enforcement agencies act as first responders to
both felony and misdemeanor crimes. For most of Indian
country, the federal government provides felony law
enforcement concerning crimes by or against Indians. Certain
areas of Indian country are under Public Law 83-280, as
amended. P.L. 280 conferred jurisdiction on certain states
over Indian country and suspended enforcement of the Major
Crimes Act (18 U.S.C. & 1153) and the General Crimes Act (18
U.S.C. & 1152) in those areas. Indian tribes retain
concurrent jurisdiction to enforce laws in Indian country
where P.L. 280 applies.

Annually, BIA provides BJS a list of Indian country jail
facilities, including detention centers, jails, and other
correctional facilities operated by tribal authorities or
BIA. BJS uses this list to update its existing roster of
jails in Indian country. BJS obtains data from administrators
of Indian country jails by faxed questionnaires and through
follow-up phone calls and facsimiles.

In 2004, BJS contacted administrators in 70 facilities to
participate in the survey. BJS received responses from 61
facilities. Seven facilities did not respond, and 2
facilities were not operating. In 2007, BJS's roster
consisted of 86 facilities. Seventy-nine of the facility
administrators responded to the survey; four did not respond,
and BJS found that three facilities were not operating. In
2009, BJS's roster of Indian country jails consisted of 85
facilities. BJS received responses from 82 facility
administrators. There were no nonrespondents, and three
facilities were not operating. For 2009, BJS's roster
consisted of 86 facilities. BJS received responses from 80
facility administrators; there were no nonrespondents, and
six facilities were not operating. Prior to the 2010 data
collection, one facility in the 2009 universe was determined
to be closed, resulting in a revised (79 facilities) facility
count.

For 2010, BJS's roster consisted of 86 facilities. Prior to
the survey collection, seven facilities were closed, not
operating, or out of scope, resulting in a survey universe of
79 facilities. During the survey collection, BJS determined
that four facilities were holding cells and were out of
scope, resulting in a final universe of 75 Indian country
jails. BJS received responses from all 75 facility
administrators. For comparison over time, BJS estimated data
on inmate populations for the seven facilities in 2004 and
four facilities in 2009 that did not respond to the surveys.

Expected length of stay

The stock-flow ratio method was used to measure the expected
average length of stay for inmates held during June 2010 in
the 75 Indian country jails that responded to stock and flow
items in the survey:

Stock--average daily population = 2,009

Flow--inmate admissions during June 2010 = 12,545

Stock-flow ratio in June 2010 = 0.160 (2,009/12,545 = 0.160)

Expected length of stay in days (the average number of days
held in custody from admission to release) = 4.8 days (0.160
x 30 days = 4.8)

****************************************************

Office of Justice Programs * Innovation * Partnerships *
Safer Neighborhoods * http://www.ojp.gov

The Bureau of Justice Statistics is the statistical agency of
the U.S. Department of Justice. James P. Lynch is the
director.

This report was written by Todd D. Minton. Margaret Noonan
and James J. Stephan provided statistical review and
verification of the report.

At Westat, Karla Eisen carried out the data collection and
processing with the assistance of Melissa Wilson. Mary Ann
Deak produced the appendix tables.

Vanessa Curto and Jill Thomas edited the report, Tina Dorsey
produced the report, and Jayne E. Robinson prepared the
report for final printing under the supervision of Doris J.
James.

December 2011, NCJ 236073

The full text of each report is available in PDF and ASCII
formats on the BJS website at www.bjs.gov. Tables are also
available in PDF and CSV formats. Related datasets are made
available on the National Archive of Criminal Justice Data
website at http://
www.icpsr.umich.edu/icpsrweb/NACJD/index.jsp.

***************************************************
11/29/2011/JER/10:42am