U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Programs
Bureau of Justice Statistics

-------------------------------------------------------
This file is text only without graphics and many of the
tables. A Zip archive of the tables in this report in
spreadsheet format (.csv) and the full report including
tables and graphics in .pdf format are available on BJS
website at: 
http://www.bjs.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbdetail&iid=5414

This report is one in a series. More recent editions 
may be available. To view a list of all in the series 
go to http://bjs.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbse&sid=32
-------------------------------------------------------

**********
Bulletin
**********

Jails in Indian Country, 2014

Todd D. Minton, BJS Statistician

An estimated 2,380 inmates were confined in 79 Indian country 
jails at midyear 2014, a 4% increase from the 2,287 inmates 
confined in 79 facilities at midyear 2013 (figure 1). The average 
number of inmates per operating facility increased from 26 
inmates in 2000 to 30 inmates in 2014. At midyear 2014, the jail 
facilities in Indian country were rated to hold an estimated 
3,720 inmates, up from 3,482 in 2013. In 2014, approximately 
1,230 jail operations staff were employed to supervise the 
confined inmates, up slightly from the 1,180 jail operations 
staff at midyear 2013.*** Footnote 1 Jail operations staff 
include correctional officers, guards, and other staff who spend 
more than 50% of their time supervising inmates***.

*********************************************
Jails operating in Indian country increased 
from 68 facilities in 2004 to 79 in 2014
*********************************************

The Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS) has conducted the Annual 
Survey of Jails in Indian Country (SJIC) since 1998, although the 
survey was not conducted in 2005 or 2006. The number of operating 
jail facilities in Indian country increased from 68 in 2004 to 79 
in 2013 and 2014. Over the 10-year period, 11 facilities 
permanently closed and 21 facilities were newly constructed. Two 
facilities in 2011 (one adult and one juvenile) were treated as 
one respondent in 2010.

******************************************************

*************
Highlights
*************

* At midyear 2014, an estimated 2,380 inmates were confined in 79 
Indian country jails—a 4% increase from the 2,287 inmates 
confined at midyear 2013.

* The number of inmates admitted into Indian country jails during 
June 2014 (10,460) was nearly five times the size of the average 
daily population (2,170).

* For the 79 facilities operating in June 2014, the expected 
average length of stay at admission for inmates was about 6 days.

* Since 2010, about 3 in 10 inmates held in Indian country jails 
have been confined for a violent offense, a decline from about 4 
in 10 since peaking in 2007.

* Domestic violence (12%) and aggravated or simple assault (9%) 
accounted for the largest percentage of violent offenders at 
midyear 2014, followed by unspecified violence (5%) and rape or 
sexual assault (2%).

* Nearly 2 in 10 inmates were held for public intoxication at 
midyear 2014.

* The ratio of inmates to jail operations employees was about 2 
inmates to 1 jail operations employee at midyear 2014, remaining 
stable since 2010.
******************************************************

Two facilities in 2011 merged into one facility in 2012. For more 
information on the Survey of Jails in Indian Country universe 
from 1998 to 2003, see the Jails in Indian Country series, 
located on the BJS website.

BJS imputed inmate and facility population counts for facilities 
that did not respond to the survey, including seven facilities in 
2004 (213 inmates, or 12% of all inmates confined at midyear), 
four facilities in 2007 (167 or 8%), two facilities in 2013 (37 
or 2%), and five facilities in 2014 (223 or 9%). All operating 
facilities responded to surveys from 2008 to 2012. (See 
Methodology for information on jails in Indian country, including 
details on facility counts and participation in the surveys.)

*********************************************
Percentage of occupied bed space declined 
from 86% in 2000 to 64% in 2014
*********************************************

At midyear 2014, the jail facilities in Indian country were rated 
to hold an estimated 3,720 inmates, up from 3,482 in 2013 (table 
1). The increase was attributed to a new facility built for 
Nisqually Adult Corrections. From June 2000 to June 2014, the 
overall rated capacity grew at a faster rate (up 79%) than the 
midyear inmate population (up 34%). As a result, the percentage 
of occupied bed space declined from 86% in 2000 to 64% in 2014. 

When measured relative to the average daily population (ADP), the 
percentage of rated capacity occupied in Indian country jails was 
62% in June 2013 and 58% in June 2014. A similar pattern was 
observed relative to the midyear inmate count from midyear 2013 
(2,287 inmates) to midyear 2014 (2,380). Indian country jails 
operated at 64% of rated capacity at midyear 2014 and 66% at 
midyear 2013.

*********************************************
The largest jails accounted for nearly a 
quarter of all facilities and over half 
of all inmates in Indian country
*********************************************

Of the inmates confined in the 79 Indian country jails at midyear 
2014, an estimated 87% (2,070) were held in 51 facilities rated 
to hold 25 or more inmates (table 2). Eighteen facilities holding 
an estimated 50 or more inmates accounted for more than half of 
the jail population at midyear 2014. The 28 facilities with a 
rated capacity of fewer than 25 inmates accounted for about 35% 
of all facilities and held 13% of all jail inmates in Indian 
country. The overall jail population ranged from no inmates in 
one facility to 185 inmates in the Tohono O’odham Adult Detention 
Center, which held nearly 8% of the total population in Indian 
country jails at midyear 2014.

The 18 jails with a rated capacity of 50 or more inmates reported 
a similar pattern in the use of their bed space at midyear 2014 
(59%) and on an average day in June 2014 (57%) (figure 2). On 
their most crowded day in June 2014, the 18 largest jails were 
operating at 72% of their rated capacity. The population of the 
61 facilities that held fewer than 50 inmates varied at midyear 
2014 (72% of rated capacity), on an average day in June 2014 
(61%), and on their most crowded day in June 2014 (107%).

Twenty-six of the 79 facilities (33%) in 2014 were operating 
above rated capacity on the most crowded day in June, which was 
similar to 2013 (table 3). Of the 26 facilities in 2014, 17 were 
operating above rated capacity on the last weekday in June 2014, 
and 14 were operating above rated capacity on an average day in 
June 2014.

*********************************************
Admissions to Indian country jails 
slightly declined 
*********************************************

During 2014, the 79 Indian country jails admitted an estimated 
10,460 persons—down slightly from 10,977 persons admitted to 79 
facilities in June 2013 (table 4). In 2014, admissions to 
facilities rated to hold from 25 to 49 inmates accounted for 
about 45% (4,680) of all admissions, down from 54% in 2013. The 
remaining jail admissions occurred in facilities rated to hold 50 
or more inmates (30%), 10 to 24 inmates (24%), and 9 or fewer 
inmates (1%) in June 2014. 

The 69 Indian country jails that provided data in both years 
reported about a 6% decrease in admissions, from 9,138 admissions 
in June 2013 to 8,565 in June 2014 (table 5). Specifically, 37 
facilities reported either a decline (35) or no change (2) in 
their admissions, and 32 facilities reported an increase in their 
admissions. The average expected length of stay (the time held in 
custody from admission to release) was about 6 days in June 2013 
and June 2014.

*********************************************
The percentage of inmates held for a violent 
offense declined
*********************************************

Since 2000, the distribution of Indian country jail inmates by 
sex and age has changed slightly. Although males represent the 
largest portion of the inmate population in Indian country jails, 
the percentage of female jail inmates increased between 2000 (20% 
of all inmates) and 2014 (25%) (table 6). The juvenile population 
declined from 16% in 2000 to 8% at midyear 2014. The distribution 
of inmates by conviction status and offense type also showed some 
change. After the percentage of convicted inmates peaked in 2009 
at 69%, it declined to 51% by midyear 2014.

Since 2010, about 3 in 10 inmates held in Indian country jails 
have been confined for a violent offense, a decline from about 4 
in 10 since peaking in 2007. ***Footnote 2 For 2002, 2004, and 
2007–2009 data, see Jails in Indian Country, 2012, NCJ 242187, 
BJS web, June 2013***. At midyear 2014, domestic violence (12%) 
and aggravated or simple assault (9%) accounted for the largest 
percentage of violent offenders. Inmates held for unspecified 
violence (5%) and rape or sexual assault (2%) accounted for about 
7% of the jail population. 

Patterns of decline were also observed among inmates held for 
alcohol- and drug-related offenses. Inmates held for driving 
while intoxicated or driving while under the influence of drugs 
or alcohol (DWI or DUI) declined from 16% of the total inmate 
population in 2000 to 9% at midyear 2014. The percentage of 
inmates held for a drug law violation declined from 8% in 2000 to 
5% at midyear 2014.

In 2013, BJS enhanced the SJIC offense category questionnaire 
item to include burglary, larceny-theft, and public intoxication. 
The enhancement allowed for better classification of previously 
unspecified offenses. About 23% of offenses at midyear 2014 
included public intoxication (20%), burglary (2%), and larceny-
theft (1%), similar to 2013.

*********************************************
The number of correctional staff increased 
since 2010
*********************************************

The 79 Indian country jails employed an estimated 1,710 persons 
at midyear 2014 (table 7). About 72% (1,230) of these employees 
were jail operations staff, including correctional officers and 
other staff who spent more than 50% of their time supervising 
inmates. Each year since 2010, about 7 in 10 personnel were jail 
operations staff. Overall, the ratio of inmates to jail 
operations employees was about 2 inmates to 1 jail operations 
employee at midyear 2014—remaining stable since 2010.

In 2014, an estimated 480 jail personnel in the 79 Indian country 
jails were administrative employees; educational staff; technical 
or professional staff; clerical, maintenance, or food service 
staff; and staff performing other job functions. The number of 
jail operations staff increased nearly 4% from midyear 2013 to 
midyear 2014 and 22% from midyear 2010 to midyear 2014.

*********************************************
Three deaths were reported in Indian 
country jails in the 12-month period ending 
June 30, 2014
*********************************************

Indian country jail authorities reported eight deaths in custody 
since midyear 2010 (not shown). Three deaths, including one 
suicide, were reported during the 12-month period ending June 30, 
2014. During the same period, 70 facilities reported a total of 
51 attempted suicides. The number of attempted suicides by 
inmates increased from 43 in 2013 to 49 in 2014, based on 66 
facilities reporting valid data on attempted suicide in both 
years. Overall, attempted suicides in Indian country jails 
declined significantly after peaking in 2002. (For more 
information, see Jails in Indian Country, 2012, NCJ 242187, BJS 
web, June 2013.)

***************
Methodology
****************

The Bureau of Justice Statistics’ (BJS) Annual Survey of Jails in 
Indian Country (SJIC) includes all Indian country correctional 
facilities operated by tribal authorities or the Bureau of Indian 
Affairs (BIA), U.S. Department of the Interior. The survey was 
conducted in June 2014 and collected data about the number of 
inmates and percentage of capacity occupied based on the average 
daily population (ADP) in June, midyear population, and peak 
population in facilities in June 2014 (appendix table 1). The 
midyear count is the number of inmates held on the last weekday 
in June, ADP is the number of inmates confined each day in June 
divided by 30, and the peak population is the number of inmates 
held on the day in June in which the custody population of a 
facility was the largest.

Through a cooperative agreement with BJS, Westat, Inc. conducted 
the SJIC to describe all adult and juvenile jail facilities and 
detention centers in Indian country. For this report, Indian 
country includes reservations, pueblos, rancherias, and other 
appropriate areas (18 U.S.C. § 1151). The reference date for the 
survey is June 30, 2014.

Indian country is a statutory term that includes all lands within 
an Indian reservation, dependent Indian communities, and Indian 
trust allotments (18 U.S.C. § 1151). Courts interpret Section 
1151 to include all lands held in trust for tribes or their 
members. (See United States v. Roberts, 185 F.3d 1125 (10th Cir. 
1999). Tribal authority to imprison American Indian offenders had 
been limited to 1 year per offense by statute (25 U.S.C. § 1302), 
a $5,000 fine, or both. On July 29, 2010, the Tribal Law and 
Order Act of 2010 (TLOA) was signed into law, expanding tribal 
court sentencing authority. As a result, offenders may serve 
potentially lengthier sentences (up to 3 years) in Indian country 
correctional facilities (P.L. 111-211, H.R. 725, 124 Stat. 2258).

Tribal law enforcement agencies act as first responders to both 
felony and misdemeanor crimes. For most of Indian country, the 
federal government provides felony law enforcement concerning 
crimes by or against American Indians and Alaska Natives. Certain 
areas of Indian country are under Public Law 83-280, as amended. 
Public Law 280 conferred jurisdiction over Indian country to 
certain states and suspended enforcement of the Major Crimes Act 
(18 U.S.C. § 1153) and the General Crimes Act (18 U.S.C. § 1152) 
in those areas. Indian tribes retain concurrent jurisdiction to 
enforce laws in Indian country where Public Law 280 applies.

Annually, BJS updates its existing roster of jails in Indian 
country. BJS obtains data from administrators of Indian country 
jails by faxed questionnaires and through follow-up phone calls 
and facsimiles. The survey universe and response rates have 
changed over time. Over the 10-year period, a number of 
facilities have closed and new facilities have been constructed 
(table 8). For comparison over time, data on inmate population 
were imputed for the seven facilities in 2004, four facilities in 
2007, two facilities in 2013, and five facilities in 2014 that 
did not respond to the surveys. In 2014, imputations for the 
midyear jail populations, average daily population, peak 
population, and admission during the month of June used the most 
recent available data. 

In some cases, facilities responding to the survey report 
incomplete data. The rated capacity for midyear 2014 was imputed 
for two facilities; one was based on 2013 data and one was based 
on 2012 data. The imputed value for the peak population for four 
facilities during June 2014 was based on their midyear or ADP in 
2014, whichever was greater.

*********************************************
Estimation of inmate characteristics in 
table 6 and jail staff in table 7
*********************************************

Table 6
************

2014
******

Sex/age group
--------------

* Estimated data for 4 facilities are based on their 2013 data. 

* Estimated data for 1 facility are based on their 2012 data. 

Conviction status
------------------

* Estimated data for 3 facilities are based on their 2013 data. 

* Estimated data for 2 facilities are the ratio of the total 
number of inmates in their jail at midyear 2014 to the reported 
number of inmates by conviction status in 2013.

* Estimated data for 1 facility are based on their 2012 data. 

Type of offense
----------------

* Estimated data for 3 facilities are based on their 2013 data. 

* Estimated data for 2 facilities are based on the ratio of the 
total number of inmates in their jail at midyear 2014 to the 
reported number of inmates by offense type in 2013.

* Estimated data for 1 facility are based on their 2012 data. 

* Estimated data for 1 facility are based on the ratio of the 
total number of inmates in their jail at midyear 2014 to the 
reported number of inmates by offense type in 2011.

2013
******

Sex/age group
---------------

* Estimated data for 3 facilities are based on their 2012 data.
 
Conviction status
------------------

* Estimated data for 3 facilities are based on their 2012 data.
 
* Estimated data for 1 facility are based on the ratio of the total 
number of inmates in their jail at midyear 2013 to the reported 
number of inmates by conviction status in 2013.

Type of offense
----------------

* Estimated data for 3 facilities are based on the ratio of the 
total number of inmates in their jail at midyear 2013 to the 
reported number of inmates by offense type in 2013.

* Estimated data for 1 facility are based on the ratio of the 
total number of inmates in their jail at midyear 2012 to the 
reported number of inmates by offense type in 2014.

* Estimated data for 1 facility are based on their 2012 data. 

* Estimated data for 1 facility are based on their 2011 data.
 
2012

Sex/age group
---------------

* Estimated data for 1 facility are based on the ratio of the 
total number of inmates in their jail at midyear 2012 to the 
reported number of inmates by sex in 2012.

Conviction status
--------------------

* Estimated data for 1 facility are based on the ratio of the 
total number of inmates in their jail at midyear 2012 to the 
reported number of inmates by conviction status in 2012.

* Estimated data for 1 facility are based on the ratio of the 
total number of inmates in their jail at midyear 2012 to the 
reported number of inmates by conviction status in 2013.

* Estimated data for 1 facility are based on their 2013 data. 

* Estimated data for 1 facility are based on their 2011 data.

Type of offense
-----------------

* Estimated data for 2 facilities are based on their 2013 data. 

* Estimated data for 2 facilities are based on their 2011 data. 

* Estimated data for 1 facility are based on the ratio of the 
total number of inmates in their jail at midyear 2012 to the 
reported number of inmates by offense type in 2012.

* Estimated data for 1 facility are based on their historical 
reporting of offense data into the “other” category.

2011
********

Sex/age group
---------------

* No estimated data.

Conviction status
--------------------

* Estimated data for 2 facilities are based on the ratio of the 
total number of inmates in their jail at midyear 2011 to the 
reported number of inmates by conviction status in 2011. 

* Estimated data for 1 facility are based on the ratio of the 
total number of inmates in their jail at midyear 2011 to the 
reported number of inmates by conviction status in 2013.

* Estimated data for 1 facility are based on the ratio of the 
total number of inmates in their jail at midyear 2011 to the 
reported number of inmates by conviction status in 2010.

Type of offense
----------------

* Estimated data for 3 facilities are based on the ratio of the 
total number of inmates in their jail at midyear 2011 to the 
reported number of inmates by offense type in 2010.

* Estimated data for 1 facility are based on the ratio of the 
total number of inmates in their jail at midyear 2011 to the 
reported number of inmates by offense type in 2013.

2010
******

Sex/age group
--------------

* No estimated data.

Conviction status
-------------------

* Estimated data for 14 inmates are based on the ratio of the 
total number of inmates in their jail at midyear 2010 to the 
reported number of inmates by conviction status in 2010. 

Type of offense
----------------

* Estimated data for 3 facilities are based on the ratio of the 
total number of inmates in their jail at midyear 2010 to the 
reported number of inmates by offense type in 2010.

2000
******

Sex/age group
-------------

* No estimated data.

Conviction status
-------------------

* No estimated data.

Type of offense
---------------------

* Estimated data for 1 facility are based on the ratio of the 
total number of inmates in their jail at midyear 2000 to the 
reported number of inmates by offense type in 2002.

* Estimated data for 1 facility are based on the ratio of the 
total number of inmates in their jail at midyear 2000 to the 
reported number of inmates by offense type in 1999.

Table 7
*********

* 2014 estimated data for 8 facilities are based on their 2012 
data. 

* 2013 estimated data for 6 facilities are based on their 2012 
data.

Expected length of stay
--------------------------

The stock-flow ratio method was used to measure the expected 
average length of stay for inmates held during June 2014. 

Stock--average daily population during June 2014 = 2,170

Flow--inmate admissions during June 2014 = 10,460

Stock--flow ratio in June 2014 = 0.207 (2,170/10,460 = 0.207)

Expected length of stay in days (the average number of days held 
in custody from admission to release) = 6.2 days (0.207 × 30 days 
= 6.2)

**************************************************
The Bureau of Justice Statistics of the U.S. Department of 
Justice is the principal federal agency responsible for measuring 
crime, criminal victimization, criminal offenders, victims of 
crime, correlates of crime, and the operation of criminal and 
civil justice systems at the federal, state, tribal, and local 
levels. BJS collects, analyzes, and disseminates reliable and 
valid statistics on crime and justice systems in the United 
States, supports improvements to state and local criminal justice 
information systems, and participates with national and 
international organizations to develop and recommend national 
standards for justice statistics. William J. Sabol is director.

This report was written by Todd D. Minton. Tracy L. Snell and E. 
Ann Carson verified the report. 

Irene Cooperman and Jill Thomas edited the report, and Barbara 
Quinn produced the report.

October 2015, NCJ 248974
**************************************************

**************************************************
Office of Justice Programs
Innovation * Partnerships * Safer Neighborhoods
www.ojp.usdoj.gov
**************************************************

**********************
10/7/2015/JER/10:55pm
**********************
