U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Programs
Bureau of Justice Statistics

Statistical Tables

Jail Inmates at Midyear 2009 - Statistical Tables

June 2010   NCJ 230122
-------------------------------------------------------------

This file is text only without graphics and many of the
tables. A Zip archive of the tables in this report in
spreadsheet format (.csv) and the full report including
tables and graphics in .pdf format are available from:
http://bjs.ojp.usdoj.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbdetail&iid=2195

This report is one in a series. More recent editions may be
available. To view a list of all in the series go to
http://bjs.ojp.usdoj.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbse&sid=38

-------------------------------------------------------------

Todd D. Minton
BJS Statistician

Between midyear 2008 and midyear 2009, the confined inmate
population in county and city jails (767,620) declined by
2.3% (down 17,936 inmates) (figure 1). Since midyear 2005,
growth in the U.S. jail population has slowed (table 1), but
this is the first actual decline in the jail population since
the Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS) began the Annual
Survey of Jails in 1982. 

During the 12 months ending June 30, 2009, the number of male
(-1.7%), female (-6.0%), and adult (-2.2%) inmates declined.
Also juvenile inmates held as adults (-8.8%) declined between
midyear 2008 and 2009 (tables 6 and 7).

At midyear 2009, whites represented 42.5% of all jail
inmates; blacks, 39.2%; and Hispanics, 16.2%. These percents
have remained nearly stable since midyear 2000. 

At midyear 2009, about 6 in 10 unconvicted offenders in jail
were awaiting court action on a current charge, a trend
unchanged since 2005. Similarly, the unconvicted male (54.8%)
and female (7.4%) population has remained relatively stable
during that time period.

Jail jurisdictions held more than 24,200 inmates at midyear
2009 for the U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement, nearly
double the number held at midyear 2000 (12,500) (table 8).

Population decline mostly concentrated in large jails

During the 12-month period ending June 30, 2009, populations
in the largest jail jurisdictions (with an average daily
population of 1,000 or more) declined by 18,929. This decline
was offset by increases in jail jurisdictions with an average
daily population between 250 and 999 inmates.

Jail population declines were mostly concentrated in large
jails. Among the 171 jail jurisdictions with 1,000 or more
inmates on an average day, two-thirds reported a decline.
Seven jurisdictions reported a drop of more than 500 inmates
(accounting for 29% of the decline nationwide). Miami-Dade
County, Florida, with a drop of 1,090, and Orange County,
Florida, with a drop of 944, led the nation in overall
decline in their inmate population.

The estimated rated capacity for all jail jurisdictions at
midyear 2009 reached 849,544 beds (table 2), an increase of
2.6% from midyear 2008 and nearly equivalent to the average
annual increase per year since 2000 (2.5%). Rated capacity is
the maximum number of beds or inmates allocated to each jail
facility by a state or local rating official. Within the
decade, the percent of capacity occupied at midyear 2009
(90.4%) was the lowest since 2001 (90.0%). As a result of the
decline in the number of large jail jurisdictions between
2008 (180) and 2009 (171), the bed space increased for
inmates in jail jurisdictions with an average daily
population between 500 and 999 inmates. This affected the
overall decline in the percent of capacity occupied in these
jail jurisdictions between midyear 2008 (100.2%) and 2009
(91.3%) (table 5). 

The amount of bed space occupied was also measured based on an
average daily population in jail jurisdictions (767,992) in
the year ending June 30, 2009, and the most crowded day in
jails during June 2009. Overall, the nation's jails were
operating at about 90% of rated capacity on an average day
and about 95% of rated capacity on their most crowded day in
June 2009.

Local jails admitted almost 13 million persons during the 12
months ending June 30, 2009

The jail population at midyear 2009 represented a
comparatively small percentage of all admissions reported
over the 12-month period. Local jails admitted an estimated
12.8 million persons during the 12 months ending June 30,
2009, or about 17 times the size of the inmate population
(767,620) at midyear (see Methodology on page 18 for methods
used to estimate admissions). 

More than 4 in 10 (42%) admissions during the last week of
June 2009 were to the largest jail jurisdictions (table 4).
Small jail jurisdictions holding fewer than 50 inmates
accounted for 6.0% of all jail admissions, but admitted about
35 times the size of their inmate population. They also
experienced the highest turnover rate (137.8%), compared to
large jail jurisdictions (52.5%). The turnover rate takes
into account all admissions into and releases from jails.
Higher turnover rates mean relatively larger numbers of
admissions and releases relative to the size of the average
daily population.

2009 Statistical Tables

Table 1. Inmates confined in local jails at midyear, average
daily population and incarceration rates, 2000-2009

Table 2. Rated capacity of local jails and percent of
capacity occupied, 2000-2009

Table 3. Inmates confined in local jails at midyear, by size
of jurisdiction, 2008 and 2009     

Table 4. Average daily jail population, admissions, and
turnover rate, by size of jurisdiction, week ending June 30,
2008 and 2009

Table 5. Percent of jail capacity occupied at midyear, by
size of jurisdiction, 2000, 2008, and 2009

Table 6. Number of inmates in local jails, by
characteristics, midyear 2000 and 2005-2009 

Table 7. Percent of inmates in local jails, by
characteristics, midyear 2000 and 2005-2009  
 
Table 8. Inmate population in jail jurisdictions reporting on
confined persons being held for U.S. Immigration and Customs
Enforcement, midyear 2002-2009     

Table 9. The 50 largest local jail jurisdictions: Number of
inmates held, average daily population, and rated capacity,
midyear 2007-2009

Table 10. Persons under jail supervision, by confinement
status and type of program, midyear 2000 and 2006-2009

Table 11. Estimated standard errors by confinement status,
Annual Survey of Jails, 2009

Table 12. Estimated standard errors by selected
characteristics, Annual Survey of Jails, 2009     

Table 13. Estimated percentages of local jail inmates, by
selected characteristics and ratio estimates, 2009          

Methodology

Annual Survey of Jails

In years between complete census of local jails, BJS conducts
the Annual Survey of Jails (ASJ). ASJ is a sample survey of
local jails used to estimate the number and characteristics
of local inmates nationwide. For the 2009 ASJ, the U.S.
Census Bureau, as the collection agent, drew a sample of 874
jurisdictions and 934 jail facilities. This sample represents
approximately 2,829 jail jurisdictions nationwide. Local jail
jurisdictions included counties (parishes in Louisiana) or
municipal governments that administered one or more local
jails. Data were estimated for one jurisdiction that did not
respond to the survey. Two jail facilities were closed during
the survey collection.

The 2009 ASJ sample included all jails with certainty (67)
that were operated jointly by two or more jurisdictions, or
multi-jurisdictional jails. Other jail jurisdictions included
with certainty (268) were those that--

*held juvenile inmates at the time of the 2005 Census of Jail
Inmates and had an average daily population of 500 or more
inmates during the 12 months ending June 30, 2005.

*held only adult inmates and had an average daily population
of 750 or more.
 
The remaining jurisdictions were stratified into two groups:
jurisdictions with jails holding at least one juvenile on
June 30, 2005, and jails holding only adults on that date.
Using stratified random sampling, 541 jurisdictions were
selected from 8 strata based on the two conditions enumerated
above and 4 strata based on the average daily jail inmate
population during 2005. The average daily jail inmate
population was derived from the 2005 Census of Jail Inmates.

Data were obtained from sampled jurisdictions by mail-out and
web-based survey questionnaires. After follow-up phone calls
and facsimiles to respondents, the response rate for the
survey was 100% for critical items, such as the number of
inmates confined, average daily population, and rated
capacity. (See appendix tables 11, 12, and 13 for standard
errors associated with reported estimates from the ASJ 2009
at <http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/pub/pdf/jim09st.pdf>.

Weekly admission and release estimation procedures

Based on the 2009 ASJ, 861 of the 934 jail facilities (92%)
provided valid data on weekly admissions and releases.
Because there were non response and incomplete data on
admissions and releases, data on offender flows through local
jails were estimated for 73 jail facilities to calculate a
weekly estimate.

Estimates were based on--

*Data for 45 jail facilities included admission and release
data based on estimates from the 2008 Annual Survey of Jails.

*Data for 21 jail facilities included admission and release
data based on estimates from the 2007 Annual Survey of Jails.

*Release data for 7 jail facilities was based on admission
data reported in 2009. 

Calculating annual admissions 

Based on findings from the 2004 Survey of Large Jails (SLJ),
BJS determined that the June admission data were a reliable
source to calculate a nationwide annual admission estimate.
Although the number of admissions to jails fluctuated
throughout the year, the SLJ tracked monthly movements from
January 2003 to January 2004 and determined that the June
2003 count (339,500) closely matched the annual average
number of admissions (342,956). The number of annual
admissions was calculated by multiplying the weekly
admissions by the sum of 365 days divided by 7 days. 

Calculating weekly turnover rates

Weekly jail turnover rates were modeled after the Bureau of
Labor Statistics' Job Openings and Labor Turnover Survey.
Additional information on turnover rates is available at 
<http://www.bls.gov/jlt/>. Jail turnover rates were
calculated by adding admissions and releases and dividing by
the average daily population. The turnover rate takes into
account admissions into and releases from jails and gives an
indication of the volatility of the jail population. Higher
turnover rates mean relatively larger numbers of admissions
and releases relative to the size of the average daily
population. 

Functions and definitions relating to the Annual Survey of
Jails (ASJ)

Jails in the ASJ include confinement facilities--usually
administered by a local law enforcement agency--that are
intended for adults but may hold juveniles before or after
adjudication. Facilities include jails and city/county
correctional centers, special jail facilities such as medical
or treatment release centers, halfway houses, work farms, and
temporary holding or lockup facilities that are part of the
jail's combined function. Inmates sentenced to jail
facilities usually have a sentence of 1 year or less. 

Jail functions. Facilities are included in the ASJ function to--

*receive individuals pending arraignment and hold them 
awaiting trial, conviction, or sentencing

*readmit probation, parole, and bailbond violators and
absconders

*temporarily detain juveniles pending transfer to juvenile
authorities

*hold mentally ill persons pending their movement to
appropriate mental health facilities 

*hold individuals for the military, for protective custody,
for contempt, and for the courts as witnesses 

*release convicted inmates to the community upon completion
of sentence

*transfer inmates to federal, state, or other authorities

*house inmates for federal, state, or other authorities
because of crowding of their facilities

*sometimes operate community-based programs as alternatives
to incarceration.

Admissions. Persons are officially booked and housed in jails
by formal legal document and the authority of the courts or
some other official agency. Jail admissions include persons
sentenced to weekend programs and who are booked into the
facility for the first time. Excluded from jail admissions
are inmates reentering the facility after an escape, work
release, medical appointment or treatment facility, and bail
and court appearances. BJS collects jail admissions for the
last 7 days in June.

Average daily population. The average is derived by the sum
of inmates in jail each day for a year, divided by the number
of days in the year (i.e., between July 1, 2008, and June 30,
2009).

Average annual change. This term denotes the mean average
change across a 12-month time period.

Calculating annual admissions. BJS collects the number of
jail admissions during the last 7 days in June. Annual jail
admissions are calculated by multiplying weekly admissions by
the sum of 365 days divided by 7 days.

Calculating weekly jail turnover rate. This rate is
calculated by adding admissions and releases and dividing by
the average daily population. See Methodology for additional
information.

Inmates confined at midyear. This term refers to the number
of inmates held in custody on the last weekday in June.     

Jail incarceration rate. This term refers to the number of
inmates held in the custody of local jails, per 100,000 U.S.
residents. 

Percent of capacity occupied. The percent of jail capacity
occupied is calculated by taking the number of inmates at
midyear, dividing by the rated capacity, and multiplying by
100.

Rated capacity. This term describes the number of beds or
inmates assigned by a rating official to a facility,
excluding separate temporary holding areas.

Releases. Persons released after a period of confinement
(e.g., sentence completion, bail/bond releases, other
pretrial releases, transfers to other jurisdictions, and
deaths). Releases include those persons who have completed
their weekend program and who are leaving the facility for
the last time. Excluded from jail releases are temporary
discharges including work release, medical appointment or
treatment center, court appearance, furlough, day reporting,
and transfers to other facilities within the jail's
jurisdiction.

Under jail supervision but not confined. This classification
includes all persons in community-based programs operated by
a jail facility. Programs include electronic monitoring,
house arrest, community service, day reporting, and work
programs. The classification excludes persons on pretrial
release and who are not in a community-based program run by
the jail, as well as persons under supervision of probation,
parole or other agencies, inmates on weekend programs, and
inmates who participate in work release programs and return
to the jail at night.

Weekend programs. Offenders in these programs are allowed to
serve their sentences of confinement only on weekends (i.e.,
Friday-Sunday). 

------------------------------------------------------------

The Bureau of Justice Statistics is the statistics agency of
the U.S. Department of Justice. Michael D. Sinclair is acting
director.

The tables were prepared and data were analyzed by Todd D.
Minton. James J. Stephan verified the report.

Lisa A. McNelis carried out the data collection and
processing with assistance provided by Alonzo Johnson, Janean
Darden, Andrea Arroyo, and Brittany Whitaker under the
supervision of Stephen Simoncini, Governments Division,
Census Bureau, U.S. Department of Commerce. Duane H.
Cavanaugh and Diron J. Gaskins provided technical assistance. 

Catherine Bird and Jill Duncan edited the report, Tina Dorsey
produced the report, and Jayne E. Robinson prepared the
report for final printing under the supervision of Doris J.
James.
June 2010, NCJ 230122

-----------------------------------------------------------

This report in portable document format and in ASCII and its
related statistical data and tables are available at the BJS
World Wide Web Internet site:
<http://bjs.ojp.usdoj.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbdetail&iid=2195.

-----------------------------------------------------------

Office of Justice Programs

Innovation - Partnerships - Safer Neighborhoods
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

06/01/10 JER revised 06/03/10