U.S. Department of Justice 
Office of Justice Programs 
Bureau of Justice Statistics 

April 2011, NCJ 233431

Jail Inmates at Midyear 2010   Statistical Tables

By Todd D. Minton, BJS Statistician 

----------------------------------------------------------
This file is text only without graphics and many of the
tables. A Zip archive of the tables in this report in
spreadsheet format (.csv) and the full report including
tables and graphics in .pdf format are available from
http://www.bjs.ojp.usdoj.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbse&sid=2375

This report is one in a series. More recent editions may be
available. To view a list of all in the series go to
http://www.bjs.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbse&sid=38
----------------------------------------------------------- 

Between midyear 2009 and midyear 2010, the confined inmate
population in county and city jails (748,728) declined by
2.4% (18,706 inmates) (figure 1 and table 1). This is the
second decline in the jail population since the Bureau of
Justice Statistics (BJS) began the Annual Survey of Jails in
1982. The first occurred between 2008 and 2009. The jail
incarceration rate declined in 2010 to 242 jail inmates per
100,000 U.S. residents, the lowest rate since 2003.

On June 30, 2010, adults represented 99% of all jail inmates.
Males accounted for 87.7%, and females accounted for 12.3%
(tables 6 and 7). At midyear whites represented 44.3% of all
jail inmates, blacks represented 37.8%, and Hispanics
represented 15.8%. These jail inmate distributions have
remained nearly stable since midyear 2000. 

At midyear 2010, about 6 in 10 inmates were unconvicted
offenders in jail awaiting court action on a current charge,
unchanged since 2005. About 4 in 10 inmates were sentenced
offenders or convicted offenders awaiting sentencing.

Population decline was mostly concentrated in large jails

During the 12-month period ending June 30, 2010, the
population in the largest jail jurisdictions with an average
daily population of 1,000 or more inmates (based on the
average daily population during the 12-month period ending
June 30, 2009) declined by 18,187 inmates (table 3). This
decline was offset by increases in jail jurisdictions with an
average daily population between 100 and 249 inmates (up
2,471) and jail jurisdictions with an average daily
population of fewer than 50 inmates (up 760).

Population declines were mostly concentrated among large
jails. Declines were reported in the inmate population
between midyear 2009 and midyear 2010 in two-thirds (111
jails) of the 170 jail jurisdictions with 1,000 or more
inmates on an average day during the 12-month period ending
June 30, 2010. About a third (57 large jails) reported an
increase in their inmate population during the 12-month
period ending June 30, 2010. Data were estimated for two
large jail jurisdictions that did not respond to the survey
in 2010, resulting in no change in their inmate population
during this period. (See Methodology for a description of
estimation and weighting procedures.)

Six jail jurisdictions account for nearly half of the decline
in jail population

Six jail jurisdictions reported a drop of more than 1,000
inmates (accounting for 46% of the decline nationwide). Los
Angeles County, California, with a drop of 3,007 inmates, led
the nation in overall decline in their inmate population
during the 12-month period ending June 30, 2010. Five other
jail jurisdictions reported a decline of more than 1,000
inmates, including Maricopa County, Arizona (1,196 inmates);
Orange County, California (1,143); Philadelphia, Pennsylvania
(1,111); Fresno County, California (1,105); and Harris
County, Texas (1,096).

Capacity to hold inmates continues to increase at slower rate

The estimated rated capacity for all jail jurisdictions at
midyear 2010 reached 866,782 beds (table 2), an increase of
2.0% (16,887 beds) from midyear 2009. This was less than the
average annual increase each year since 2000 (2.5% or 22,281
beds). Rated capacity is the maximum number of beds or
inmates allocated to each jail facility by a state or local
rating official. The percentage of capacity occupied at
midyear 2010 (86.4%) was the lowest since 1984. Jail
jurisdictions holding 50 or more inmates experienced a
decline in the percent of bed space occupied between midyear
2009 (91.5%) and 2010 (87.4%) (not shown in a table). In jail
jurisdictions holding fewer than 50 inmates, the jail inmate
population grew slightly faster than the rated capacity. As a
result, the percent of capacity occupied at midyear 2010
(63.3%) was slightly larger than in 2009 (62.2%) (table 5).

The amount of bed space occupied was also measured based on
an average daily population in jail jurisdictions (748,553)
in the year ending June 30, 2010, and the most crowded day in
jails during June 2010. Overall, the nation's jails were
operating at about 86% of rated capacity on an average day
and about 91% of rated capacity on their most crowded day in
June 2010.

Local jails admitted almost 13 million persons during the 12
months ending June 30, 2010

The jail population at midyear 2010 represented a
comparatively small percentage of all admissions reported
over the 12-month period. Local jails admitted an estimated
12.9 million persons during the 12 months ending June 30,
2010, or about 17 times the size of the inmate population
(748,728) at midyear. (See Methodology on page 15 for methods
used to estimate admissions.)
 
Nearly 4 in 10 (39%) admissions during the last week of June
2010 were to the largest jail jurisdictions (table 4). Small
jail jurisdictions holding fewer than 50 inmates accounted
for 6.3% of all jail admissions, but the number of inmates
admitted was about 36 times the size of the inmate population
at midyear 2010. They also experienced the highest turnover
rate (136.7%), compared to large jail jurisdictions (51.5%).
The turnover rate takes into account all admissions into and
releases from jails. Higher turnover rates mean relatively
larger numbers of admissions and releases relative to the
size of the average daily population.

-------------------------------------------------------------
Annual Survey of Jails (ASJ) - functions and definition of
terms

Jails in the ASJ include confinement facilities-usually
administered by a local law enforcement agency-that are
intended for adults but may hold juveniles before or after
adjudication. Facilities include jails and city or county
correctional centers; special jail facilities, such as
medical or treatment release centers, halfway houses, and
work farms; and temporary holding or lockup facilities that
are part of the jail's combined function. Inmates sentenced
to jail facilities usually are sentenced to serve a year or
less.

Jail functions 

Within the ASJ, jail functions are to 

* receive individuals pending arraignment and hold them
awaiting trial, conviction, or sentencing

* re-admit probation, parole, and bail bond violators and
absconders

* temporarily detain juveniles pending transfer to juvenile
authorities

* hold mentally ill persons pending their movement to
appropriate mental health facilities

* hold individuals for the military, for protective custody,
for contempt, and for the courts as witnesses

* release convicted inmates to the community upon completion
of sentence

* transfer inmates to federal, state, or other authorities

* house inmates for federal, state, or other authorities
because of crowding of their facilities

* sometimes operate community-based programs as alternatives
to incarceration.

Definition of terms

Admissions--persons are officially booked and housed in jails
by formal legal document and the authority of the courts or
some other official agency. Jail admissions include persons
sentenced to weekend programs and who are booked into the
facility for the first time. Excluded from jail admissions
are inmates re-entering the facility after an escape, work
release, medical or treatment facility appointment, and bail
and court appearances. BJS collects jail admissions for the
last 7 days in June.

Average daily population--derived by the sum of inmates in
jail each day for a year, divided by the number of days in
the year (i.e., between July 1, 2009, and June 30, 2010).

Average annual change-denotes the mean average change across
a 12-month time period.

Calculating annual admissions--the number of jail admissions
during the last 7 days in June. Annual jail admissions are
calculated by multiplying weekly admissions by the sum of 365
days divided by 7 days.

Calculating weekly jail turnover rate--calculated by adding
admissions and releases and dividing by the average daily
population. See Methodology for additional information.

Inmates confined at midyear--the number of inmates held in
custody on the last weekday in June.

Jail incarceration rate--the number of inmates held in the
custody of local jails, per 100,000 U.S. residents.

Percent of capacity occupied--calculated by taking the number
of inmates at midyear, dividing by the rated capacity, and
multiplying by 100.
Rated capacity-describes the number of beds or inmates
assigned by a rating official to a facility, excluding
separate temporary holding areas.

Releases -persons released after a period of confinement
(e.g., sentence completion, bail/bond releases, other
pretrial releases, transfers to other jurisdictions, and
deaths). Releases include those persons who have completed
their weekend program and who are leaving the facility for
the last time. Excluded from jail releases are temporary
discharges including work release, medical or treatment
center appointment, court appearance, furlough, day
reporting, and transfers to other facilities within the jail
jurisdiction.

Under jail supervision but not confined includes all persons
in community--based programs operated by a jail facility.
Programs include electronic monitoring, house arrest,
community service, day reporting, and work programs. The
classification excludes persons on pretrial release and who
are not in a community-based program run by the jail, as well
as persons under supervision of probation, parole or other
agencies, inmates on weekend programs, and inmates who
participate in work release programs and return to the jail
at night.

Weekend programs -offenders in these programs are allowed to
serve their sentences of confinement only on weekends (i.e.,
Friday through Sunday).

-------------------------------------------------------
List of Tables

Table 1. Inmates confined in local jails at midyear, average
daily population, and incarceration rates, 2000-2010

Table 2. Rated capacity of local jails and percent of
capacity occupied, 2000-2010

Table 3. Inmates confined in local jails at midyear, by size
of jurisdiction, 2009 and 2010

Table 4. Average daily jail population, admissions, and
turnover rate, by size of jurisdiction, week ending June 30,
2009 and 2010

Table 5. Percent of jail capacity occupied at midyear, by
size of jurisdiction, 2009, and 2010

Table 6. Number of inmates in local jails, by characteristic,
midyear 2000 and 2005-2010

Table 7. Percent of inmates in local jails, by
characteristic, midyear 2000 and 2005-2010

Table 8. Inmate population in jail jurisdictions reporting on
confined persons being held for U.S. Immigration and Customs
Enforcement, midyear 2002-2010

Table 9. The 50 largest local jail jurisdictions, by number
of inmates held, average daily population, and rated
capacity, midyear 2008-2010 

Table 10. Persons under jail supervision, by confinement
status and type of program, midyear 2000 and 2006-2010

Table 11. Estimated standard errors, by confinement status,
Annual Survey of Jails, 2010


Table 12. Estimated standard errors, by selected
characteristics, Annual Survey of Jails, 2010

Table 13. Estimated percentages of local jail inmates, by
selected characteristics and ratio estimates, 2010
-----------------------------------------------------

Methodology

Annual Survey of Jails

In years between the complete census of local jails, BJS
conducts the Annual Survey of Jails (ASJ). ASJ is a sample
survey of local jails used to estimate the number and
characteristics of local inmates nationwide. For the 2010
ASJ, the U.S. Census Bureau, as the collection agent, drew a
sample of 873 jail jurisdictions represented by 936 jail
facilities (also referred to as reporting units). This sample
represents approximately 2,830 jail jurisdictions nationwide.
Local jail jurisdictions include counties (parishes in
Louisiana) or municipal governments that administer one or
more local jails.

The 2010 ASJ sample included all jails with certainty (67)
that were operated jointly by two or more jurisdictions, or
multi-jurisdictional jails. Other jail jurisdictions included
with certainty (268) were those that -

* held juvenile inmates at the time of the 2005 Census of
Jail Inmates and had an average daily population of 500 or
more inmates during the 12 months ending June 30, 2005.

* held only adult inmates and had an average daily population
of 750 or more.
 
The remaining jurisdictions were stratified into two groups:
jurisdictions with jails holding at least one juvenile on
June 30, 2005, and jails holding only adults on that date.
Using stratified random sampling, 538 jurisdictions were
selected from eight strata based on the two conditions
enumerated above and four strata based on the average daily
jail inmate population during 2005. The average daily jail
inmate population was derived from the 2005 Census of Jail
Inmates.

Data were obtained from sampled jurisdictions by mail-out and
web-based survey questionnaires. After follow-up phone calls
and facsimiles to respondents, the response rate for the
survey was 100% for critical items, such as the number of
inmates confined, average daily population, and rated
capacity. (See tables 12, 13 and 14 for standard errors
associated with reported estimates from the ASJ 2010 at
http://www.bjs.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbdetail&iid=2195.) 

Response rate, nonresponse adjustment, and out-of-scope jail
facilities

There were 930 active respondents in the 2010 ASJ universe
file.* [FOOTNOTE: Of the 936 respondents in the 2010 ASJ
universe file, two jail facilities were determined to be
out-of-scope for the 2009 ASJ and remained out-of-scope for
2010. Four were out-of-scope for the 2010 data collection
because they closed permanently, leaving 930 active
respondents.] Eight jail facilities were nonrespondents. For
this collection year, BJS implemented nonresponse weight*
adjustment procedures to account for missing data. However,
prior to implementing the plan, data were estimated for 3 of
the 8 survey nonrespondents. For the confined population and
average daily population (ADP), the estimation method
included applying the average annual change from 2007-2009 to
estimate the 2010 data. The rated capacity for 2010 is the
same as in 2009 because of the stability of these numbers.
After October, 21, 2010, BJS implemented the nonresponse
weight adjustment procedure to account for five respondents
that did not participate. 

Nonresponse weight adjustment

The nonresponse weighting adjustment for the ASJ is handled
in two steps. The first step is to calculate a multi-jail
factor for the jail jurisdictions with more than one
nonregional jail reporting unit. The second step is to
calculate the nonresponse weighting adjustment factor within
sample stratum.
                                                  
Step 1: Multi-jail factor

When all the nonregional jail reporting units within the jail
jurisdiction respond, the multi-jail factor is 1. When none
of the nonregional jail reporting units within the
jurisdiction respond, the multi-jail factor is 0. When at
least one nonregional jail reporting unit within the jail
jurisdiction has responded and at least one nonregional jail
reporting unit has not responded, the multi-jail factor
weights up the data for the responding nonregional jail
reporting unit to account for the nonresponding nonregional
jail reporting units within the jail jurisdiction. 
              
The nonregional jail reporting units were match back to the
2005 Census of Jail Inmates, and the 2005 ADP was used in the
multi-jail factor. For 2010, the 5 nonrespondents were self
representative and not considered for a multi-jail factor.
The multi-jail factor F1hi is calculated as--

where

Ji = Number of jail reporting units in jurisdiction i,
JRi= Number of responding jail reporting units 
       in jurisdiction i,
Xhij = Value of 2005 ADP for jail reporting unit 
       j in jurisdiction i in stratum h.

Step 2: Nonresponse weighting adjustment factor

The nonresponse weighting adjustment factor is calculated
within each stratum. The sample weights in the nonresponse
adjustment factor are used. The nonresponse weighting
adjustment factor F2h is calculated as--

where

nh = number of jurisdictions in stratum h,
whij = sample weight for jail j in jurisidiction i in stratum
h.

Final weight

The final weight FWhij for each individual jail reporting
unit on the 2010 ASJ data file is calculated as--

Weekly admission and release estimation procedures

Based on the 2010 ASJ, 821 of the 925 jail facilities (89%)
provided valid data on weekly admissions or releases
(including estimates for five nonrespondents). To calculate
an overall weekly estimate, data on offender flows through
local jails were estimated for the 104 jail facilities that
did not report data on admissions and releases.

Estimates were calculated based on the following criteria: 

* Data for 64 jail facilities included admission and release
data based on estimates from the 2009 Annual Survey of Jails.

* Data for 13 jail facilities included admission and release
data based on estimates from the 2008 Annual Survey of Jails.

*Release data for 13 jail facilities was based on admission
data reported in 2009. 

* Data for 11 jail facilities included admission and release
data based on estimates from the 2007 Annual Survey of Jails.

* Admission data for 2 jail facilities was based on release
data reported in 2009.

* Admission data for 1 jail facility was based on admission
data reported in 2009.        

Calculating annual admissions
 
BJS determined that the June admission data on the 2004
Survey of Large Jails (SLJ) were a reliable source to
calculate a nationwide annual admission estimate. Although
the number of admissions to jails fluctuated throughout the
year, the SLJ tracked monthly movements from January 2003 to
January 2004 and showed that the June 2003 count (339,500)
closely matched the annual average number of admissions
(342,956). The number of annual admissions was calculated by
multiplying the weekly admissions by 365 days and dividing by
7 days. 

Calculating weekly turnover rates

Weekly jail turnover rates were modeled after the Bureau of
Labor Statistics' Job Openings and Labor Turnover Survey.
Additional information on turnover rates is available at
http://www.bls.gov/jlt/. Jail turnover rates were calculated
by adding admissions and releases and dividing by the average
daily population. The turnover rate takes into account
admissions into and releases from jails and gives an
indication of the fluctuation of the jail population. Higher
turnover rates mean larger numbers of admissions and releases
relative to the size of the average daily population.
 
Revised 2008 and 2009 data

The number of inmates held at midyear 2008 and 2009 and the
average daily population in 2009 for Bexar County, TX, are
based on revised data. 

The rated capacity data for Bexar County, TX, and the
District of Columbia have been revised for 2008 and 2009.
Revised rated capacity data for Kern County, CA, have been
revised for 2009.

------------------------------------------------------------
Office of Justice Programs * Innovation * Partnerships *
Safer Neighborhoolds * http://www.ojp.gov
------------------------------------------------------------

The Bureau of Justice Statistics is the statistical agency of
the U.S. Department of Justice. James P. Lynch is director.

These Statistical Tables were prepared and data were analyzed
by Todd D. Minton. Margaret Noonan verified the report.
Lisa A. McNelis and Jennifer Deppe carried out the data
collection and processing with assistance provided by Joshua
Giunta, Alonzo Johnson, and  Andrea Arroyo, under the
supervision of Stephen Simoncini and Heather C. West, Ph.D.,
Governments Division, Census Bureau, U.S. Department of
Commerce. Suzanne Dorinski and Andrew Post provided
statistical and technical assistance, respectively.

Catherine Bird and Jill Thomas edited the report, Tina Dorsey
produced the report, and Jayne Robinson prepared the report
for final printing under the supervision of Doris J. James.

April 2011, NCJ 233431

This report in portable document format and in ASCII and its
related statistical data and tables are available at the BJS
website: http://www.bjs.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbdetail&iid=2375
-------------------------------------------------------------

Revised 7/11/2011/TLD/12:00



