U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Programs
Bureau of Justice Statistics

----------------------------------------------------------
This file is text only without graphics and many of the
tables. A Zip archive of the tables in this report in
spreadsheet format (.csv) and the full report including
tables and graphics in .pdf format are available on BJS
website at: 
http://www.bjs.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbdetail&iid=4804
---------------------------------------------------------

***************
Bulletin
***************

Local Government Corrections Expenditures, FY 2005–2011


Tracey Kyckelhahn, Ph.D., BJS Statistician
Preliminary data indicate that local governments spent $26.4 
billion on corrections in 2011. Local corrections 
expenditures fund jails and juvenile institutions that house 
both sentenced offenders and defendants awaiting trial. 
These expenditures also cover the community supervision of 
offenders. ***Footnote 1 This report excludes 
intergovernmental transfers because most intergovernmental 
transfers by local governments are to other local 
governments. Excluding intergovernmental transfers avoids 
the artificial inflation that would result if the 
expenditure were tabulated and then counted again when the 
recipient governments spent the money***. Between 2005 and 
2011, local government corrections expenditures fluctuated 
between $25.8 billion and $28.4 billion (figure 1). Data 
from the Census Bureau’s Annual Survey of Government 
Finances provide further detail. Financial data for fiscal 
years 2005 to 2010 were inflation-adjusted to 2011 constant 
dollars (see Methodology).

**********************************
Local governments spent 1.6% of 
total expenditures on corrections
**********************************

Between 2005 and 2011, total spending by local governments 
fluctuated between $1.6 trillion and $1.7 trillion. From 
2005 to 2011, local governments annually spent 1.6% of their 
total expenditures on corrections.

Between 2005 and 2011, local governments annually spent the 
largest percentage of funds on education (36.0% to 38.4%), 
followed by health care and hospitals (7.3% to 7.7%), police 
protection (4.9% to 5.0%), highways (3.7% to 4.0%), public 
welfare (3.2% to 3.5%), and judicial-legal services (1.3% to 
1.4%) (table 1). All other expenditures combined, including 
financial administration and utility costs, ranged from 
40.5% to 42.9% of local government expenditures.

*********************************************************

************
HIGHLIGHTS
************

* In fiscal year 2011, local governments spent $26.4 billion 
on corrections. Between 2005 and 2011, the annual 
expenditures by local governments varied between $25.8 
billion and $28.4 billion.

* Corrections expenditures represented 1.6% of total local 
government expenditures between 2005 and 2011. 
Education was the largest component of local government 
expenditures, varying between 36.0% and 38.4% from 2005 to 
2011.

* Local governments spent more than 80% of total corrections 
expenditures on correctional institutions such as jails 
between 2005 and 2011.

* Between 2005 and 2011, local governments annually spent 
just over a third (34.4% to 37.0%) of all funds spent by 
state and local governments on correctional institutions.
*********************************************************

**************************************
Local governments spent more than 
80% of total corrections expenditures 
on correctional institutions 
**************************************

Local governments spent 84.0% of their total corrections 
expenditures on correctional institutions (such as local 
jails) in 2011, up from 80% in 2005 (table 2). Local 
governments spent the remainder of their corrections budgets 
on other corrections functions, such as supervising 
offenders in the community and maintaining and operating 
nonresidential halfway houses.

To build and operate correctional institutions, local 
governments pay for capital outlay and current operations. 
Capital outlay expenditures include spending on 
construction, renovations, and major repair of institutions; 
purchase of land, rights-of-way, and existing structures; 
title searches and related costs; and purchase of equipment 
having a useful life of more than 5 years. Current 
operations expenditures include officer and employee 
compensation, utilities, and any supplies, materials, or 
contractual services not covered by capital outlay. 

Between 2005 and 2011, capital outlay expenditures for local 
correctional institutions ranged from a low of $1.1 billion 
in 2006 to a high of $1.7 billion in 2009 and 2010 (table 
3). Current operations expenditures for local correctional 
institutions ranged from $19.4 billion in 2005 to $21.9 
billion in 2009. Current operations ranged from 92.7% to 
95.1% of institutional direct expenditures.

*********************************************************

**************************************
Comparing state and local government 
corrections expenditures
**************************************

Between 2005 and 2011, local governments annually spent just 
over a third (34.4% to 37.0%) of all funds spent by state 
and local governments on correctional institutions (figure 
2). Similarly, local governments spent 34.3% to 36.0% of 
total state and local current operations expenditures for 
institutions (figure 3). However, local governments spent a 
greater share of state and local institutional capital 
outlay expenditures, ranging from a low of 34.1% in 2005 to 
a high of 56.4% in 2010 (figure 4).
*********************************************************

*************
Methodology
*************

Expenditure data are from the U.S. Census Bureau’s Annual 
Survey of Government Finances. The survey collects 
expenditure information for federal, state, and local 
governments. This report includes local government 
expenditures and components of those expenditures compiled 
by U.S. Census Bureau representatives. The Census Bureau 
collected data from government audits, budgets, and other 
financial reports with the advice of state officers and 
employees. It then placed information from these reports 
into expenditure categories using its classification system. 
The data were verified with state and local government 
officials before release. The Annual Survey of Government 
Finances is available on the U.S. Census Bureau’s website at 
http://www.census.gov/govs/.
 
Preliminary data
***************** 

This report uses preliminary data for fiscal years 2010 and 
2011. Preliminary data are subject to change and will be 
superseded by data released approximately a year after their 
original publication. Although the Census Bureau makes every 
effort to obtain financial information from government 
entities, financial statements and completed questionnaires 
may not be available from all sampled governments at the 
time the Census Bureau closes the processing. The Census 
Bureau imputes missing data until complete data can be 
obtained. See the Census Bureau’s website for updates on 
release information: http://www.census.gov/govs/state/. 
 
Adjusting for inflation
*************************

BJS inflation-adjusted government expenditures for fiscal 
years 2005 through 2010 to 2011 constant dollars, as 
appropriate for local government spending. BJS used annual 
chain-type price indices for gross domestic product as 
divisors and unadjusted expenditures as dividends to produce 
inflation-adjusted expenditures in 2011 constant dollars. 
The U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of Economic 
Analysis, developed the price indices used in all inflation 
adjustments, as published in the Economic Report of the 
President. [For more information on price indices, see the 
Economic Report of the President (2013), Table B-7. Chain-
type price indexes for gross domestic product, 1964-2012, 
U.S. Government Printing Office, retrieved from 
http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/ERP-2013/pdf/ERP-2013-
table7.pdf.] 

Terms and Definitions
*************************

Correctional institutions include facilities such as local 
jails, residential work release units, and detention 
centers, in addition to correctional farms, industrial and 
training schools, and the related educational, training, and 
health care programs for inmates. It also includes hospitals 
for the criminally insane if operated by a corrections 
agency. 

Corrections involve the community supervision, confinement, 
and rehabilitation of convicted adults and adjudicated 
juveniles and the confinement of persons awaiting trial or 
adjudication. 

Corrections expenditures finance the community supervision, 
confinement, and rehabilitation of adults and juveniles 
convicted of offenses and the confinement of persons 
awaiting trial or adjudication. Local corrections 
expenditures also include the costs of operation and 
employment for local jail and juvenile institutions, 
probation and parole offices, pardon proceedings, 
correctional administration, and intergovernmental 
transfers.   
Education expenditures include the financing of schools, 
colleges, and other educational institutions (e.g., for 
blind, deaf, and other handicapped individuals), and 
educational programs for adults, veterans, and other special 
classes. 

Expenditures include only external cash payments made from 
any source of funds, including any payments financed from 
borrowing, fund balances, intergovernmental revenue, and 
other current revenue.  

Intergovernmental transfers are the sum of payments made 
from one government entity to another, including grants-in-
aid, shared revenues, payments in lieu of taxes, and amounts 
for services performed by one government for another on a 
reimbursable or cost-sharing basis (e.g., payments by one 
government to another for boarding prisoners). It excludes 
amounts paid to other governments for purchase of 
commodities, property, or utility services. 
Intergovernmental expenditures are not included in this 
report.

Direct expenditures include all expenditures except those 
classified as intergovernmental. It includes direct current 
expenditures (e.g., salaries, wages, fees, and commissions 
and purchases of supplies, materials, and contractual 
services) and capital outlays (e.g., construction and 
purchase of equipment, land, and existing structures). 
Capital outlays are included for the year in which the 
direct expenditure is made, regardless of how the funds are 
raised (e.g., bond issue) or when they are paid back. 

Highway expenditures include construction, maintenance, and 
operation of highways, streets, and related structures, 
including toll highways, bridges, tunnels, ferries, street 
lighting, and snow and ice removal.

Health expenditures include outpatient health services; 
public health administration; research and education; 
categorical health programs; treatment and immunization 
clinics; nursing; environmental health activities (such as 
air and water pollution control); ambulance service if 
provided separately from fire protection services; school 
health services, if provided by health agencies rather than 
school agencies; and other general public health activities, 
such as mosquito abatement.

Hospital expenditures include the financing, construction, 
acquisition, maintenance, or operation of hospital 
facilities, provision of hospital care, and support of 
public and private hospitals. Financing of nursing homes is 
included if they are directly associated with a government 
hospital.

Judicial-legal expenditures include the financing of 
criminal and civil courts, including court reporters, 
witness fees, and court law libraries; medical and social 
service activities of courts (aside from probation); court 
activities of sheriff offices, such as bailiffs, registers 
of wills, and other probate activities; prosecuting and 
district attorneys; child support enforcement; and indigent 
defense.

Police protection expenditures include all law enforcement 
activities of regular police departments, sheriff and 
constable offices, and state highway patrols, including the 
following: criminal investigation, forensic services, crime 
labs and testifying in court; buildings, including training 
academies, that are used exclusively for police purposes; 
coroners and medical examiners; payments for transporting 
criminals; police communications and radio services; 
criminal justice planning and general support activities, if 
handled by law enforcement; and motor vehicle inspection and 
regulation, liquor law enforcement, and traffic control, if 
handled by a police agency. 

Public welfare expenditures include support of and 
assistance to persons contingent upon their need. 
Expenditures under this heading include cash assistance paid 
directly to needy persons under the categorical programs 
(Old Age Assistance, Temporary Assistance for Needy 
Families) and under any other welfare programs; vendor 
payments made directly to private purveyors for medical 
care, burials, and other commodities and services provided 
under welfare programs; and government provision and 
operation of welfare institutions. Other public welfare 
includes payments to other governments for welfare purposes, 
administration, and support of private welfare agencies.

*********************************************************
The Bureau of Justice Statistics, located in the Office of 
Justice Programs, U.S. Department of Justice, collects, 
analyses, and disseminates statistical information on crime, 
criminal offenders, victims of crime, and the operation of 
justice systems at all levels of government. William J. 
Sabol is acting director.

This report was written by Tracey Kyckelhahn. Andrew Tiedt 
verified the report.

Vanessa Curto and Jill Thomas edited the report, and Barbara 
Quinn produced the report.

December 2013, NCJ 243527
*********************************************************

**************************************************
Office of Justice Programs
Innovation * Partnerships * Safer Neighborhoods
www.ojp.usdoj.gov
**************************************************

***********************
11/13/13 JER 12:28
***********************


