U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Programs
Bureau of Justice Statistics

This report is one in a series.  More recent
editions may be available.  To view a list of
all in the series go to
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/pubalp2.htm#lpd

Local Police Departments, 1993--Executive Summary

April 1996, NCJ-160802
    
The full text of this report is available
through--
*the BJS Clearinghouse, 1-800-732-3277
*on the Internet at http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/
*on the BJS gopher:
gopher://www.ojp.usdoj.gov:70/11/bjs/
*on the National Criminal Justice Reference
Service Electronic
Bulletin Board (set at 8-N-1, call 301-738-8895,
select BJS).

By Brian A. Reaves, Ph.D.
BJS Statistician

* As of June 30, 1993, local police departments in
the United States had an estimated 474,072
full-time employees, 3% more than in 1990.  Among
this total were 373,554 sworn personnel,
including approximately 230,000 uniformed officers
whose regularly assigned duties included
responding to calls for service.

* About 80% of U.S. residents were served by a
local police department at either the municipal or
county level, and there were approximately 21
full-time local police officers employed
for every 10,000 residents served.

* Women comprised 8.8% of all full-time local
police officers in 1993, compared to 8.1% in 1990
and 7.6% in 1987.  Black officers accounted for
11.3% of the total in 1993, compared to 10.5% in
1990 and 9.3% in 1987.  The percentage of Hispanic
officers was 6.2% in 1993, up from 5.2% in 1990
and 4.5% in 1987.

* Twelve percent of local police departments
required new officer recruits to have at least
some college education in 1993, compared to about
6% in 1990.  Eight percent of departments had some
type of degree requirement, with 1% requiring a
4-year degree.

* The average number of training hours required of
new local police officer recruits in 1993 ranged
from over 1,100 hours in departments serving a
population of 100,000 or more, to under 500 in
those serving fewer than 2,500 residents. 

* For fiscal year 1993, local police departments
had total operating expenditures of $24.3 billion,
compared to $20.6 billion in 1990, a 6% increase
after controlling for inflation.  Operating
expenditures averaged $62,600 per sworn officer,
$48,200 per employee, and $131 per resident for
1993.

* Eighty-four percent of local police departments
authorized their regular field officers to use
semiautomatic sidearms in 1993, up from 73% in
1990.  Departments authorizing semiautomatic
sidearms employed 96% of all local police officers
in 1993, compared to 91% in 1990.

* In 1993, a third of all local police
departments, including nearly half of those
serving a population of 1 million or more,
required all regular field officers to wear
protective body armor while on duty.  Departments
with such a requirement employed 41% of all local
police officers in 1993, compared to 32% in 1990.

* Nearly all local police departments authorized
the use of one or more types of impact devices as
a nonlethal weapon, most commonly in the form of a
PR-24 baton (59%) or traditional baton (58%). 
Three-fourths of departments authorized the use of
chemical agents, with pepper spray (59%) the type
most commonly authorized.

* Sixty-eight percent of local police departments
participated in a 911 emergency telephone system
during 1993, and 41% had an enhanced 911 system. 
Departments with a 911 system employed 89% of all
local police officers in 1993, compared to 65% in
1990. 

* A majority of local police departments serving a
population of 10,000 or more had primary
responsibility for  processing fingerprints. 
Three-fourths of the departments serving a
population of 1 milllion or more were also
responsible for performing ballistics tests and
laboratory tests of substances. 

* In addition to traditional law enforcement
duties, some local police departments were
responsible for court-related functions such as
providing court security (19%) or serving civil
process (11%), and 5% operated a jail.  Among the
numerous other special functions performed by
local police departments were animal control
(49%), and emergency medical services (20%).   

* Two-thirds of local police departments were
using computers in 1993, compared to half in 1990. 
Departments using computers employed 95% of all
local police officers in 1993.   Departments
that used laptop computers or mobile terminals
employed twice as many officers in 1993 (60%) as
in 1990 (30%).  

END OF FILE