U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Programs
Bureau of Justice Statistics


This report is one in a series.  More recent
editions may be available.  To view a list of
all in the series go to
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/pubalp2.htm#lpd



Bureau of Justice Statistics Bulletin
Local Police Department 1993
April 1995, NCJ-148822



The full text of this report is available through--

* the BJS Clearinghouse, 1-800-732-3277,

* on the Internet at http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/

* on the BJS gopher:

gopher://www.ojp.usdoj.gov: 70/11/bjs/

* on the National Criminal Justice Reference

Service Electronic Bulletin Board ( set at 8-N-1,

call 301-738-8895, select BJS).


U.S. Department of Justice

Bureau of Justice Statistics



Jan M. Chaiken, Ph.D.

Director



Brian Reaves, BJS statistician, wrote this report.  Tom Hester
edited it.  Pheny Z. Smith provided statistical review.  It was
produced by Marilyn Marbrook, assisted by Rhonda Keith, Priscilla 
Middleton, and Yvonne Boston.  Sampledesign, selection, and 
weighting were provided by David Hubble and Carol Perseley of 
the Demographic Statistical Methods Division, Bureau of the Census.  
The data were collected and processed by Martha Greene, Etta Herrin, 
Linda Huang, Sheryl Jones, Charlene Sebold, and Charline Watz 
of the Governments Division, Bureau of the Census.

Data utilized in this report are available from the National
Archive of Criminal Justice Data at the University of Michigan,
P.O. Box 1248, Ann Arbor, MI 48106; 1-800-999-0960.  The dataset
is archived as Law Enforcement Management and Administrative
Statistics, 1993, (ICPSR 9749).



An electronic version of this report and the data analyzed in
the report may be found on the Internet at --

http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/



Local Police Department 1993



************

Highlights

************



* As of June 30, 1993, local police departments in the United
States had an estimated 474,072 full-time employees, 3% more
than in 1990.  Among this total were 373,554 sworn personnel,
including approximately 230,000 uniformed officers whose
regularlyassigned duties included responding to calls for
service.



* About 80% of U.S. residents were served by a local police
department at either the municipal or county level, and there
were approximately 21 full-time local police officers employed
for every 10,000 residents served.



* For fiscal year 1993, local police departments had total
operating expenditures of $24.3 billion, compared to $20.6
billion in 1990, a 6% increase after controlling for inflation. 
Operating expenditures averaged $62,600 per sworn officer,
$48,200 per employee, and $131 per resident for 1993.



* Women comprised 8.8% of all full-time local police officers in
1993, compared to 8.1% in 1990 and 7.6% in 1987.  Black officers
accounted for 11.3% of the total in 1993, compared to 10.5% in
1990 and 9.3% in 1987.  The percentage of Hispanic officers was
6.2% in 1993, up from 5.2% in 1990 and 4.5% in 1987.



* Twelve percent of local police departments required new
officer recruits to have at least some college education in
1993, compared to about 6% in 1990. Eight percent of departments
had some type of degree requirement, with 1% requiring a 4-year
degree.



* The average number of training hours required of new local
police officer recruits in 1993 ranged from over 1,100 hours in
departments serving a population of 100,000 or more to under 500
in those serving fewer than 2,500 residents. 



* Eighty-four percent of local police departments authorized
their regular field officers to use semiautomatic sidearms in
1993, up from 73% in 1990.  Departments authorizing
semiautomatic sidearms employed 96% of all local police officers
in 1993, compared to 91% in 1990.



* In 1993, a third of all local police departments, including
half of those serving a population of 1 million or more,
required all regular field officers to wear protective body
armor while on duty.  Departments with such a requirement
employed 41% of all local police officers in 1993, compared to
32% in 1990.



* Nearly all local police departments authorized the use of one
or more types of impact devices as a nonlethal weapon, most
commonly in the form of a PR-24 baton (59%) or traditional baton
(58%).  Three-fourths of departments authorized the use of
chemical agents, with pepper spray (59%) the type most commonly
authorized.



* Sixty-eight percent of local police departments participated
in a 911 emergency telephone system during 1993, and 41% had an
enhanced 911 system.  Departments with a 911 system employed 89%
of all local police officers in 1993, compared to 65% in 1990. 



*In addition to traditional law enforcement duties, some local
police departments were responsible for court-related functions
such as providing court security (19%) or serving civil process
(11%), and 5% operated a jail.  Among the numerous other special
functions performed by local police departments were animal
control (49%), and emergency medical services (20%).   



* Two-thirds of local police departments were using computers in
1993, compared to half in 1990.  Department using computers
employed 95% of all local police officers in 1993.  Departments
that used laptop computers or mobile terminals employed twice as
many officers in 1993 (60%) as in 1990 (30%).



During 1993, the Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS) as a part of
its Law Enforcement Management and Administrative Statistics
(LEMAS) program surveyed a nationally representative sample of
the more than 17,000 State and local law enforcement agencies
operating nationwide.  This report presents data describing the
more than 12,000 general purpose local police departments
operated by municipal or county governments in terms of their
personnel, expenditures and pay, operations, equipment,
computers and information systems, and policies.   This report
excludes sheriffs' departments (covered in a companion report),
State police, and special police agencies (those with limited
jurisdictions such as parks, transit systems, airports, or
schools).



*******************

The LEMAS survey

******************



The 1993 LEMAS survey questionnaire was mailed to all 854 State
and local law enforcement agencies with 100 or more sworn
officers and to a representative sample of 2,416 agencies
employing fewer than 100 officers (see Methodology for a
description of the sample). Of the 3,270 agencies receiving the
LEMAS questionnaire, 3,028 (92.6%) responded.



Detailed agency-by-agency tabulations from the 1993 LEMAS survey
were previously published for State and local law enforcement
agencies with 100 or more officers (see Law Enforcement
Management and Administrative Statistics, 1993  NCJ-148825). 
This report and the companion report Sheriffs' Departments, 1993
summarize the data collected from agencies of all sizes.

      

This is the third LEMAS survey.  Data from the previous surveys
in 1987 and 1990 are used for comparison purposes in this report. 
Law enforcement manpower data collected by BJS in 1992 are 
less comprehensive in content (they include only personnel counts) 
and therefore are not used for comparison.



***********

Personnel

***********



During 1993 an estimated 17,120 publicly funded State and local
law enforcement agencies were operating in the United States. 
The estimated 12,361 general purpose local police departments
accounted for 72% of this total.  Municipal governments operated
over 99% of these local police departments.  Although county
police departments comprised less than 1% of all local police
departments, they employed about 7% of all local police officers.



Local police departments employed an estimated 474,072 persons
full time and another 58,146 on a part-time basis as of June 30,
1993.  An estimated 373,554 (79%) of full-time local police
employees were sworn officers, representing 60% of all full-time
State and local sworn personnel nationwide.  Local police departments 
had an estimated 100,518 full-time civilian employees in 1993, 
about half of all full-time State and local civilian law enforcement 
employees nationwide.



The number of local police employees in 1993 was up by about
14,000, or 3.1%, from 1990 and by about 27,000, or 6.1%, compared
to 1987.



For all State and local law enforcement agencies, there was an
increase of about 35,000, or 4.5%, over 1990 levels and 69,000,
or 9.2%, compared to 1987. 



When only sworn personnel are considered, employment increased
by about 11,000 (2.9%) for local police departments, and by
27,000 (4.5%) for all State and local law enforcement agencies
from 1990 to 1993.  Compared to 1987, there were about 19,000,
or 5.4%, more local police officers in 1993, and 55,000, or
9.7%, more State and local sworn officers overall. 



The New York City Police Department, the largest police
department in the United States, reported 35,480 full-time
employees as of June 30, 1993, including 28,019 full-time sworn
officers.  Other municipal police departments with at least
2,500 full-time officers included those in Chicago (12,368
officers), Los Angeles (7,662), Philadelphia (6,076), Houston
(4,627), Washington, D.C. (4,271), Detroit (3,861), Baltimore
(2,945), and Dallas (2,810).  County police departments with
more than 2,500 officers were operating in Nassau County, New
York (2,633), and Dade County, Florida (2,614). 



While 38 local police departments employed 1,000 or more sworn
officers,  nearly 6,400 (52% of all departments) employed fewer
than 10 officers.  Nearly twice as many departments employed
only 1 full-time or part-time officer as employed 100 or more
officers (7% versus 4%).



Despite the large number of small police  departments, they
accounted for a small proportion of local police officers.



Just 1 in 19 full-time local police officers were employed by a
department with fewer than 10 sworn employees.



In contrast, about 3 in 5 worked for a department with 100 or
more officers, and nearly 1 in 3 worked for a department with
1,000 or more officers.



About half of all full-time local police officers worked for a
department serving a population of 100,000 or more, and a fifth
were employed by the 12 departments that served a population of
1 million or more.  About 1 in 7 officers were employed by the
more than 9,000 departments serving a population under 10,000.



On average, departments serving a population of 1 million or
more had about 8,000 full-time employees, including about 6,300
full-time sworn officers.  These departments did not employ any
part-time officers.  Departments in the smallest towns (under
2,500 in population) employed an average of 3 full-time sworn
officers, and 2 part-time officers.



On average, local police departments employed about 2.1
full-time officers for every 1,000 residents.   By population
category, this ratio ranged from 1.7 for departments serving
50,000 to 99,999 residents to 2.6 among departments serving a
population of 1 million or more.  When county police are
excluded, the average officer-to-citizen ratio rose to 3.2 in
jurisdictions with 1 million or more residents, 2.7 in those
with 500,000 to 999,999 residents, and 2.3 in those with 250,000
to 499,999 residents.



                            Average number 

                            of full-time local 

                            police officers per 

Population served           1,000 residents

------------------------------------------------ 

All sizes                         2.1



1,000,000 or more                 2.6

500,000-999,999                   2.1

250,000-499,999                   2.1

100,000-249,999                   1.8

50,000-99,999                     1.7

25,000-49,999                     1.8



-----------------------------------------------





Race and sex of officers

------------------------



Women comprised 8.8% of all local police officers nationwide in
1993 .  The percentage of women officers was highest in large
jurisdictions, including 15% of officers in jurisdictions of 1
million or more in population, and 12% in jurisdictions with at
least 250,000 residents but fewer than 1 million.  About 3% of
officers in departments serving fewer than 2,500 residents were
women, as were about 5% of those serving a population of at
least 2,500 but less than 50,000. 



The estimated 32,849 female local police officers employed in
1993 represented an increase of about 3,500 over the number in
1990 and about  5,800 over 1987.  Women also comprised a higher
percentage of the total local police force in 1993 (8.8%) than
in 1990 (8.1%) or 1987 (7.5%).



About 302,000, or 81%, of full-time local police officers were
non-Hispanic whites in 1993.  This represented a decrease from
1990 (83%) and 1987 (85%).  The number of white male local
police officers in 1993 was estimated to be 281,057, a decrease
of about 20,000 from 1990 and about 22,000 from 1987.  In
contrast, the estimated 71,244 minority officers in 1993 was
larger than the 61,710 in 1990 and the 51,872 in 1987. 



The estimated 42,212 black local police officers in 1993
represented an increase of about 4,000 over 1990 and about 9,000
over 1987.  The percentage of local police officers who were
black  was 11.3% in 1993, compared to 10.5% in 1990 and 9.3% in
1987.



Hispanics also comprised a larger percentage of local police
officers in 1993 (6.2%) than in earlier years (5.2% in 1990,
4.5% in 1987).  The number of Hispanic officers in 1993 (23,309)
was 23% greater than in 1990 (18,876) and 46% greater than in
1987 (15,988).



*************************************************

Duties of sworn personnel in local police departments

*************************************************



Departments with 100 or more offficers

-------------------------------------



About 10% of local police officers in deparments with 100 or
more primarily performed duties outside the area of field
operations.   About half of these officers worked in
administrative areas (5%), including  finance, personnel, and
internal affairs. 



Another 4% of the officers in these larger departments provided
technical support services. These sworn personnel primarily
performed duties related to dispatch, recordkeeping, data
processing, communications, fleet management, and training.



Depending on a particular department's responsibilities, some
local police officers may have been assigned to jail or court
operations.  Departments with 100 or more officers reported
about 1% of their full-time sworn personnel  worked primarily in
these areas.



-----------------------------------------------

Departments with 100 or more officers

**************************************

Primary area              Percent of 

of responsibility         full-time officers

----------------------------------------------

Field operations                90%

Administration                   5%

Technical support                4%

Other*                                1%

----------------------------------------------------------

Among the 90% of officers classified as working in field
operations, an estimated 3 in 4 were uniformed officers whose
regularly assigned duties included responding to calls for
service.  The other fourth included supervisors and those whose
primary duties were investigative in nature, such as detectives.
Other examples of field operation officers whose primary duties
did not include responding to calls for service included those
assigned to special operations or traffic-related duties.



All departments

---------------

Overall, an estimated 252,000 local police officers, 67%
of all such officers nationwide, were uniformed personnel whose
regularly assigned duties included responding to calls for
service.  



The percentage of full-time sworn personnel in local police
departments who were uniformed officers assigned to respond to
calls for service was highest in jurisdictions with fewer than
25,000 residents. For example, an estimated 75% of sworn
personnel in departments serving a population of 10,000 to
24,999 were assigned to respond to calls for service. The
percentage was even higher in departments serving a population
of 2,500 to 9,999 (85%) or under 2,500 (95%).



Possible explanations for this pattern include the fact that
smaller departments have less need for administrative personnel
such as those handling budgetary and personnel matters. Smaller
departments also tend to be less technologically advanced and
may need fewer employees for technical support duties related to
computerized functions.  Smaller departments also often rely on
larger departments for their training needs rather than employ
personnel to handle such duties.



In some small departments it may also be more common for sworn
personnel to handle multiple areas of responsibility, including
but not limited to responding to calls for service.



Education and training requirements for new officers

--------------------------------------------



Nearly all (97%) local police departments had a formal education
requirement for new officer recruits. (The typical minimum
educational requirement for new local police officers was
completion of high school (86%).  In 1993, 12% of local police
departments, twice as many as in 1990, required at least some
college coursework.  About 1% required new officers to have a
4-year college degree, and 7% required a 2-year degree.



Ninety-nine percent of all local police officers were employed
by a department that required at least a high school diploma of
new recruits, and 15% worked for a department that required at
least some college.



In 90% of local police departments, employing 99% of all local
police officers, new officer recruits were required to complete
formal training. Nearly all (98%) of the departments serving a
population of more than 2,500 required training, while 83% ofthe
departments in towns of under 2,500 had a training requirement.



On average, local police departments required 640 training hours
of their new officer recruits, including 425 classroom training
hours and 215 field training hours.  Training requirements were
more stringent in larger jurisdictions than smaller
ones--ranging from over 1,100 total hours in departments serving
a population of 100,000 or more to under 500 hours in
jurisdictions with fewer than 2,500 residents.



The average number of required classroom training hours was
highest in departments serving 1 million or more residents (865
hours), while the most field training was required by
departments serving a population of 250,000 to 499,999 (551
hours).  When departments are weighted according to number of
officers employed, it is estima- ted that the average new local
police recruit in 1993 was required to undergo nearly 1,000
hours of training, with two-thirds of it in the classroom.

Applicant and employee drug testing

-----------------------------------



Twenty-eight percent of local police departments, employing 64%
of all local police officers, required that all applicants for
sworn positions be tested for illegal drug use.  A majority of
the departments serving a population of 50,000 or more required
a drug test of all officer applicants, as did about half of
those in jurisdictions with at least 10,000 but fewer than
50,000 residents.  Departments in small jurisdictions were the
least likely to test all officer applicants for drugs:  28% of
departments serving a population of 2,500 to 9,999 and 15% of
those serving fewer than 2,500 residents had such a requirement.



Overall, about a fourth of local police departments had a drug
testing program for their regular field officers, and a majority
(58%) of local police officers were employed by a department
that had some type of drug testing program for regular field
officers.



Unlike applicant testing programs, testing requirements for
regular field officers were rarely mandatory.  Just 3% of local
police departments, employing 4% of all officers, had a
mandatory requirement that all regular field officers be tested
for drugs.  Most common was a drug testing program that required
testing of officers suspected of using illegal drugs--16% of
local police departments employing 43% of all officers had such
a drug testing program.  Half this many departments had a random
selection drug testing program (8%.  Departments with random
selection drug testing for regular field officers employed 28%
of all local police officers. 



Civilian employees in local police departments were somewhat
less likely than sworn personnel to be subjected to a drug
testing program --19% of all departments, employing 42% of all
nonsworn local police employees, tested such employees for drug
use. As with sworn personnel, the most common type of drug
testing program for civilian police employees was one based on
suspicion of use.  About 13% of departments, employing 36% of
all nonsworn local police personnel, tested nonsworn employees
suspected of using illegal drugs.  Small percentages of local
police departments had random selection (5%) or mandatory (4%)
drug testing programs for civilian personnel.



*********************

Expenditures and pay

********************



Operating expenditures

----------------------



The total annual operating expenditure by local police
departments duringfiscal year 1993 was $24.3 billion, an
increase of 18% over 1990.  After controlling for inflation, the
increase was about 6%.  These figures do not include capital
expenditures such as those for equipment purchases or
construction projects.  Local police accounted for 58% of the
$41.9 billion in total operating expenditures for all State and
local law enforcement agencies during fiscal year 1993.  

-----------------------------------------------

                                                                
                     Billions                                   
     -----------

Total operating expenditures          41.9

Local police                          24.3

Sheriff                               10.7

State police                           4.2

-----------------------------------------------



Local police operating expenditures averaged about $2 million
per department, ranging from an average of about $427,000,000
for departments serving a population of 1 million or more, to
$107,000 in those serving fewer than 2,500 residents. 



Overall, the operation of local police departments for the year
cost $131 per resident served.  Departments serving a population
of 1 million or more cost the most to operate, about $194 per
resident, and those in the smallest jurisdictions (under 2,500
residents) cost the least, $88 per resident. 



Nationwide, local police departments cost about $63,000 per
sworn officer to operate for the year, with departments serving
a population of 50,000 or more costing more than this, and
departments serving fewer than 25,000 residents costing less. 
Departments serving a population of 500,000 to 999,999 had the
highest per-officer operating expenditure, about $77,000.  This
was more than twice the per officer expenditure for departments
serving fewer than 2,500 residents ($29,400).



After controlling for inflation, the per officer operating costs
were up from $67,000 to $70,000 for departments serving a
population of 250,000 or more.  A similar increase was seen
among departments serving 10,000 to 49,999 residents (from
$57,000 to $59,000) and departments serving fewer than 10,000
residents (from $39,000 to $41,000).



Departments serving a population of 50,000 to 249,999
experienced the largest increase, from $62,000 per officer in
1990 to $70,000 per officer in 1993.



When local police operating expenditures are considered on a per
employee basis rather than per officer, the national average for
fiscal year 1993 was $48,200, ranging from a high of  $58,600
per employee in jurisdictions with 500,000 to 999,999 residents
to a low of $25,300 in the smallest jurisdictions.  Overall,
employee salaries and benefits accounted for about $6 of every
$7 in local police operating expenditures.



Salaries

-----------

The average base starting salary offered by local police
departments to entry-level officers was $21,300 in 1993.  This
was an increase of 12.6% compared with 1990, or 1.9% after
controlling for inflation.  Departments in jurisdictions with
10,000 or more residents had an average starting salary that was
higher than the overall average, ranging from $24,600
(population served of 10,000 to 24,999) to $28,200 (population
served of 1 million or more).  The average for departments
serving a population of 2,500 to 9,999 was about the same as the
overall average, and departments serving a population under
2,500 paid entry-level officers an average starting salary of
$17,400 per year, about $4,000 below the overall average.  When
departments are weighted according to number of officers
employed, the average entry-level salary for local police
officers in 1993 was about $26,000.



Across population categories, salaries for the positions of
sergeant and chief of police followed a pattern similar to that
for entry-level officers.  By department, the average starting
salary for sergeants was $28,500, with sergeants in the largest
jurisdictions starting at $44,600 on average, about twice as
much as in departments in the smallest jurisdictions ($20,800). 
When departments are weighted according to size, the average
base starting salary for local police sergeants was $37,400 in
1993.



The overall average base starting salary for chiefs of local
police departments was $34,600; however, the chief of
departments in jurisdictions with 10,000 or more residents had
an average starting salary that was considerably higher.  The
average starting salary for local police chiefs was highest in
jurisdictions with 1 million or more residents ($91,700) and
lowest in departments serving a population of under 2,500
($22,900).  



Special pay

------------

Some local police departments offered certain types of special
pay to officers.  For example, 28% of local police departments,
employing 51% of all officers, offered education incentive pay
to qualifying officers.  A majority of departments serving a
population of 10,000 or more had education incentive pay;
however, just 8% of departments serving fewer than 2,500
residents offered this type of pay to officers. 



Roughly equal percentages of departments offered shift
differential pay (16%) or merit pay (15%) to officers.  About
three-fourths of departments in jurisdictions with 500,000 to
999,999 residents had shift differential pay, and about
two-fifths of those serving 250,000 to 999,999 residents had
merit pay.  Nearly half of all local police officers were
employed by an agency that offered shift differential pay, and a
fourth were employed by a department that had merit pay.



Of the types of special pay included in the LEMAS survey, the
one least likely to be available to officers was hazardous duty
pay.  This type of special pay was offered by just 3% of all
departments; however, about half of departments serving a
population of 250,000 or more offered hazardous duty pay. 
Nationwide, 22% of all local police officers were employed by a
department that offered hazardous duty pay.



Collective bargaining and union membership

--------------------------------------------



Nationwide, 38% of all local police departments, employing 71%
of all officers, authorized collective bargaining for sworn
personnel.  A majority of the departments serving a population
of 10,000 or more authorized collective bargaining for sworn
employees, including over 80% of the departments in
jurisdictions with a population of 500,000 or more.  Just 10% of
the departments serving a population of under 2,500 authorized
collective bargaining for sworn personnel.



Civilian personnel in local police departments were less likely
to have collective bargaining rights than were sworn employees.
Overall, 20% of local police departments, employing 60% of all
nonsworn local police personnel, authorized collective
bargaining for civilians. While a large majority of departments
serving a population of 500,000 or more authorized collective
bargaining for civilian employees, just 2% of departments
serving a population under 2,500 did so.



About a third of local police departments allowed police union
membership, including a majority of those in jurisdictions with
10,000 or more residents.  About two-thirds of local police
officers were employed by a department that authorized them to
belong to a police union.  Officer membership in a nonpolice
union was authorized by about 7% of local police departments,
employing 9% of all officers.



A fourth of all local police departments authorized officer
membership in a local, State, or regional police association. 
Thirty-seven percent of local police officers worked for a
department authorizing police association membership.



************

Operations

************



Crime investigation

--------------------



Nearly all local police departments had primary responsibility
for investigating at least some types of crimes occurring in
their jurisdiction.  All departments in jurisdictions with a
population of 250,000 or more had primary responsibility for
investigating homicides and other violent crimes such as rape,
robbery, or assault.  Nearly all departments serving a
population of 10,000 or more had primary responsibility for
homicide investigation, but 11% of those serving a population of
2,500 to 9,999 and 30% of those serving fewer than 2,500
residents reported they did not have primary responsibility for
such investigations.  In jurisdictions under 2,500 in
population, about 1 in 7 local police departments did not have
primary responsibility for the investigation of any violent
crimes.



About three-fourths of all local police departments had the
primary role in arson investigations.  Nearly all departments
had primary responsibility for the investigation of other
property crimes such as burglary, motor vehicle theft, or
larceny.  By population category, departments in jurisdictions
with fewer than 2,500 residents were the least likely to have
primary investigative responsibility for arson (66%) or other
property crimes (94%).



Investigative support functions

-------------------------------

Some local police departments performed functions that supported
their own and other agencies' crime investigations.  For
example, about 2 in 5 departments were responsible for
fingerprint processing (41%).  A majority of the departments
serving a population of 10,000 or more were responsible for
fingerprint processing, including over three-fourths of those
serving a population of 50,000 or more.  About three-fourths of
local police officers nationwide were employed by a department
that was responsible for fingerprint processing.



Overall, few local police departments were responsible for
laboratory testing of substances (2%) or ballistics testing
(1%); however, 75% of departments serving a population of 1
million or more were responsible for these functions, as were
over 40% of the departments in jurisdictions with 250,000 to
999,999 residents.  



Drug and vice enforcement

-------------------------



Eighty percent of all local police departments, including over
90% of those serving 25,000 or more residents, had primary drug
enforcement responsibility in their jurisdiction.  These
departments employed 93% of all local police officers. 
Departments in jurisdictions of less than 2,500 in population
(72%) were the least likely to have primary drug enforcement
responsibility.  In some cases, departments without primary drug
enforcement responsibility reported they shared that
responsibility with other law enforcement agencies.  Often this
was through participation in a multiagency drug enforcement task
force.



About half of all local police departments were responsible for
vice enforcement, including over 90% of the departments serving
a population of 50,000 or more.  Departments in jurisdictions
with fewer than 2,500 residents (33%) were the least likely to
have vice enforcement responsibilities.  Overall, local police
departments responsible for vice enforcement employed 86% of all
local police officers.



Patrol and response

-------------------



Ninety-seven percent of local police departments, including all
those serving a population of 50,000 or more, provided routine
patrol services for their jurisdiction.  At least 95% of the
departments in all population categories provided patrol
services, and 99.6% of all local police officers worked for a
department with routine patrol responsibilities.



Nearly all (93%) local police departments reported they had
primary responsibility for receiving calls for service from
citizens.  The percentage of departments that handled service
calls directly was at least 90% in all population categories,
and 97% of all officers were employed by these departments.  



About half of local police departments had responsibility for
dispatching calls for service to officers in the field.  Police
departments in larger jurisdictions were the most likely to
perform dispatch services:  Over 90% of those serving a
population of 250,000 or more were responsible for dispatching
calls for service, as were over 80% of those
serving at least 10,000 but fewer than 250,000 residents. 
Nearly two-thirds of the departments serving 2,500 to 9,999
residents (63%) had dispatch responsibilities, while a fourth of
the departments serving fewer than 2,500 residents had primary
responsibility for dispatching calls for service.



911 emergency telephone system

-------------------------------



In 1993 about two-thirds of all local police departments
participated in an emergency telephone system whereby one of
their units could be dispatched in response to a citizen call to
911 or its equivalent.  This was a significant increase from
1990 when about half of all departments had a 911 system, and
twice the proportion of agencies reporting 911 participation in
1987.  Local police departments with a 911 system employed 89%
of all officers in 1993, compared to 65% in 1990.



A majority of the local police departments in each population
category were participating in a 911 system in 1993, ranging
from 100% of those serving 250,000 to 499,999 residents to 59%
of those serving a population of under 2,500.



In contrast to 1990, a majority of the departments with a 911
system in 1993 reported their system was an enhanced system,
capable of pinpointing the location of a caller automatically. 
In 1993, enhanced 911 systems were operating in 41% of all local
police departments, while 27% reported they had a basic 911
system.  In 1990, 18% had an enhanced system and 30% a basic
system.



Increases in the use of enhanced 911 were seen in all population
categories from 1990 to 1993, and a majority of the departments
serving a population of 10,000 or more had an enhanced  system
in 1993.  This included 80% of those serving a population of
250,000 or more (compared to 72% in 1990), 77% of those serving
a population of 50,000 to 249,999 (54% in 1990), and 60% of
those serving a population of 10,000 to 49,999 (34% in 1990). 
Among departments serving a population under 10,000, the
percentage with enhanced 911 tripled, from 11% in 1990 to 34% in
1993.



Traffic-related functions

-------------------------

Nearly all local police departments were responsible for
traffic-related functions such as enforcement of traffic laws
(99%), accident investigation (98%), or traffic direction and
control (90%)).  In all population categories, at least 97% of
the departments were responsible for enforcing traffic laws and
accident investigation.  At  least 93% of the departments in
each population category from 2,500 to 249,999 were responsible
for traffic direction and control.





Jail- and court-related functions

----------------------------------



In addition to various law enforcement functions, local police
departments in some jurisdictions were also responsible for
functions related to jail or court operations.  Nationwide, 5%
of local police departments, employing 11% of all local police
officers, operated a jail in 1993.  Nearly a fourth of
departments serving a jurisdiction with 100,000 to 499,999
residents operated a jail.



Nearly 1 in 5 local police departments provided court security,
and about 1 in 9 served civil process papers such as summonses. 
 About 20% of local police officers worked for a department that
was responsible for court security, and 7% worked for a
department responsible for serving civil process.



Lockup facilities

-----------------



About 1 in 4 local police departments were operating at least
one lockup facility in 1993.  Lockup facilities are temporary
holding facilities operated separately from a jail with a
limited holding time--an average maximum holding time of 22
hours was reported by the local police departments that operated
a lockup facility.  



A majority of the departments serving a population of 500,000 or
more and those serving a population of 10,000 to 49,999 were
operating at least 1 lockup facility.  Departments serving a
population of under 2,500 (6%) were the least likely to be
operating a lockup.  Overall, 41% of local police officers were
employed by a department that operated at least one lockup. The
average total lockup capacity for all departments was 10
persons, ranging from 810 in jurisdictions with 1 million or
more residents to 4 in jurisdictions with fewer than 10,000
residents.





Special public safety functions

-------------------------------



Another important area of responsibility for many local police
departments involves the performance of special functions
related to public safety.  Examples of such functions include
animal control, search-and-rescue operations, emergency medical
services, civil defense, and fire services.



Of these functions, the one performed by the most local police
departments in 1993 was animal control. Slightly more than half
of the departments in jurisdictions with 10,000 to 99,999
residents were responsible for animal control, compared to about
1 in 10 departments serving 500,000 or more residents.  Overall,
49% of local police departments, employing 32% of all local
police officers, were responsible for animal control in their
jurisdiction. 

A third of all local police departments, employing two-fifths of
all officers, were responsible for performing search-and-rescue
operations.  Local police in jurisdictions of 1 million or more
in population (67%), were the most likely to be responsible for
search and rescue.



Twenty percent of local police departments were the primary
provider of emergency medical services in their jurisdiction; 
however, no departments serving a population of 250,000 to
499,999 had this responsibility.  Nationwide, departments
responsible for emergency medical services employed 14% of all
local police officers.  



About 16% of local police departments were responsible for civil
defense functions in their jurisdiction.  Departments serving
500,000 or more residents were the most likely to be responsible
for civil defense, and those in jurisdictions with 100,000 to
499,999 residents were the least likely.   



In about 9% of local police departments, fire services were a
part of the agency's overall responsibility;  however, no
departments serving a population of 250,000 or more provided
fire services. Departments serving fewer than 2,500 residents
were the most likely to be responsible for fire services (13%).
Nationwide, 4% of local police officers were employed by a
department that provided fire services. 



Training academy operation

---------------------------



An important area of responsibility for about 600 local police
departments nationwide was the operation of a training academy.
Although just 5% of all local police departments operated a
training academy, these departments employed 46% of all local
police officers.  A large majority of departments serving a
population of 250,000 or more operated a training academy as did
about half of those in jurisdictions with 100,000 to 249,999
residents. Less than 10% of local police departments serving a
population of under 50,000 operated a training academy.



**********

Equipment

**********



Sidearms

---------



In 1993, 84% of local police departments, employing 96% of all
local police officers, authorized the use of some type of
semiautomatic weapon as an officer sidearm. 



Well over 90% of departments serving a population of 25,000 or
more authorized semiautomatic weapons in 1993, as did 90% of
those serving a population of 2,500 to 24,999.  Departments
serving a population of under 2,500 (73%) were the least likely
to authorize the use of semiautomatic sidearms by officers. 



As in 1990, the 9mm semiautomatic was the most popular type of
local police sidearm, with 69% of departments authorizing its
use by officers.  Thirty-one percent of departments authorized
.45-caliber semiautomatic sidearms.  Smaller percentages
authorized 10mm and .380-caliber semiautomatics.  Just over half
(55%) of local police departments authorized the use of
revolvers by officers, with .357-caliber (45%) and .38-caliber
(30%) revolvers being the types most commonly authorized.



An estimated 62% of local police departments supplied sidearms
to their regular field officers, and another 4% provided a cash
allowance to officers for the purchase of sidearms. At least 81%
of the departments in each  population category  from 10,000 to
999,999 supplied sidearms, compared to just under half of those
serving a population under 2,500. About two-thirds of the
departments serving a population of 1 million or more, or a
population of 2,500 to 9,999 supplied sidearms to their officers.



Departments serving a population of 1 million or more (17%) were
more likely than other departments to provide a cash allowance
for sidearms.  Overall, nearly all local police officers were
employed by a department that either supplied sidearms (79%) or
provided a cash allowance for their purchase (15%).



Body armor

-----------



Sixty-five percent of local police departments, employing 73% of
all officers, supplied protective body armor to their regular
field officers.  An additional 5%, employing 9% of all officers,
provided a cash allowance for armor. At least 80% of the
departments in each population category from 2,500 up either
supplied body armor or provided a cash allowance for it. 
Departments serving a population of under 2,500 were the least
likely to supply armor (51%) or to provide a cash allowance for
its purchase (2%).



A third of local police departments, employing about two-fifths
of all officers, required all regular field officers to wear
body armor while on duty and an additional 4% of departments
(employing 8% of all officers) required some of their officers
to do so.  About half of local police officers were employed by
a department that required either some or all regular field
officers to wear protective armor while on duty. 



Departments serving a population of 1 million or more were the
most likely to require the wearing of protective armor: 
Forty-two percent required all regular field officers to wear
armor and 17% required some officers to do so.



Overall, the percentage of local police departments requiring
all or some regular field officers to wear body armor increased
from 27% in 1990 to 37% in 1993.  The percentage of local police
departments requiring all regular field officers to wear body
armor increased from 24% in 1990 to 33% in 1993.



Such an increase was evident among all population sizes.  Among
departments serving a population of 250,000 or more, 30%
required all field officers to wear armor in 1993 compared to
21% in 1990, and 31% of those serving 50,000 to 249,999
residents had such a requirement in 1993, up from 22% in 1990. 
For departments serving 10,000 to 49,999 residents, the increase
was from 27% to 37%, and among departments serving fewer than
10,000 residents, 33% required armor in 1993 compared to 23% in
1990.



Nonlethal weapons

-----------------



Nearly all (99%) local police departments, authorized their
field officers to use one or more types of nonlethal weapons. 
Impact devices were the type most commonly authorized: 93% of
all departments, employing 98% of all officers, authorized this
type of weapon. The second most popular category of nonlethal
weapon, chemical agents, was authorized by 76% of all
departments.  These departments employed 89% of all officers. 
Over 90% of the departments serving a population of 100,000 or
more authorized the use of chemical agents.



The types of impact devices most frequently authorized were
PR-24 batons (59%) and traditional batons (58%), followed by
collapsible batons (39%).   Departments serving a population of
100,000 or more showed a preference for the traditional baton,
while departments serving a population of 2,500 to 99,999 showed
a slight  preference for the PR-24 baton. Local police officers
were most likely to be working for a department that authorized
them to use a traditional baton (67%) followed by the PR-24
baton (57%). 



Pepper spray (59%) was the most popular chemical nonlethal
weapon, and was the only nonlethal weapon other than PR-24 and
traditional batons to be authorized by a majority of local
police departments. More than three-fourths of the departments 
serving a population of 100,000 to 999,999 authorized pepper spray,
and 69% of all local police officers were employed by a department
that authorized it.



About 28% of local police departments authorized the use of tear
gas by officers.  Departments were more likely to authorize tear
gas in the personal issue size (23%) than in the bulk size (9%).
 About half of all local police officers were employed by a
department that authorized the use of tear gas in some form. 



Vehicles

---------



Nationwide, local police departments operated about 47 cars per
100 sworn personnel.  The ratio of cars to officers was lowest
in jurisdictions with a population of 1 million or more, with
about 24 per 100 officers.  About 38% of the cars operated by
local police departments were unmarked.  The proportion of cars
that were unmarked ranged from half in departments serving a
population of 1 million or more, to a sixth in departments
serving a population of under 2,500. 



Forty-two percent of local police departments allowed sworn
personnel to take marked vehicles home.  In most of these
departments, officers were allowed only to drive the vehicle to
and from work (32%).  Nine percent of departments allowed
officers to operate a marked vehicle for private errands. 
Departments in jurisdictions with 1,000,000 or more residents
(25%) were the most likely to have a policy allowing personal
use.

Overall, only small percentages of local police departments
operated off-land vehicles such as boats (4%), helicopters (1%),
or planes (less than 1%); however, many departments serving
larger jurisdictions operated such vehicles.

For example, over 70% of departments serving a population of
500,000 or more operated at least 1 helicopter. A majority of
these departments also operated boats, including 92% of those
serving a population of 1 million or more.  A third of the
departments serving a population of 1 million or more, about a
fourth those serving a population of 500,000 or more, and nearly
a fifth of those serving 250,000 to 499,999 residents, operated
at least 1 fixed-wing aircraft.  



Animals

--------



About 1 in 6 local police departments maintained one or more
dogs for use in activities related to law enforcement.  In
general, the percentage of departments using dogs declined with
size of population served.  Over 90% of departments serving a
population of 100,000 or more maintained dogs, as did 64% of
those serving a population of 50,000 to 99,999.  Just 17% of
those in jurisdictions with 2,500 to 9,999 residents, and 5% of
those serving fewer than 2,500 residents maintained dogs. 
Nationwide, it is estimated that there were nearly 5,200 dogs
maintained by local police departments in 1993, and about
two-thirds of all local police officers were employed by a
department that had at least one dog.



About 1% of local police departments maintained horses for law
enforcement purposes.  Five in six departments serving a
population of 1 million or more used horses, as did nearly half
of those serving a population of 250,000 to 999,999. 
Nationwide, local police departments were estimated to be
maintaining nearly 1,200 horses for law enforcement purposes
during 1993.  These departments employed about a third of all
local police officers.



**********************************

Computers and information systems

**********************************



Types of computers used

-----------------------



All local police departments serving a population of 50,000 or
more, and nearly all those in jurisdictions with 10,000 to
49,999 residents were using 1 or more types of computers in
1993.  About 4 in 5 departments serving a population of 2,500 to
9,999 were using computers, as were about 2 in 5 departments
serving a population under 2,500.



Overall, two-thirds of local police departments were using
computers in 1993, compared to about half in 1990.  The
percentage of all local police officers employed by a department
that used computers of some type was 95% in 1993, compared to
90% in 1990.



Personal computers were used by 54% of local police departments
in 1993.  This represented an increase over 1990 when 40% of
departments were using personal computers. All departments
serving a population of 500,000 or more were using personal
computers in 1993, as were 98% of those serving a population of
100,000 to 499,999.  At least two-thirds of the departments in
each

population category were using personal computers with the
exception of those serving fewer than 2,500 residents (28%).
Overall, local police departments using personal computers
employed 89% of all local police officers in 1993.  



About a third of local police departments were using a mainframe
computer during 1993, compared to a fifth in 1990.  A majority
of the departments serving a population of  10,000 or more were
using a mainframe in 1993, including all departments serving a
population of 1 million or more.  Departments using mainframes
employed about three-fourths of all officers in 1993.



A majority of departments serving a population of 250,000 or
more were using mini-computers in 1993, as were about half of
the departments serving

a population of 50,000 to 249,999.  Overall, 12% of local police
departments, employing 52% of all local police officers, were
using mini-computers.



Although just 10% of all local police departments were using a
laptop computer in 1993, these departments employed about half
of all local police officers.  A majority of the departments
serving a population of 100,000 or more were using laptop
computers in 1993, and about three times as many departments
were using laptops in 1993 as in 1990.



About 7% of local police departments were using mobile digital
terminals in 1993, twice the percentage that were using them in
1990.  Most departments using mobile terminals were using the
car-mounted type with about 1 in 7 using hand-held terminals. 
In 1993 departments using either type of mobile terminal
employed 40% of all local police officers.



Overall, 14% of local police departments were using either
laptop computers or mobile digital terminals in 1993, compared
to 5% in 1990.  During the same period, the percentage of
officers working in a department that utilized laptops or mobile
digital terminals doubled--from 30% in 1990 to 60% in 1993. 

 

Although departments in larger jurisdictions continued to be
more likely than those in smaller jurisdictions to use laptops
and mobile terminals, significant increases in their use were
seen in all population categories from 1990 to 1993.  In
jurisdictions with 250,000 or more residents, 90% of the local
police departments were using these types of computers in 1993
compared to 63% in 1990.  Among departments serving 50,000 to
249,999 residents, the increase was from 31% to 63%.  In
jurisdictions with 10,000 to 49,999 residents, 32% of the
departments were using laptops or mobile terminals in 1993, up
from 9% in 1990, and in jurisdictions with fewer than 10,000
residents, the increase was from 2% to 7%.



Computer functions

------------------



An estimated 53% of all local police departments, employing 88%
of all officers, were using computers for record keeping in
1993. This included over 90% of the departments serving a
population of 50,000 or more.  More than a fourth of all local
police departments, including a

majority of those serving a population of 25,000 or more, also
used computers for criminal investigations (41%), budgeting
(31%), crime analysis (29%), or dispatch (29%). A majority of
departments serving a population 100,000 or more also used
computers for fleet management, manpower allocation, and
research purposes during 1993.



About three-fourths of all local police officers worked for a
department that used computers for criminal investigations,
crime analysis, and dispatch, and just over half were employed
by a department that used computers for budgeting, fleet
management, manpower allocation, and research.  For each of the
management functions included in the LEMAS survey, the
percentage of local police departments that were utilizing
computers to perform that function was greater in 1993 than in
1990.



Computerized files

--------------------



Local police were also more likely to be maintaining
computerized information files in 1993 than they were in 1990. 
For example, 55% of all local police departments were
maintaining computerized files on arrests compared to 39% in
1990, and nearly half of all departments were maintaining files
on traffic citations (46%) and calls for service (45%) compared
to about a third for each in 1990.  In 1993, about 90% of the
departments serving a population of 25,000 or more maintained
computerized files on arrests and calls for service.



At least a third of all local police departments were also
maintaining the following types of computerized information
files during 1993:  traffic accidents (42%), stolen property
(39%), warrants (36%), summary Uniform Crime Reports  (35%),
criminal histories (34%), agency personnel (34%), and stolen
vehicles (34%).  A majority of the departments serving a
population of 10,000 or more maintained these types of files.



Less than a third of local police departments reported that they
maintained computer files containing the following types of
information:  inventory (27%), evidence (26%), payroll (20%),
driver's license information (19%), summonses (18%), vehicle
registration (18%), incident-based Uniform Crime Reports (18%)
and fingerprints (6%).   A majority of the departments serving a
population of 25,000 or more were maintaining files on
inventory, evidence, and payroll.  



******************

Policy directives

*****************



Nearly all local police departments serving a population of
2,500 or more maintained written policy directives on the use of
deadly force, pursuit driving, and employee conduct and
appearance. About three-fourths of the departments serving a
population under 2,500 had policy directives covering these
subjects as well.



Overall, departments with a policy directive on deadly force
employed 99% of all officers, and those with directives on
pursuit driving, and employee conduct and appearance employed
98% of all officers



At least two-thirds of all local police departments also had
policy directives that addressed the handling of domestic
disputes, juveniles, citizen complaints, and off-duty employment
by officers.  At least 88% of the departments in each population
category of 10,000 or more had a directive on these matters.  



Departments with a policy directive pertaining to off-duty
employment employed 93% of all local police officers nationwide
and more than 80% of officers were employed by a department with
a policy directive on the handling of juveniles, citizen
complaints, and domestic disputes.



About half of local police departments had a written policy
directive pertaining to the handling of mentally ill persons and
to the conducting of strip searches.  Nearly half had a
directive on the use of confidential funds, and a third
maintained a directive pertaining to employee counseling
assistance.  



Four-fifths of all local police officers were employed by a
department with a directive on the handling of mentally ill
persons, and three-fourths were employed by a department with a
directive on strip searches, use of confidential funds, and
employee counseling assistance.



************

Methodology

************



The Law Enforcement Management and Administrative Statistics
(LEMAS) survey collects data from a nationally representative
sample of the more than 17,000 publicly funded State and local
law enforcement agencies in the United States.  This report
focuses on general purpose local police departments operated by
a municipal or county government.  Police departments with
special jurisdictions such as parks, transit systems, airports,
or school systems have been defined as special police and are
not included.  



The population served categories used in this report are based
on official 1990 Census Bureau counts for cities and counties. 
For some county police departments, the population served was
derived by subtracting the population of cities within the
county that were served by municipal police from the overall
county population.



All 854 State and local law enforcement agencies in the United
States with 100 or more sworn officers (as reported in the 1992
BJS Directory Survey of Law Enforcement Agencies) received the
full-length LEMAS questionnaire.  The 854 self-representing (SR)
agencies were supplemented by a nationally representative sample
of agencies with fewer than 100 sworn officers.  These
nonself-representing (NSR) agencies were chosen using a
stratified random sample with cells based on the type of agency
(local police, sheriff, or special police), size of population
served, and number of sworn officers.  The 2,416 NSR agencies
received a slightly abbreviated version of the LEMAS
questionnaire that was mailed to the SR agencies.



The initial mailing of the survey questionnaire was conducted in
August 1993.  The pay period containing June 15, 1993, was used
as the reference date for personnel-related questions and June
30, 1993, for other questions.  The data were collected by the
Bureau of the Census for the Bureau of Justice Statistics.



After two followup mailings and additional telephone calls as
needed, a final total of 3,028 agencies responded to the LEMAS
questionnaire, including 831 SR agencies and 2,197 NSR agencies.
 The overall response rate was 92.6%.  The final database
includes responses from 1,827 local police departments, 918
sheriffs' departments, 234 special police departments, and the
49 primary State police departments.



The base weight for all SR agencies is 1.  For NSR local and
special police departments, the base weight is 8, and for NSR
sheriffs' departments it is 4.  The final weight associated with
every agency, both SR and NSR, is the product of the base weight
and a factor that adjusted for any nonresponding agencies in
each cell.  This agency nonresponse factor was based on number
of sworn officers for SR agencies and on number of agencies for
NSR agencies.



Some responding agencies did not fully complete the LEMAS
questionnaire.  When an agency did not supply a response to an
item, a donor agency was randomly selected from responding
agencies in the same sample cell.  The donor agency's value for
the item was placed into the nonresponding agency's response
field with an indicator that the value had been imputed. 
Complete documentation regarding sampling procedures and
nonresponse adjustments is available upon request.  



Data on the number of employees and on the amount of agency
expenditures in this report are not comparable with figures
based on the BJS Survey of Criminal Justice Expenditure and
Employment series.  In the latter, these data are presented by
governmental function, whereas in the LEMAS survey expenditures
are classified by type of agency.  For example, what might be
attributed to sheriffs' departments in the LEMAS survey would be
apportioned among various functions, such as police protection
and corrections, in the expenditure and employment series. 
Also, the LEMAS figures for operating expenditures include
employee benefits, but the expenditure and employment figures do
not.



Because the data from agencies with fewer than 100 sworn
personnel were collected from a sample, the results are subject
to sampling error.  All statements of comparison in this report
have been tested to ensure that observed differences between
values are significant at 2 standard errors (the 95-percent
confidence level) or higher.U.S. Department of Justice Bureau of
Justice Statistics




