U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Programs
Bureau of Justice Statistics Bulletin


-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Note to readers of the ASCII version:
This file is text only without graphics and many of the tables. 
A Zip archive of the tables in this report in spreadsheet format 
(.wk1) and the full report including tables and graphics in
.pdf format are available from: 
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/abstract/lpd97.htm.

This report is one in a series.  More recent
editions may be available.  To view a list of
all in the series go to
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/pubalp2.htm#lpd


-------------------------------------------------------------------------

Local Police Departments 1997

Brian A. Reaves, Ph.D.
and Andrew L. Goldberg
BJS Statisticians

February 2000, NCJ 173429

---------------------------------------------------------------------
Highlights

Personnel

* As of June 1997, local police departments had an estimated
531,496 full-time employees, including about 420,000 sworn
personnel.  Local police employment was up an average of about
3% a year after 1993, compared to about 1% per year, 1987-93.   

* Racial and ethnic minorities comprised 21.5% of full-time
sworn officers in local police departments in 1997.  This
compared to 19.1% in 1993, 17.0% in 1990, and 14.6% in 1987.

* Nearly all officers worked for departments that used
criminal record checks (99%), background investigations (98%),
driving record checks (98%), and medical exams (97%) to screen
applicants.  Psychological (91%), aptitude (84%), and physical
agility (78%) tests were also widely used.     

* In 1997, 1% of departments required a 4-year degree of new
officer recruits and 8% a 2-year degree.  Overall, 14% of
departments, employing 31% of all officers, required new
recruits to have completed at least some college in 1997, up
from 12% and 15% in 1993.

* Field and classroom training requirements for new officer
recruits averaged more than 1,000 hours combined.  About 7 in 8
departments required officers to complete in-service training,
with an average annual requirement of 29 hours.

Expenditures and pay

* Local police departments had total operating expenditures of
$29.2 billion during fiscal 1997, 8% more than in 1993 after
adjusting for inflation.  Expenditures averaged $67,100 per
sworn officer, and $150 per resident.

* Starting salaries for local police officers averaged about
$28,400, ranging from an average of $18,800 in the smallest
jurisdictions to $30,600 in the largest.  About two-thirds of
all local police officers worked for a department that
authorized collective bargaining.

Operations

* More than 99% of local police departments were responsible for
responding to citizen calls for service, providing routine
patrol services, and enforcing traffic laws.  Ninety-one
percent, including all but a few of those serving a population
of 10,000 or more, were the primary investigating agency for
crimes occurring in their jurisdiction.

* About 7 in 8 local police departments had primary drug
enforcement responsibilities (88%).  Nearly 1 in 6 had officers
assigned full-time to a drug enforcement unit, with 13,000
officers so assigned nationwide.  About a third of departments
had officers assigned to a multi-agency drug task force, with a
total of 6,000 officers assigned full-time nationwide.

* Forty-three percent of all departments, employing 82% of all
officers, had drug asset forfeiture receipts during fiscal 1997.
Collectively, departments received an estimated $490 million in
money, goods, and property.  

* In 1997, 85% of local police departments, employing 97% of all
officers, participated in a 9-1-1 emergency telephone system
compared to 68% and 89% in 1993.  In 1997, 53% of departments,
employing 80% of all officers, had an enhanced 9-1-1 system,
capable of pinpointing the source of a call automatically,
compared to 41% and 65% in 1993.

Community policing

* More than 60% of the departments  serving 100,000 or more
residents had a formal written community policing plan. 
Overall, about 9 in 10 local police officers worked for a
department with some type of community policing plan.

* Sixty-six percent of departments serving 50,000 or more
residents had a full-time community policing unit.  Fifty-four
percent of departments serving 10,000 or more residents had
either a full-time unit or designated community policing
personnel.

* More than 80% of the departments serving a population of
25,000 or more trained at least some in-service officers and new
officer recruits in community policing.  In a majority of the
departments serving a population of 10,000 or more, all new
officer recruits received such training.

* Nearly all local police departments serving a population of
10,000 or more regularly met with community groups during 1997. 
A majority of those serving 25,000 or more residents formed 1 or
more problem-solving partnerships through written agreements.  

* An estimated 38% of departments, employing 70% of all
officers, had officers assigned full-time as school resource
officers.  Nationwide, more than 9,400 local police officers
worked as school resource officers in 1997.

Equipment

* Ninety-four percent of local police departments, employing 98%
of all  officers, authorized the use of semiautomatic sidearms
in 1997.  These percentages represented increases over the 1993
figures of 84% and 96%.

* In 1997 nearly all local police departments authorized the use
of non-lethal weapons by officers.  From 1993 to 1997, the
percent of officers employed by an agency that authorized them
to use pepper spray went from 69% to 91%.

* In 1997 about half of all local police officers were employed
by a department that required them to wear protective body armor
while on duty, compared to about two-fifths in 1993.

* Nationwide, local police departments operated approximately
215,000 cars during 1997, or about 1 for every 2 officers
employed.  About a third of these cars were unmarked.  

* A majority of departments serving a population of 500,000 or
more used boats and helicopters.  Nearly half (44%) of those
serving 1 million or more residents had at least 1 airplane.

* A fourth of all departments, including nearly all of those
serving 100,000 or more residents, used dogs for law enforcement
work, with 6,100 in use nationwide.  Two percent had horses,
with a total of about 1,200 in use. 

Computers and information systems

* Nearly all local police departments serving a population of
2,500 or more used 1 or more types of computers during 1997. 
About two-thirds of those serving fewer than 2,500 residents
used them.

* A majority of the departments serving a population of 10,000
or more used computers for crime analysis and dispatch.  A
majority of those serving a population of 100,000 or more used
them for fleet management, resource allocation, and crime
mapping.

* From 1993 to 1997, the percentage of local police departments
using in-field computers increased from 13% to 29%.  Departments
using in-field computers employed 73% of all officers in 1997,
up from 55% in 1993.

* In about a sixth of departments, at least some officers could
access vehicle and driving records by computer while in the
field.  This was the case in a majority of the departments
serving a population of 100,000 or more. 

* In 7 of 8 local police departments, officers primarily
transmitted criminal incident field data to a central
information system through paper reports.  Methods used in other
departments included laptop download, disk transfer, wireless
transmission, or telephone lines. 

Written policy directives

* Nearly all local police departments (93%) had a written policy
on pursuit driving.  Three-fifths restricted vehicle pursuits
according to specific criteria such as speed or offense.  About
a fourth had a policy that left the decision to the officer's
discretion.  Six percent discouraged all vehicle pursuits.

* Ninety-one percent of local police departments, employing 99%
of all officers, had a written policy on the use of deadly
force.  Eighty-four percent, employing 96% of all officers, had
a policy on the use of nonlethal force. 

* About 5 in 6 departments, employing 96% of officers, had
written policies on the handling of domestic disputes and the
handling of juveniles.  About 3 in 5 departments, employing 70%
of officers, had a discretionary arrest policy. 

----------------------End of highlights--------------------------------

The LEMAS survey

During 1997, the Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS), as a part
of its Law Enforcement Management and Administrative Statistics 
(LEMAS) program, surveyed a nationally representative sample of the
nearly 19,000 State and local law enforcement agencies operating 
nationwide. Previous LEMAS surveys were conducted in 1987, 1990, 
and 1993.

This report presents data from the 1997 survey describing the
more than 13,000 local police departments operating in the
United States in terms of their personnel, expenditures and pay,
operations, community policing initiatives, equipment, computers
and information systems, and written policies.  Comparisons are
made with prior years where appropriate.

Nearly all local police departments are operated by municipal
(86%) or township (13%) governments. As of 1997, about 100 local
police departments were operated by tribal governments, and
approximately 50 by county governments.

The 1997 LEMAS survey questionnaire was mailed to 3,597 State
and local law enforcement agencies, including all 968 agencies
with 100 or more sworn officers (see Methodology for a
description of the sample).  The overall response rate was
94.9%.  Among local police departments, 2,012 of 2,097 surveys
were returned for a 95.9% response rate.  

This report and its companion report (Sheriffs' Departments 1997
NCJ-173428), summarize data collected from agencies of all
sizes. Detailed agency-by-agency tabulations from the 1997 LEMAS
survey were previously published for agencies with 100 or more
officers (see Law Enforcement Management and Administrative
Statistics, 1997, NCJ-171681).

Personnel

As of June 30, 1997, local police departments had an estimated
531,496 full-time employees (table 1).  They also employed about
62,000 persons on a part-time basis.  Approximately 420,000, or
79%, of full-time local police department employees were sworn
officers.

Local police departments employed three-fifths of all State and
local sworn officers nationwide.  Their estimated 111,345
nonsworn employees comprised nearly half (45%) of all civilian
State and local law enforcement employees.

There were about 55,000, or 11.5%, more full-time local police
employees in 1997 than in 1993. (figure 1).  For all State and local 
law enforcement agencies, the increase in number of employees from
1993 to 1997 was about 107,000, or 12.8%. 

When only sworn personnel are considered, employment by local
police departments increased by 45,000, or 12.0%, from 1993 to
1997.  Overall, the number of sworn personnel employed by State
and local law enforcement agencies in 1997 was up by 68,000, 
or 10.9%, compared to 1993.

Nationwide, 541 local police departments employed at least 100
sworn personnel (4.0%), including 41 with 1,000 or more officers
(0.3%) (table 2). An estimated 7,164 departments employed fewer
than 10 officers (52.9%), including about 800 with just one
sworn officer (5.9%).

A third of all full-time local police officers were employed by
a department with 1,000 or more officers, and about three-fifths
were employed by a department with at least 100 officers.
Departments that employed fewer than 10 officers accounted for
about 5% of all local police officers nationwide. 

Although 77% of all local police departments served a
jurisdiction with fewer than 10,000 residents, these departments
employed just 15% of all local police officers (table 3).  About
half of all officers served a jurisdiction with 100,000 or more
residents, including nearly a fourth in jurisdictions with a
population of 1 million or more.  

Departments in jurisdictions with a population of 1 million or
more had an average of 7,695 full-time employees, including
6,075 sworn officers (table 4). In contrast, departments in
jurisdictions with fewer than 2,500 residents had an average of
3 full-time sworn officers.

Gender and race of officers

Of the 420,152 full-time sworn personnel employed by local
police departments in 1997, 10% were women (table 5).  The
percentage of female officers was highest in departments serving
a population of 1 million or more (16%), followed by those
serving a population of 250,000 to 999,999 (14%).  Women
comprised just 3% of the officers in jurisdictions with fewer
than 2,500 residents. 

In 1997 just over a fifth (21.5%) of full-time local police
officers were members of a racial or ethnic minority.  Minority
officers comprised more than a third of the total in
jurisdictions with 500,000 or more residents.

Blacks accounted for 11.7% of all local police officers in 1997.
Black employment was highest among departments serving a
population of 500,000 to 999,999 (23.4%).

An estimated 7.8% of local police officers nationwide were
Hispanic, with representation among departments serving a
population of 1 million or more (15.6%) twice the overall
average.

In 1997 the estimated 41,493 female local police officers
represented about 9,000, or 26%, more than in 1993.  During this
time female representation among local police officers 
increased from 8.8% to 10.0% (figure 2).

The number of local police officers who were members of a racial
or ethnic minority in 1997 (90,377) represented an increase of
about 19,000, or 26%, over 1993 levels.  From 1993 to 1997,
minority representation in local police departments increased
from 19.1% to 21.5%.

The estimated 48,950 full-time black local police officers
employed in 1997 represented an increase of about 6,600, or 16%,
compared to 1993.  This resulted in a slight increase in the
percentage of officers who were black from 11.3% to 11.7%.  

There were an estimated 32,678 Hispanic officers employed by
local police departments in 1997.  This was about 9,300, or 40%,
more than in 1993.  From 1993 to 1997, the percentage of local
police officers who were Hispanic rose from 6.2% to 7.8%.  

From 1993 to 1997 representation by other minority groups such
as Asians, Pacific Islanders, and American Indians increased by
53% to about 8,800 officers.  These groups comprised 2.1% of
local police officers in 1997 compared to 1.5% in 1993. 

Screening of officer applicants 

Local police departments employed a variety of screening methods
when hiring new officers (table 6).  The most widely methods
used were personal interviews (97% of departments employing 98%
of all officers), criminal record checks (95% and 99%),
background investigations (94% and 98%), driving record checks
(90% and 98%), and medical exams (82% and 97%). 

A majority of departments serving a population of 2,500 or more
also used psychological tests, drug tests, written aptitude tests, 
and physical agility tests to screen applicants for sworn positions.
Overall, 64% of departments, employing 91% of all officers,
used psychological tests; 54% of departments, employing 84% of
all officers, used drug tests; 46% of departments, employing 84%
of all officers, used  aptitude tests; and 45% of departments,
employing 78% of all officers, used physical agility tests.

Education and training requirements

Nearly all (97%) local police departments had an education
requirement for new officer recruits (table 7).  The typical
minimum requirement was a high school diploma (83%).  Fourteen
percent of departments had some type of college requirement,
usually a 2-year degree (8%).  Just 1% required new recruits to
have a 4-year college degree.

The percentage of local police officers employed by a department
with some type of college requirement for new officers in 1997
(31%) was twice that of 1993 (15%), and 3 times that of 1990
(10%) (figure 3).   From 1993 to 1997, the percentage of local
police officers employed by a departments with a nondegree
college requirement increased from 8.5% to 22.5%.

Nearly all departments serving a population of 2,500 or more had
a training requirement for new officer recruits, as did about
four-fifths of those serving fewer than 2,500 residents.  The
average number of training hours required ranged from more than
1,300 hours in those serving 250,000 to 999,999 residents to 422
hours in those serving fewer than 2,500 residents (table 8). 

The overall departmental average was about 600 hours with about
two-thirds in the classroom, and a third in the field.  When
departments are weighted according to number of officers, it is
estimated that the average new local police recruit in 1997 was
required to undergo more than 1,000 of hours of training, with
about two-thirds of it in the classroom.

In addition to entry-level requirements, 87% of local police
departments required officers to complete in-service training. 
On average, officers were required to complete 29 hours of such
training during the year. 

Overall, just 3% of all local police departments operated a
training academy; however, a large majority of those serving a
population of 250,000 or more did so.  Nationwide, nearly half
(44%) of all officers were employed a department that operated an 
academy.

Population          Percent with
served              training academy
  All sizes               3%
 
1,000,000 or more        94%
500,000-999,999          96
250,000-499,999          82
100,000-249,999          45
50,000-99,999             5
25,000-49,999             2
10,000-24,999             2
2,500-9,999               1
Under 2,500               2

Expenditures and pay

Operating expenditures

The total operating expenditure of local police departments
during fiscal 1997 was about $29.2 billion, 20% more than in
1993 (table 9).  Controlling for inflation, the net increase in
spending was8%. (These figures do not include capital
expenditures such as equipment purchases or construction
projects).  Local police departments accounted for nearly
three-fifths of the $50.7 billion in total operating
expenditures for State and local law enforcement agencies during
fiscal 1997.  

              Agency operating
              expenditures (in billions)
                   1997       1993
 
      Total       $50.7      $41.9
 
Local police      $29.2      $24.3
Sheriff            13.1       10.7
State police        5.2        4.2
Other               3.2        2.8

Nationwide, operating expenditures were about $2.16 million per
department for fiscal 1997, ranging from $423 million for departments 
serving a population of 1 million or more, to $128,000 among those
serving fewer than 2,500 residents.  

The overall operating cost per resident was $150, with
departments in jurisdictions with a population of 1 million or
more costing the most to operate, $222 per resident. 
Departments in jurisdictions with a population of less than
2,500 had the lowest per resident cost -- $109. 

Nationwide, local police departments cost an estimated $67,100
per sworn officer to operate for fiscal 1997, ranging from more
than $75,000 per officer in jurisdictions with at least 50,000
but fewer than 1 million residents, to $33,200 per officer in
jurisdictions with a population under 2,500.  
When both sworn and nonsworn employees are included, the average
operating expenditure for local police departments was about
$52,000 peremployee for the year, with a high of about $59,000
per employee in jurisdictions with 250,000 to 999,999 residents.
 Departments in the smallest jurisdictions cost about $30,000
per employee to operate for the year.  Employee salaries and
benefits accounted for about $7 of every $8 in local police
operating expenditures.

After controlling for inflation, per officer operating costs for
1997 were actually slightly lower than in 1993 (figure 4). 
Overall, per officer costs in 1997 were about $2,400 lower.  The
largest  decrease was recorded in jurisdictions with 250,000 or
more residents, from $77,900 to $72,600.  Slight decreases were
recorded in other population categories as well.

Salaries

The overall average base starting salary for local police chiefs
was $38,700 in 1997 (table 10).  Average starting salaries for
chiefs ranged from about $101,000 in jurisdictions with 1 million 
or more residents to about $26,000 in those with a population of 
less than 2,500.

By department, the average base starting salary offered to
entry-level patrol officers in 1997 was about $23,300.  
Starting salaries ranged from about $19,000 in jurisdictions
with fewer than 2,500 residents to near $30,000 in those with a
population of 25,000 or more.  Patrol officer salaries increased
by about 10% after 1 year of service.

When departments are weighted by number of officers, the overall
average starting salary for entry-level local police officers
was $28,400.  This was 9% more than in 1993, but after 
controlling for inflation was actually a net decrease of 0.2%.

Salaries for the position of sergeant or equivalent increased
with jurisdiction size in a pattern similar to that for
entry-level officers.  Overall, the average starting salary for
sergeants was $32,300, ranging from $47,500 in the largest
jurisdictions to $24,300 in the smallest.  When departments are
weighted according to number of officers, the estimated average
base starting salary for sergeants was $42,100.

Special pay

Nationwide, 29% of all local police departments offered
education incentive pay to qualifying officers, including a
majority of those serving a population of 10,000 or more (table
11).  About half (53%) of all local police officers nationwide
worked for a department that offered it.

Hazardous duty pay was available in just 4% of all local police
departments.  About three-fifths of the departments serving a
population of 500,000 or more, and half of those serving a
population of 250,000 to 499,999 offered it.  Nationwide, about
a fourth of all local police officers were employed by a
department that offered hazardous duty pay.

Nineteen percent of local police departments, employing 27% of
all local police officers nationwide, offered merit pay to
qualifying officers.  

No more than 38% of the departments in any population category
offered this type of special pay.

Seventeen percent of all departments offered shift differential
pay to their full-time officers.  This included a majority of
the departments serving a population of 250,000 or more and
about two-fifths of those serving 50,000 to 249,999 residents. 
Nationwide, about half (48%) of all local police officers were
employed by a department with shift differential pay.

Work-related policies 

About half of local police departments, employing two-thirds of
all officers, had a written policy on the maximum number of
hours that officers can work (table 12).  Departments serving a
population of at least 500,000 but less than 1 million (79%)
were the most likely to maintain such a policy, and those
serving a population of less than 2,500 (37%) were the least
likely.

Two-thirds of all departments, employing 93% of all officers,
had a written policy pertaining to off-duty employment by
officers.  All departments serving a population of 250,000 or
more had such a policy as did at least 90% of the departments in
each population category of 10,000 to 249,999. 

Unions and collective 
bargaining

Forty-six percent of all local police departments authorized
police union membership by their sworn personnel (table 13). 
This included at least 66% of the departments in each population
category of 10,000 or more.  Nationwide, 72% of all local police
officers were employed by a department that authorized them to
belong to a police union.

Twenty-eight percent of local police departments, employing 44%
of all local police officers nationwide, authorized membership
in a nonpolice union.

Seventy-six percent of all departments authorized officer
membership in a police association.  These departments employed
90% of all local police officers nationwide.  

Nationwide, 37% of all local police departments, employing 68%
of all officers, authorized collective bargaining for sworn personnel
(table 14).  At least 65% of the departments in each population
category of 10,000 or more authorized collective bargaining for
officers.  Just 14% of the departments in jurisdictions with
fewer than 2,500 residents did. 

Nonsworn personnel in local police departments were somewhat
less likely to have collective bargaining rights than sworn
employees.  Overall, 18% of local police departments, employing
56% of all nonsworn local police personnel, authorized
collective bargaining for civilian employees.   This included a
majority of the departments serving a population of 25,000 or
more. 

Operations

Patrol and response

All local police departments serving 10,000 or more residents
provided routine patrol services in their jurisdiction in 1997
(table 15).  Ninety-nine percent of those serving fewer than
10,000 residents did so as well.  Nearly all departments used
automobiles for routine patrol.  

In addition, half of all departments used foot patrol units on a
routine basis.  This included 94% of those serving a population
of 1 million or more.  Departments with routine foot patrol
employed two-thirds of all officers.

About 7 in 8 departments serving 500,000 or more residents had
routine bike patrols, as did more than three-fifths of the
departments in each population category of 25,000 to 499,999.
Overall, 28% of departments, employing 71% of all officers, used
bicycle patrol units on a routine basis. 

Overall, just 9% of departments used motorcycle patrol on a
routine basis.  However, more than three-fourths of those
serving 100,000 or more residents did so.  Departments using
motorcycle patrols employed 57% of all officers.

Overall, few departments routinely  scheduled marine (3%) and
horse (1%) patrol units.  However, more than 60% of the
departments serving 1 million or more residents used these
patrol types routinely.

A fourth of local police departments used foot patrol for
special events only. Eight percent used bicycles for special
events patrol, but not routine patrol.  

               Percent of
Type of        agencies using for
patrol         special events only
 
Foot                   25%
Bicycle                 8
Motorcycle              3
Horse                   2
Marine                  2
Automobile              1

All but a few local police departments had primary
responsibility for responding to citizen calls for service
(table 16). Nearly half (44%) dispatched calls as well.  This
included all departments serving a population of 1 million or
more, about 9 in 10 departments serving a population of 250,000
to 999,999, and nearly 8 in 10 departments serving a population
of 10,000 to 249,999. 

9-1-1 emergency telephone system

In 1997, 85% of local police departments participated in an
emergency telephone system whereby one of their units could be
dispatched as a result of a call to 9-1-1 or its equivalent
(table 17).

At least 9 in 10 departments in each population category of
2,500 or more had 9-1-1, including all of those serving 100,000
to 999,999 residents.  

About three-fifths of local police 9-1-1 systems were enhanced,
capable of pinpointing the location of a caller automatically. 
About 9 in 10 departments serving a population of 250,000 to
999,999 had enhanced 9-1-1, as did about 8 in 10 departments in
the other population categories of 25,000 or more.  Less than
half of all local police departments in jurisdictions with fewer
than 2,500 residents had enhanced 9-1-1.

The 85% participation rate in 9-1-1 among local police
departments in 1997 was a significant increase from 1993 when
68% of all local police departments were 9-1-1 participants, and
nearly 3 times the percentage of departments with 9-1-1
participation in 1987 (figure 5).  In 1997, 97% of all local
police officers worked for a department with 9-1-1.  

The 53% of local police departments participating in an enhanced
9-1-1 system in 1997 also represented a sizable increase over
1993, when 41% were participants. This was 3 times the
proportion reporting such a capability in 1990 (18%), and nearly
8 times as many as in 1987.  In 1997, 4 in 5 local police
officers were employed by a department with enhanced 9-1-1.

Crime investigation

Overall, 91% of local police departments had primary
responsibility for investigating at least some types of crimes. 
Eighty-five percent had primary investigative responsibility for
violent crimes such as rape, robbery, or assault (table 18). 
This included all departments serving a population of 250,000 or
more and 98% of the departments serving a population of 10,000
to 249,999.  Slightly lower percentages of departments in
population categories under 250,000 were the primary
investigative agency for homicides; however all departments
serving a population of 250,000 or more had this responsibility.

Ninety percent of all departments had primary responsibility for
investigating property crimes such as burglary, larceny, or
vehicle theft.  As with violent crimes, all departments serving
250,000 or more residents handled such investigations, as did
about 98% of those serving a population of 10,000 to 249,999.  

Two-thirds of all departments were responsible for arson
investigations, with those serving a population of 10,000 to
49,999 (84%) the most likely to most likely to handle such
incidents. 

About 3 in 8 departments were responsible for investigating
environmental crimes.  No more than 39% of the departments in any
population category had responsibility for such investigations.

Investigative support functions

Nearly half of all local police departments were responsible for
fingerprint processing (46%) (table 19).  This included a large
majority of those  serving a population of 10,000 or more.    

Few departments were responsible for providing crime lab
services (3%) or conducting ballistics tests (1%).  Departments
in jurisdictions with a population of 1 million or more were the
most likely to be responsible for these functions:  87% were
responsible for providing crime lab services and 75% for
ballistics testing.

Drug and vice enforcement

About 7 in 8 local police departments had primary responsibility
for the enforcement of drug laws in their jurisdiction (table
20).  More than 90% of the departments in each population
category of 10,000 or more had drug enforcement
responsibilities, including all of those serving a population of
250,000 or more.  Departments with drug enforcement
responsibilities employed 97% of all local police officers.

About half of local police departments, employing 88% of all
officers, had primary vice enforcement responsibilities.  This
included all departments serving 250,000 or more residents, and
more than 90% of those serving a population of 25,000 to
249,999.  A majority of the departments serving 2,500 to 24,999
residents also had primary vice enforcement responsibilities,
but just a third of those serving a population of less than
2,500 did. 

Drug testing of employees in local 
police departments, 1997

About 3 in 5 local police departments had some type of program that
authorized the testing of regular field and patrol officers for
illegal drug use.  These departments employed 84%  of all local police 
officers.

At least 8 in 10 departments in each population category of
25,000 or more had a drug testing program for officers.  About 7
in 10 departments serving a population of 2,500 to 24,999, and 5
in 10 departments serving fewer than 2,500 residents did also.

In 22% of departments, employing 16% of all officers, all
field/patrol officers were subject to drug testing.  Sixteen
percent of departments, employing 41% of all officers, used a
random selection method for testing of field/patrol officers.  

Thirty-one percent of departments, employing 60% of all
officers, authorized drug testing of officers suspected of using
illegal drugs.  A majority of the departments serving 25,000 or
more residents had such a policy. 

Forty-one percent of departments, employing 70% of all civilian
local police employees, included such employees under some type
of drug testing program.  Fourteen percent of departments had
mandatory testing for all nonsworn employees.   

Fifteen percent of local police departments operated a special 
unit for drug enforcement with 1 or more full-time officers assigned 
(table 21).  All of the departments serving a population of 1 million 
or more had a full-time drug enforcement unit, as did about 90% of those
serving a population of 250,000 to 999,999.  

The number of local police officers assigned full-time to drug
enforcement units totaled about 13,200 nationwide.  Another
2,100 were assigned on a part-time basis.  The average number of
officers assigned full-time ranged from nearly 300 in
jurisdictions with a population of 1 million or more to 2 in
those with fewer than 25,000 residents. 

Drug enforcement task force 
participation

In 1997 about a third of local police departments had one or
more officers assigned to a multi-agency drug enforcement task
force (table 22).  About two-thirds of all local police officers
worked for a department that assigned officers to a task force. 
About 6,200 officers were assigned full time, and another 3,200
on a part-time basis.

The number of officers assigned full-time ranged from 27 in
departments serving a population of 1 million or more to about 2
in those serving fewer than 50,000 residents.

Drug asset forfeiture 
receipts

Forty-three percent of all local police departments received
money, property, or goods from a drug asset forfeiture program
during the 12-month period ending June 30, 1997 (table 23). 
These departments employed 82% of all local police officers.  
At least 80% of the departments in each population category of 
25,000 or more had drug asset forfeiture receipts.

The overall median amount received from drug asset forfeiture
programs by local police departments in fiscal 1997 was $4,000. 
By population category the median amount received ranged from
about $1.8 million among departments serving a population of 1
million or more to $800 among those serving fewer than 2,500
residents.   

Collectively, local police departments received $1,130 in money,
goods, and property from drug asset forfeiture programs for
every sworn officer employed during fiscal 1997 (figure 6). 
Departments with at least 25 but fewer than 100 full-time
officers, received the most  about $2,000 per officer.  Next
highest were departments with 100 to 249 officers, with about
$1,600 per officer. The largest departments, those with 1,000 or
more officers, had total receipts of $558 per officer.   

Traffic and vehicle-related 
functions

Nearly all local police departments had primary responsibility
for traffic-related functions such as enforcing traffic laws
(99%), investigating accidents (96%) and directing traffic (91%)
(table 24).    

Eighty-four percent of all departments had primary
responsibility for parking enforcement, including more than 90%
of those serving 10,000 to 49,999 residents.  Forty-three
percent of all departments provided school crossing services,
including a majority of those serving a population of 10,000 or
more. 

Court-related 
functions

Although 90% of local police departments executed arrest
warrants, just 21% provided court security and 14% served civil
process (table 25).  Those in the largest jurisdictions (31%)
were the most likely to be responsible for court security, while
those in the smallest jurisdictions (20%) were the most likely
to handle process serving. Departments handling court security
employed 20% of all officers and those serving process, 8%.

Detention-related 
functions

About 1 in 8 local police departments operated a jail during
1997 (table 26).  No more than 30% of the departments in any
population category were operating a jail, and just 5% of the
departments in jurisdictions with fewer than 2,500 residents
operated one.  Twenty-two percent of all local police officers
worked for a department that had a jail.

Thirty percent of local police departments operated at least 1
temporary holding (lockup) facility for adults that was separate
from a jail (table 27).  The median of the maximum holding time
for these facilities was 22 hours.  Most of the departments in
jurisdictions with 10,000 or more residents had an adult lockup.
The median total capacity of adult lockups ranged from about 70
in jurisdictions with 500,000 or more residents to 3 in those with
fewer than 10,000 residents.  The total adult capacity of local
police lockups nationwide was 41,000.

About 1 in 7 departments had a lockup facility for juveniles,
including a majority of those serving a population of 500,000 or
more.  The median capacity of juvenile lockup facilities ranged
from 16 in jurisdictions with 500,000 or more residents to 1 in
those with fewer than 2,500 residents.  Nation- wide, local
police lockups for juveniles had a total capacity of 7,500 with
a median maximum holding time of 6 hours. 

Special operations 
functions

An estimated 23% of local police departments, employing 43% of
all officers, had primary responsibility for search and rescue
operations during 1997 (table 28).  Departments serving a
population of 1 million or more (88%) were by far the most
likely to perform this function.  No more than 35% of the
departments in any other population category had primary
responsibility for search and rescue.

About a fifth of departments were responsible for tactical
operations, utilizing what are commonly known as SWAT (Special
Weapons and Tactics) teams.  These departments employed 72% of
all local police officers.  All departments serving a population
of 250,000 or more performed tactical operations, and a large
majority of those serving a population of 50,000 to 249,999 did
so as well.

Five percent of local police departments, employing 35% of all
officers, were responsible for underwater recovery operations. 
This included about three-fifths of the departments serving a
population of 1 million or more, and half of those serving a
population of 500,000 to 999,999.

Bomb disposal was a responsibility of 3% of all departments,
included a large majority of those serving a population of
250,000 or more.  Departments with bomb disposal
responsibilities employed 44% of all officers.

Special public safety 
functions

Another important area of responsibility for local police
departments is the performance of special functions related to
public safety.  For example, 56% of departments had primary
responsibility for animal control in 1997 (table 29).  This
included a majority of the departments serving a population
of less than 25,000, and about half of those serving 10,000 to
99,999 residents.  Departments handling animal control employed
about a third of all officers.

Other special public safety functions handled by small
percentages of local police departments included emergency
medical services (18%), civil defense (13%), and fire services
(9%).  

No more than a fifth of the departments in any population group
were responsible for providing emergency medical services. 
Departments providing such services employed 13% of all officers.

Departments serving a population of 1 million or more (25%) were
the most likely to handle civil defense functions.
Twelve percent of all local police officers were employed by a
department with civil defense responsibilities.

No department serving a population of 250,000 or more provided
fire services.  About 1 in 10 departments serving fewer than
10,000 residents handled this function.  Overall, just 3% of all
local police officers were employed by a department that was
responsible for providing fire services.

Community Policing

Community policing is a philosophy that promotes and supports
organizational strategies to address the causes and reduce the
fear of crime and social disorder through problem-solving
tactics and community partnerships.  A fundamental shift from
traditional reactive policing, community policing stresses the
prevention of crime before it occurs.  The implementation of a
community policing plan supports and empowers front-line
officers, decentralizes command, and encourages innovative
problem solving.

In 1997, 16% of local police departments had a formally written
community policing plan (table 30).  Roughly two-thirds of
departments serving a population of 100,000 or more had a
formally written plan, as did about half of those serving a
population of 50,000 to 99,999.  Departments serving fewer than
2,500 residents (6%) were the least likely to have a formal
plan.   Departments with a formal, written community policing
plan employed about 56% of all local police officers.

In all population categories, a majority of local police
departments had either a formal, written community policing plan
or an informal, unwritten plan (figure 7). Departments serving a
population of less than 50,000 were more likely to have a
informal, unwritten plan than a formal, written one.   Overall,
91% of local police officers worked for a department with some
type of community policing plan.

Community policing 
training

During the 3-year period ending June 30, 1997, 53% of all local
police departments, employing 83% of all officers, trained at
least some new officer recruits in community policing skills
such as problem-solving; Scanning, Analysis, Response,
Assessment (SARA); and developing community partnerships (table
31).  

Forty percent of departments, employing 74% of all officers,
trained all new recruits in community policing tech-niques.  The
larger the jurisdiction, the more likely a department trained
all recruits in community policing, ranging from about 9 in 10
departments serving 500,000 or more residents to less than 3 in
10 departments serving fewer than 2,500 residents.

About 3 in 5 departments, employing 5 in 6 officers, trained at
least some in- service officers during the 3-year period. About
a fourth of all departments, employing a third of all officers,
trained all in-service officers in community policing, including
nearly half of those serving a population of 100,000 to 499,999.

Specially designated community 
policing personnel

In 1997, 13% of local police departments, employing 45% of local
police officers nationwide, operated a community policing unit
with 1 or more officers assigned full-time (table 32).  About
two-thirds of the departments serving a population at least
50,000 but less than 1 million had a full-time community
policing unit.

About a fourth of local police departments did not have a
full-time community policing unit, but had designated certain
personnel to perform community policing activities.  Another
fifth did not have a full-time unit or specially designated
community policing personnel, but had established policies or
procedures to address problems and tasks related to community
policing. 

Forty-one percent of local police departments, employing 11% of
all local police officers, had no community policing unit,
personnel, policies, or procedures.  This included 56% of those
serving fewer than 2,500 residents. 

Overall, 34% of departments, employing 60% of all officers, had
full-time sworn personnel serving as community policing
officers, whether as part of a separate unit or not (table 33).
In some jurisdictions, these officers are known as community
relations officers, community resource officers, or some other
name indicative of the community policing approach they
employed.  Nationwide, local police departments employed about
16,000 community policing officers or their equivalent. 

A majority of departments serving a population of 10,000 or more
had full-time community policing officers. Those serving a
population of 1 million  or more employed 93 such officers on
average.  Departments serving fewer than 10,000 residents had an
average of 1 each.

An estimated 38% of local police departments, employing 70% of
all local police officers, had full-time school resource
officers during 1997 (table 34).  These officers use a community
policing approach to provide a safe environment for stu- dents and 
staff.  In addition to handling calls for service within the school, 
they work closely with school administrators and staff to prevent
crime and disorder by monitoring crime trends, problem areas,
cultural conflicts, and other areas of concern.  

Overall, local police departments had about 9,400 full-time
sworn personnel assigned as school resource officers in 1997. 
Most of the departments serving 10,000 or more residents had
school resource officers.  The average number of school resource
officers ranged from 73 in departments serving a population of 1
million or more, to 1 in those serving fewer than 25,000
residents. 

Community-oriented policies 
and programs

Forty-two percent of all departments, employing 80% of all
officers, gave patrol officers responsibility for specific
geographic areas or beats during 1997 (table 35).  This included
more than 90% of the departments serving a population of 250,000
or more.

Just 7% of departments, employing 44% of all officers, assigned
cases to investigators by geographic area, although a majority
of the departments serving a population of 100,000 or more did
so.

About a fourth of local police departments, employing just over
half of all officers, actively encouraged patrol officers to
become involved in problem-solving projects.  About three-fifths
of the departments serving a population of 100,000 or more had
such a policy, as did about half of those serving 25,000 to
99,999 residents. 

Fifteen percent of all departments included problem-solving
projects in the performance evaluation criteria for patrol
officers.  This included more than 40% of those serving a
population of 100,000 or more.  Departments including
problem-solving projects in performance evaluation criteria
employed 37% of all officers.

Many local police departments maintain written policy directives
to guide officers in dealing with special situations and
populations in the community.  For example, 85% of departments,
employing 96% of all officers, had a written policy for dealing
with domestic disputes (table 36).  At least 90% of the
departments in each population category of 2,500 or more had a
written policy for this type of situation.  This included all
departments serving a population of 250,000 to 999,999.

In special situations such as domestic disputes, some local
police departments allow for officer discretion in making an
arrest.  Fifty-eight percent of all departments had some type of
written policy pertaining to discretionary arrest power.  These
departments employed 70% of all officers.

About 5 in 6 departments had a written policy pertaining to the
handling of juveniles, including all of those serving a
population of 250,000 or more.  Departments with a policy on
juveniles employed 96% of all officers.

Fifty-seven percent of departments had had a written policy
pertaining to the  handling of mentally ill persons.  These
departments employed 82% of all officers. 

Just a fourth of departments, employing two-fifths of all officers, 
had a policy for dealing with homeless persons.  Less than half of the 
departments in each population category had a written policy on this 
subject.

About 3 in 10 local police departments enhanced their proactive
role in solving community problems by forming problem-solving
partnerships with community groups, local agencies, or others
through written agreements (table 37).  This included a majority
of the departments serving a population of 25,000 or more. 
Departments forming partnerships through written agreements
employed 63% of all officers. 

Nearly a fourth of all departments, employing nearly two-thirds
of all officers, offered training to citizens on community
policing topics such as community mobilization and
problem-solving during the 12-month period ending June 30, 1997.
A majority of departments serving 50,000 or more residents more
offered such training.  

As of June 30, 1997, about 1 in 8 departments were operating at
least 1 community substation.  This included a majority of the
departments serving 50,000 or more residents.  Departments
operating substations employed 57% of all officers.  

About 4 in 5 departments, including nearly all of those serving
a population of 10,000 or more, met regularly with community
groups during the year ending June 30, 1997.  Departments
holding regular community group meetings employed 96% of all
officers.

Departments meeting with neighborhood associations employed 87%
of all local police officers (figure 8).  The corresponding
percentages for other types of groups that departments met with
were as follows:  school groups (84%), business groups (78%),
youth service organizations (67%), tenants' associations (64%),
religious groups (60%), and advocacy groups (57%).

Nearly a third of local police departments, employing about half
of all officers, surveyed the citizens in their jurisdiction
during the year ending June 30, 1997 (table 38).  This included
at least half of the departments in each population category of
25,000 or more.

Twenty-six percent of departments, employing 41% of all
officers, surveyed citizens' regarding their satisfaction with
police services.  Twenty-one percent, employing 35% of all
officers, surveyed citizens regarding their perception of crime
problems; and 11%, employing 23% of all officers, surveyed
citizens regarding their personal crime experiences. 

A majority of the departments conducting surveys used the data
to provide information to officers (78%), and/or to prioritize 
crime-related problems (56%) (figure 9).  Other uses included the 
formulation of agency policy and procedures (46%), the allocation 
of resources to neighborhoods (40%), and the redistricting of 
beats (15%). 

Citizen access to crime 
statistics

Thirty-five percent of local police departments, employing 70%
of all officers,  provided citizens with routine access to crime
statistics and/or crime maps (table 39).  This included more
than 80% of the departments serving a population of 100,000 or
more.

Departments were most likely to provide access to crime
statistics at the county or city level (30% of departments
employing 64% of all officers).  An estimated 14% of
departments, employing 37% of all officers, provided routine
access to crime statistics by neighborhood; and 10%, employing
31% of all officers, provided them at the street or block level. 

Eight percent of departments, employing 32% of all officers,
provided routine access to crime statistics by patrol beat. 
Just 5% of all departments provided routine citizen access to
district or precinct crime statistics; however, a majority of
the departments serving a population of 250,000 did so, and
departments making such statistics available employed 42% of all
officers.

As of June 1997, 85% of the departments with routine access to
crime statistics provided it to citizens who inquired in person
(figure 10).  Nearly  half made crime statistics available
through the newspaper (47%) or by telephone (43%).  Smaller
percentages provided access to crime statistics through the use
of radio (18%), news-letters (16%), television (13%), or the
Internet (5%). 

Equipment

Sidearms

In 1997, 94% of local police departments, employing 98% of all
local police officers, authorized the use of some type of semi-
automatic sidearm (table 40).  These figures represent increases
compared to 1993, when 84% of departments, employing 96% of all
officers, authorized semiautomatic sidearms.    

As in 1993, the 9mm semiautomatic was the most popular type of
local police sidearm.  Two-thirds of all departments, employing
about three-fourths of all officers, authorized its use by
officers.  A majority (57%) of departments also authorized
40-caliber semiautomatic sidearms.  These departments employed
about half of all officers.  Other semiautomatic sidearms
authorized included the .45-caliber (38%), the .380-caliber
(14%), and the 10mm (14%).

Nearly half (46%) of all local police departments authorized the use 
of one or more types of revolvers by officers, with the .357-caliber
(38%) and the  .38-caliber (24%) revolvers the most commonly
authorized.

About three-fifths (62%) of local police departments, employing
83% of all officers, supplied sidearms to officers.  Another 5%
of departments, employing 4% of all officers, provided a cash
allowance for their purchase.

Body armor

In 1997, half all local police departments required at least
some of their regular field officers to wear protective body
armor while on duty (table 41).  These agencies employed 63% of
all officers.  Eighty-one percent of all departments, employing
91% of all officers, supplied protective body armor to at least
some of their regular field officers.  An additional 9% provided
a cash allowance for armor.

The percentage of local police departments requiring all regular
field officers to wear body armor increased from 33% in 1993 to
43% in 1997.  Such an increase was seen in all population
categories (figure 11).  The largest increase was in
jurisdictions with 50,000 to 249,999 residents, where 49% of
local police departments required all officers to wear armor in
1997, compared to 31% in 1993.  The next largest increase was in
jurisdictions with 250,000 or more residents - from 30% to 41%.  

The percentage of local police officers employed by a department
requiring all field officers to wear armor increased from 40% in
1993 to 52% in 1997.  

Nonlethal weapons 

In 1997 nearly all local police departments authorized officers
to use one or more types of nonlethal weapons.  Chemical agents,
such as pepper spray, were the type of nonlethal weapon most
commonly authorized for personal use by officers (table 42).  

Eighty-nine percent of all departments authorized pepper spray
including at least 90% of the departments in each population
category of 10,000 to 499,999.  Other types of chemical agents
authorized by local police departments for personal use by
officers included CS (4%) and tear gas (3%). 

From 1993 to 1997 significant increases in the percentage of
departments authorizing the use of pepper spray were recorded in
all population categories (figure 12).  In departments serving a
population of 250,000 or more, 87% of departments authorized its
use, compared to 74% in 1993.  The increases in other population
categories were as follows:  50,000 to 249,999 (from 66% to
95%); 10,000 to 49,999 (from 59% to 92%); under 10,000 (from 58%
to 87%).  In 1997 an estimated 91% of local police officers were
employed by a department that authorized the use of pepper
spray, compared to 69% in 1993.

The other type of nonlethal weapon frequently authorized for
personal use by officers was the baton; authorized by 88% of all
departments.  Departments authorizing 1 or more types of baton
employed 96% of all officers.  

Collapsible batons (61%) were authorized by more departments
than PR-24 (47%) or traditional (46%) batons.  About
three-fifths of local police officers nationwide worked for a
department that authorized them to use a traditional (59%) or
collapsible (58%) baton and about half for a department that
authorized the PR-24 (51%) baton.

Eleven percent of departments, employing 55% of all officers, 
authorized flash/bang grenades, including most of those serving a 
population of 50,000 or more. Eight percent of departments, employing 
27% of all officers, authorized the use of electrical devices such as 
stun guns and tasers.  This included 44% of departments serving a 
population of 1 million or more.  

Seven percent of departments, employing 18% of all officers,
authorized the use of carotid holds, choke holds, or neck
restraints.  Departments serving a population of 1 million or
more (44%) were the most likely to authorize holds and
restraints.

Ninety-one percent of all local police departments, employing
99% of all officers, had a written policy pertaining to use of
deadly force by officers (table 43).  All departments serving
25,000 or more residents, and nearly all (98%) departments
serving 2,500 to 24,999 residents had such a policy.  

Eighty-four percent of departments, employing 96% of all
officers, had a written policy pertaining to the use of
nonlethal force.  All departments serving a population of
250,000 or more had this type of policy, as did well over 90% of
the departments serving a population of 10,000 to 249,999. 

Vehicles

Nationwide, local police departments operated 49 cars per 100 sworn 
officers (table 44).  By population category, the ratio of cars to 
officers was lowest in  jurisdictions with 1 million or more 
residents C 25 cars per 100 officers.  It ranged from 52 to 64 
cars per 100 officers in other population categories.

About a third of the cars operated by local police departments
were unmarked (35%).  The percentage of cars that were unmarked
ranged from 45% in jurisdictions with a population of 1 million
or more to 15% in jurisdictions with less than 2,500 residents.

Forty-eight percent of local police departments, employing 37% of all 
local police officers, allowed officers to take marked vehicles home 
(table 45).  The percentage of departments allowing officers to take 
vehicles home ranged from 62% in jurisdictions with fewer than 2,500
residents to less than 30% in jurisdictions with a population of
least 10,000 but less than 50,000.  

In a large majority of the departments that allowed marked vehicles 
to be taken home, officers were allowed only to drive the vehicle to 
and from work.  Ten percent of departments allowed officers to operate 
a marked vehicle for personal errands, ranging from 33% of departments 
serving 500,000 to 999,999 residents to 8% of those serving 2,500 to 
24,999 residents.

Sixty percent of local police departments, employing 75% of all
officers, maintained a restrictive pursuit driving policy (table
46).  This type of policy restricts vehicle pursuits according
to specific criteria such as type of offense or maximum speed. 
A majority of the departments in each population category except
the smallest had this type of policy. 

Twenty-three percent of departments, employing 14% of all
officers, had a judgmental pursuit policy, one that leaves
pursuit decisions to the officer's discretion.  Six percent of
departments, employing 6% of all officers, discouraged all
vehicle pursuits.  Seven percent of departments, employing 1% of
all officers, had no pursuit driving policy. 

Five percent of local police departments operated at least 1
boat, including about two-thirds of those serving a population
of 500,000 or more (table 47).  Departments using boats employed
39% of all officers.    

Overall, just 1% of all departments operated any helicopters. 
About three-fourths of departments serving a population of
500,000 or more, and half of those serving a population of
250,000 to 499,999 operated at least 1 helicopter.  Departments
using helicopters employed 29% of all officers.

Less than 1% of all departments operated any fixed-wing
aircraft.  Nearly half of departments serving a population of 1
million or more operated had at least 1 airplane, as did about a
fifth of those serving a population of 250,000 to 999,999. 
Departments using airplanes employed 10% of all officers. 

Animals

An estimated 23% of local police departments, employing 72% of
all local police officers, maintained 1 or more dogs for use in
activities related to law enforcement (table 48).  This included
more than 90% of those serving a population of 100,000 or more. 
A majority of departments serving a population of 25,000 to
99,999 also used dogs.  About 6,100 dogs were maintained by
local police departments in 1997. 

Just 2% of all local police departments used horses for law
enforcement purposes, with those in jurisdictions       with 1
million or more residents (75%) the most likely to be
maintaining at least 1 horse.  Local police departments
collectively maintained approximately 1,200 horses, and those
using horses employed 35% of all local police officers.

Computers and information systems 

Types of computers used for 
administrative functions

All local police departments serving a population of 25,000 or
more, and nearly all of those serving 2,500 to 24,999 residents,
used computers for administrative purposes in 1997 (table 49). 
The percentage of all local police officers employed by a
department that used computers increased from 95%  in 1993 to 98% 
in 1997.  

The type of computer most commonly used in local police
facilities in 1997 was the personal computer, used by about
two-thirds of all departments.  Nearly all departments serving a
population of 25,000 or more used personal computers. 
Departments using personal computers employed 93% of all
officers in 1997 compared to 89% in 1993.

About 3 in 8 local police departments were using a mainframe
computer in 1997, including a majority of those serving a
population of 10,000 or more. Departments using mainframes employed 
three-fourths of all officers, the same proportion as in 1993.  

About 1 in 8 departments were using a minicomputer in 1997,
including a majority of those serving a population of 100,000 or
more.  Departments using minicomputers employed about half of
all officers in both 1997 and 1993.  

Computer functions

Local police departments utilized computers for a wide variety
of  functions in 1997.  For example, 74% of all departments,
employing 91% of all officers, used computers for record-keeping
(table 50).  These percentages represented increases over 1993
when 53% of departments, employing 88% of officers, used
computers for this function.

During 1997, 53% of all departments used computers to assist
with criminal investigations, including more than 80% of those
serving a population of 10,000 or more.  Departments using
computers for criminal investigations employed 84% of all
officers in 1997. In 1993, 41% of departments, employing 77% of
all officers, used computers for criminal investigations. 


In 1997, 41% of departments used computers for crime analysis,
compared to 29% in 1993.  A large majority of departments
serving 10,000 or more residents used computers for this
function.  Those using computers for crime analysis employed 81%
of all officers in 1997, up from 75% in 1993.

Related to crime analysis efforts in local police departments is
the use of crime mapping.  In 1997 a sixth of all departments, including 
a large majority of those serving a population of 100,000 or more 
reported they used computers in conjunction with crime mapping.  
Departments using computers for crime mapping purposes employed 58% of 
all officers in 1997.

About a fourth of all local police departments used computers
for dispatching calls for service (27%).  A majority of
departments serving a population of 10,000 or more had
computer-aided dispatch, and three-fourths of all officers
worked for such departments.  

About a fifth of local police departments used computers for
fleet management and resource allocation.  A majority of
departments serving a population of 100,000 or more used
computers for these functions, and such departments employed a
majority of all officers.

Computerized files

In 1997, a majority of local police departments were maintaining
computerized files on arrests (69%), incident reports (69%),
calls for service (61%) and traffic citations (56%) (table 51). 
Half had files on traffic accidents and nearly half had files on
stolen property (47%).  All of these types of information were
maintained in a computerized format by a majority of the
departments in each population category of 2,500 or more.

A majority of the departments in each population category of
10,000 or more had computerized files with the following types
of information:  warrants, criminal histories, evidence, alarms,
inventory, personnel, incident-based crime data, and summary
crime data.  

A majority of departments serving a population of 25,000 or more
had computerized information on field interviews and the agency
payroll (table 52).   A majority of those serving a population
of 100,000 or more had linked crime analysis files.

Except for incident-based crime data (45%), driver's license
information (40%), summonses (38%), and vehicle registration
(34%), a majority of local police officers worked for a
department that had computer files on each type of information
included in the 1997 LEMAS survey. 

Compared with 1993, the percentage of officers working for a
department with computerized arrest data increased from 87% to
92% (figure 13). The increases for selected other types
of information were as follows: calls for service (from 84% in
1993 to 90% in 1997); criminal histories (61% to 77%); stolen
property (62% to 75%); traffic accidents (67% to 74%).

About 1 in 8 local police departments had either exclusive or
shared ownership of an Automatic Fingerprint Identification
System (AFIS) that included a file of digitized prints (table
53).  These departments employed just over half of all officers.
 A majority of the departments serving a population of 100,000
or more had exclusive or shared ownership of an AFIS system.

Three percent of local police departments used an AFIS terminal
with access to a remote system.  These departments employed 35%
of all officers.   

Use of computers in the 
field

A large majority of local police departments serving 25,000 or
more residents used mobile computers or terminals in the field
during 1997 (table 54).  Overall, 29% of departments, employing
73% of all officers, were using in-field computers or terminals.
 
Laptops were the most common type of in-field computer, used by
nearly 3 in 4 departments serving a population of 500,000 or
more and by nearly 3 in 5 departments serving a population of
25,000 to 499,999.   Overall, 21% of local police departments,
employing 58% of all officers, were using laptops. 

More than two-thirds of departments serving a population of
250,000 were using car-mounted data terminals.  Overall, about 1
in 8 departments, employing about half of all officers used
them. 

Smaller percentages of departments used car-mounted computers
(4%) or hand-held terminals (1%).  Departments using these
technologies employed about a sixth of all officers. 

The 29% of local police departments using in-field computers or
terminals in 1997 was about twice the percentage in 1993 (13%)
and about 6 times that in 1990 (5%).  Likewise, the 73% of local
police officers working for a depart- ment with in-field
computers or terminals in 1990 was considerably higher than in
1993 (55%) and 1990 (30%).  

From 1990 to 1997 increases in local police use of in-field
computers and terminals occurred in jurisdictions of all sizes
(figure 14).  During this period, in-field computer use among
departments serving 250,000 or more residents increased from 56%
to 85%; among departments serving 50,000 to 249,999 residents,
from 31% to 79%; among departments serving 10,000 to 49,999
residents, from 9% to 54%; and among departments serving fewer
than 10,000 residents, from 2% to 19%.

About a fourth of local police departments used in-field
computers or terminals for writing incident reports (26%) (table
55).  These departments employed 23% of all officers.  About 1
in 7 departments used them for at least some in-field
communications. These departments employed about half of all
officers. 

In about a sixth of local police departments, at least some
officers in the field could use computers to access vehicle or
driving records in 1997 (table 56).  This included a majority of
the departments serving a population of 100,000 or more. 
Departments using in-field computers for these purposes employed
more than half of all officers. 

In 10% of local police departments, employing a fourth of all
officers, in-field computers or terminals could be used to
access criminal history information.  This included half of the
departments serving a population of 1 million or more, and about
a third of those serving a population of 100,000 to 999,999.  

In 9% of departments, employing 24% of all officers, in-field
computers or terminals could be used to access calls for service
information.  This included more than half of departments
serving a population of 500,000 to 999,999, and about two-fifths
of those serving a population of 100,000 to 499,999.  
In 2% of all departments, employing 3% of all officers, in-field
officers had access to linked files for crime analysis.

In 86% of local police departments, paper reports were the
primary method used to transmit criminal incident reports from
the field to the agency's central information system (table 57).
Other methods included computers and data devices (9%), and
telephone and wireless communication systems (4%).

Ninety percent of local police departments used paper reports to
transmit traffic incident reports from the field to the agency's
central information system.  Six percent used computer and data
devices, and 4% used telephone or wireless transmissions.

Methodology

The Law Enforcement Management and Administrative Statistics
(LEMAS) survey collects data from a nationally representative
sample of the approximately 19,000 publicly funded State and
local law enforcement agencies in the United States.

This report presents data from the 1997 survey describing the
more than 13,000 local police departments  operating in the
United States in terms of their personnel, expenditures and pay,
operations, community policing initiatives, equipment, computers
and information systems, and written policies.  Comparisons are
made with prior years where appropriate.

Nearly all local police departments are operated by municipal
(86%) or township (13%) governments.  As of 1997, about 100
local police departments were operated by tribal governments,
and approximately 50 by county governments.

The 1997 LEMAS survey questionnaire was mailed to 3,597 State
and local law enforcement agencies.  The overall response rate
was 94.9%.  Among local police departments, 2,012 of 2,097
surveys were returned for a 95.9% response rate.

All 968 State and local law enforcement agencies in the United
States with 100 or more sworn officers (as reported in the 1996
BJS Census of State and Local Law Enforcement Agencies) received
the full-length LEMAS survey questionnaire.  This included 529
local police departments.  These self-representing (SR) agencies
were supplemented by a nationally representative sample of
agencies with fewer than 100 sworn officers.

Nonself-representing (NSR) agencies were chosen using a
stratified random sample with cells based on the type of agency
(local police, sheriff, or special police), size of population
served, and number of sworn officers.  The 2,629 NSR agencies
received one of two shorter versions of the questionnaire  that
was mailed to the SR agencies.

The initial mailing of the questionnaire was conducted in July
1997.  The pay period containing June 15, 1997, was used as the
reference date for personnel-related questions and June 30,
1997, for other questions.  The data were collected by the
Bureau of the Census for the Bureau of Justice Statistics.

After two followup mailings and additional telephone calls as
needed, a final total of 3,412 agencies responded to the LEMAS 
questionnaire, including 909 SR agencies and 2,503 NSR agencies.  
The final database includes responses from 2,012 local police 
departments, 915 sheriffs' departments, 356 special jurisdiction 
police departments, 80 Texas constable offices, and the 49 primary 
State police departments.

The base weight for all SR agencies is 1.  For NSR sheriffs'
departments, it is 4.  For NSR local police departments, the
base weights are determined by  number of sworn officers
employed as reported in the 1996 BJS Census of State and Local
Law Enforcement Agencies.  For agencies with 0 to 6 sworn
officers, the base weight is 15.55; for 7 to 13 officers, it is
9.65; for 14 to 23 officers, it is 7.09; for 24 to 39 officers,
it is 4.95; for 40 to 62 officers, it is 3.38; and for 63 to 99
officers, the base weight is 2.14.

Special police are similarly weighted based upon the number of
sworn officers.  For agencies with 0 to 9 officers, the base
weight is 9.85; for 10 to 24 officers, it is 4.90; for 25 to 49 officers, 
it is 2.75; and for 50 to 99 officers, it is 1.52.  The final weight
associated with every agency, both SR and NSR, is the product of
the base weight and a factor that adjusted for any nonresponding
agencies in each cell.  This agency nonresponse factor was based
on number of sworn officers for SR agencies and on number of
agencies for NSR agencies. 

Some responding agencies did not fully complete the LEMAS
questionnaire.  When an agency did not supply a response to an
item, a donor agency was randomly selected from responding
agencies in the same sample cell.  The donor agency's value for
the item was placed into the nonresponding agency's response
field with an indicator that the value had been imputed.

Complete documentation regarding sampling procedures and nonresponse 
adjustments is available upon request.  Because the data from agencies 
with fewer than 100 sworn personnel were collected from a sample, the 
results are subject to sampling error.  All statements of comparison in 
this report have been tested to ensure that observed differences between
values are significant at 2 standard errors (the 95-percent
confidence level) or higher.

Data on the number of employees and on the amount of agency
expenditures in this report are not comparable with figures
based on the BJS Survey of Criminal Justice Expenditure and
Employment series.  In the latter, these data are presented by
governmental function, whereas in the LEMAS survey, expenditures
are classified by type of agency.  For example, what might be
attributed to sheriffs' departments in the LEMAS survey would be
apportioned among various functions, such as police protection
and corrections, in the expenditure and employment series. 
Also, the LEMAS figures for operating expenditures include
employee benefits, but the expenditure and employment figures do
not.

U.S. Department of Justice
Bureau of Justice Statistics

Jan M. Chaiken, Ph.D.
Director

Brian A. Reaves and Andrew L. Goldberg prepared this report. 
Timothy C. Hart provided statistical review.  Tom Hester and
Tina Dorsey edited the report and provided production
assistance.  Jayne Robinson prepared the report for printing.

Debra Cohen, Joseph B. Kuhns III, Tammy Rinehart, Karin
Schmerler, and Meg Townsend of the Department of Justice's
Office of Community Oriented Policing Services (COPS) developed
the community policing content of the 1997 LEMAS questionnaire. 
Funding for the community policing section of the questionnaire
was provided by the COPS Office.  Additional information on the
COPS Office is available on the Internet at:
http://www.usdoj.gov/cops.

The 1997 LEMAS data were collected and processed by the
Governments Division of the Bureau of the Census under the
supervision of Stephanie Brown and Stephen Owens.  Census Bureau
project staff included Carolyn Gates, Henrietta Herrin, Martha
Haselbush, Martha Greene, and Patricia Torreyson.  Sample
selection and imputation procedures were done by Yukiko Ellis
and Suzanne Dorinski of the Economic Statistical Methods and
Procedures Division of the Census Bureau under the supervision
of Carma Hogue.

Data presented in this report may be obtained from the National
Archive of Criminal Justice Data at the University of Michigan,
1-800-999-0960.  The report and data are available on the
Internet at: http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs





End of file
2/2/00 ih