U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Programs
Bureau of Justice Statistics

--------------------------------------------------
This file is text only without graphics and many of the
tables. A Zip archive of the tables in this report in
spreadsheet format (.csv) and the full report including
tables and graphics in .pdf format are available on BJS
website at:http://bjs.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbdetail&iid=4558
--------------------------------------------------

Mortality in Local Jails and State
Prisons, 2000–2010 - Statistical Tables

Margaret E. Noonan, BJS Statistician

During 2010, 4,150 inmates died while in the custody of local jails and 
state prisons--a 5% decline from 2009. Local jails accounted for about a 
quarter of all inmate deaths, with 918 inmates who died in custody in 
2010. The number of jail inmate deaths declined from 2009 to 2010 (down 
3%), while the mortality rate remained relatively stable, from 127 deaths 
per 100,000 jail inmates in 2009 to 125 per 100,000 in 2010. The five 
leading causes of jail inmate deaths were suicide, heart disease, drug or 
alcohol intoxication, cancer, and liver disease.

Most inmates who died in custody were serving time in state prisons 
(78%). 
In 2010, 3,232 state prison inmates died in custody--a 5% decline from 
2009. The mortality rate in state prisons declined slightly, from 252 
deaths per 100,000 prison inmates in 2009 to 245 per 100,000 in 2010. The 
five leading causes of state prison inmate deaths were heart disease, 
cancer, respiratory disease, liver disease, and suicide. 

The data in this report were developed from the Bureau of Justice 
Statistics’ (BJS) Deaths in Custody Reporting Program (DCRP), an annual 
data collection that documents inmate mortality in local jails and state 
prisons. Annual collection of data from jails began in 2000, followed by 
prisons in 2001. This report examines deaths of inmates in state prison 
and local jail custody between 2000 and 2010. Statistical tables provide 
information about the causes and circumstances of local jail and state 
prison inmate deaths and present trends by cause of death, selected 
decedent characteristics, and states where the jails and prisons were 
located.

**************************
Mortality in local jails
**************************

*****************
Cause of death
*****************

* The number of inmates who died while in the custody of local jails 
declined in 2010, falling to 918 from the 951 deaths in 2009, 
representing 
the third consecutive annual decrease since the number of jail deaths 
peaked at 1,100 in 2007 (table 1).

* Suicide, the leading cause of local jail inmate deaths, remained at 
about the same level in 2010 (305 suicides) as in 2009 (304), although 
the 
number has trended upward slightly since 2006. *** Footnote * The number 
of suicides reported for 2008 is undercounted due to the relatively large 
number (n=203 or 22% of deaths in 2008) of local jail deaths missing 
information about cause of death. For of trend comparisons, the 2008 
counts classified by cause of death are omitted from the discussion.***

* The number of jail inmate deaths from heart disease increased in 2010 
to 240, up from 199 occurring in 2009. The annual average number of heart 
disease deaths was 222 over the past 10 years (excluding 2008 data as 
noted above).

* The five leading causes of jail inmate deaths in 2010--suicide, heart 
disease, drug or alcohol intoxication, cancer, and liver diseases--were 
the same as in 2009. In all years prior to 2009, AIDS-related deaths were 
among the five leading causes of death (table 2).

* Since an initial decline in 2008, the mortality rate for jail inmates--
125 per 100,000 inmates in 2010--has remained relatively unchanged (123 
per 100,000). Likewise, the annual mortality rate between 2000 and 2008 
showed little variation, increasing or decreasing between 1% and 3% 
(table 3). 

* The suicide rate in local jails declined over time from 49 per 100,000 
inmates in 2001 to 36 per 100,000 in 2007. Since 2007, the rate has 
increased slightly to reach 42 per 100,000 inmates in 2010 (excluding 
2008 data as noted above).

* Jail inmates died of heart disease at a rate of 33 per 100,000 inmates 
in 2010, similar to rates between 2000 and 2006, but was slightly above 
the rate of 27 per 100,000 inmates in 2009.

*************************
Decedent characteristics
*************************

* In 2010, males accounted for nearly 9 out of 10 jail inmate deaths 
(88%). In any single year between 2000 and 2010, males accounted for no 
less than 87% of jail deaths (table 5).

* Prior to 2008, the annual male rate was no more than 24% above the 
female rate, with the difference in most years being about 10% (table 6).

* From 2008 through 2010, the male and female mortality rates were about 
equal, signifying a convergence in their respective rates over time. 
Mortality rates for white and black inmates in 2010 were nearly equal to 
the mortality rates in 2009. 

* The Hispanic mortality rate declined from 72 to 60 per 100,000 inmates 
from 2009 to 2010, which was one of the largest single year declines for 
Hispanic jail inmate deaths between 2000 and 2010. 

******************************
State-level jail populations
******************************

* California, Texas, New York, and Florida together reported about a 
third of jail deaths in 2010. These states also had the largest jail 
populations, comprising 32% of the total jail population in 2010 (table 
7).

* Between 2000 and 2010, nearly all (97% to 99%) of the approximately 
2,800 jail jurisdictions in the United States submitted population and 
mortality data to the DCRP. These jurisdictions reported a total of 
10,923 deaths over the 11-year period (table 9). 

*******************************************
Cause of death by decedent characteristics, 
2000 to 2010 average annual trends
*******************************************

* Between 2000 and 2010, about a third (767 or 32%) of heart disease 
deaths occurred within seven days of the inmate’s admission to jail. Less 
than 10% of jail inmate deaths due to cancer (4%) and AIDS related 
illnesses (7%) occurred in the first seven days (table 10).

* Between 2000 and 2010, the male suicide rate (42 per 100,000 male 
inmates) was 55% higher than the rate for females (27 per 100,000 female 
inmates) (table 11).

* White jail inmates committed suicide (80 per 100,000) at a rate that 
was more than 3 times that of Hispanics (25 per 100,000) and more than 5 
times that of black jail inmates (15 per 100,000). 

* Jail inmates age 55 or older had the highest suicide rate and committed 
suicide at twice the rate of jail inmates ages 18 to 24, who had the 
lowest suicide rate.

* Jails reported 60 suicides per 100,000 inmates age 55 or older, 
compared to 28 suicides per 100,000 inmates ages 18 to 24.

* Between 2000 and 2010, 9 out of every 100,000 jail inmates who were age 
55 or older died as a victim of homicide, a rate that was between 1.8 and 
4.4 times higher than the homicide mortality rate of younger inmates.

****************************
Mortality in state prisons
****************************

****************
Cause of death
****************

* The number of inmates dying while in the custody of state prisons 
declined from 3,414 in 2009 to 3,232 in 2010, for a total decrease of 5%, 
which is the largest decline in the number of prison deaths since 2001 
when the DCRP began collecting data on prison deaths (table 12).

* In 2010, cancer was the most common cause of death in prisons, followed 
by heart disease, respiratory disease, liver disease and suicide. In each 
year between 2001 and 2010, cancer and heart disease combined accounted 
for about half of all prison deaths (table 13).

* In 2010, the cancer mortality rate in state prisons (68 per 100,000) 
exceeded the heart disease mortality rate (65 per 100,000) for the second 
consecutive year (table 14).

* AIDS-related deaths were among the five leading causes of death in 
prison in 2001 and 2002. The AIDS-related mortality rate declined 76% 
between 2001 and 2010.

* Between 2001 and 2010, suicide was among the five leading causes of 
deaths in prison in all but two years. For the same period, the prisoner 
suicide rate was nearly equal to both the liver and respiratory disease 
mortality rates but was consistently about 4 times lower than heart 
disease and cancer mortality rates.

***************************
Decedent characteristics
***************************

* In 2010, males accounted for nearly all prisoner deaths (96%). In any 
single year between 2001 and 2010, males accounted for no less than 95% 
of prison deaths (table 16).

* The mortality rate for prisoners age 55 or older declined 27% in 2010, 
while the population of prisoners age 55 or older increased by a third 
(table 17).

* In 2010, male prisoners died at twice the rate of female prisoners. 
The male mortality rate among prisoners declined 4% between 2009 and 
2010, and the female mortality rate declined 20% during the same period. 

* White prison inmates had the highest mortality rate of all race or 
ethnic groups between 2001 and 2010, with a mortality rate between 1.4 
and 2.3 times higher than any other race or ethnic group in any single 
year in the 10-year period.

********************************
State-level prison populations
********************************

* Half of the 50 state departments of corrections reported a decrease in 
the number of deaths occurring in state prisons between 2009 and 2010, 
with eight reporting a decline of more than 25% in the number (table 19).

* The federal prisoner mortality rate peaked at 233 deaths per 100,000 
prisoners in 2005 before declining 18% to 192 per 100,000 in 2006. The 
rate declined again to 179 deaths per 100,000 inmates in 2010 (table 20).

******************************
Cause of death by decedent 
characteristics
*******************************

* Over the 10-year period between 2001 and 2010, male prisoners were 1.7 
times more likely to die than female prisoners. Heart disease-related 
mortality contributed to the largest difference between male and female 
prisoner mortality rates, with male prisoners 3.4 times more likely to 
die of heart disease than female prisoners (table 23).

* White prison inmates were, on average, 3 times more likely than black 
inmates to commit suicide over the 10-year period. 

* On average, over the 10 years between 2001 and 2010, black prison 
inmates had an AIDS-related mortality rate at least twice that of prison 
inmates of any other race or ethnic group.

* Both heart disease and cancer had the largest differences in mortality 
rates by age of inmates, with rates for inmates age 55 or older at least 
5 times higher than any other age group.

* Liver disease had the smallest differences in mortality rates by age, 
with inmates age 55 or older dying at a rate that was 1.9 times that of 
inmates between ages 45 to 54.
 
* On average, over the 10 years from 2001 to 2010, age had little 
differences in suicide rates, with prisoners committing suicide at nearly 
equal rates, across age groups.

************************
Cause of death by state
************************

* The mortality rate for state prisoners for the 10-year period between 
2001 and 2010 varied between 155 deaths per 100,000 inmates and 439 
deaths per 100,000 inmates, with a median rate of 244 deaths per 100,000 
inmates (table 25).

* Mortality rates between states are not directly comparable because 
rates are not adjusted for differences in age, sex, race, geographic 
location, and any other characteristics.

******************
List of tables
******************
Table 1 
Number of local jail inmate deaths, by cause of death, 2000–2010	5

Table 2 
Percent of local jail inmate deaths, by cause of death, 2000–2010	5

Table 3 
Mortality rate per 100,000 local jail inmates, by cause of death, 2000–
2010	                                                       6

Table 4 
Number of local jail inmate deaths, by selected decedent characteristics, 
2000–2010	                                               6

Table 5 
Percent of local jail inmate deaths, by selected decedent 
characteristics, 2000–2010	                                                  
                                                               7

Table 6 
Mortality rate per 100,000 local jail inmates, by selected decedent 
characteristics, 2000–2010	                               8

Table 7 
Number of jail deaths, by state and year, 2000–2010	       9

Table 8 
Mortality rate per 100,000 local jail inmates, by state, 2000–2010	10

Table 9 
Number of jail jurisdictions reporting to the Deaths in Custody Reporting 
Program, by state and year, 2000–2010	                                11

Table 10 
Number of local jail inmate deaths, by cause of death and selected 
decedent characteristics, 2000–2010	                                12

Table 11 
Average annual mortality rate per 100,000 local jail inmates, by cause of 
death and selected characteristics, 2000–2010                           13

Table 12 
Number of state prisoner deaths, by cause of death, 2001-2010	        13

Table 13 
Percent of state prisoner deaths, by cause of death, 2001–2010	        14

Table 14 
Mortality rate per 100,000 state prisoners, by cause of death, 2001–2010
	          
                                                                        14

Table 15 
Number of state prisoner deaths, by selected characteristics, 2001–2010
	   
                                                                        15

Table 16 
Percent of state prisoner deaths, by selected characteristics, 2001–2010
	                                                                15

Table 17 
Estimated number of state prisoners in custody at midyear, by selected 
characteristics, 2001–2010	                                        16

Table 18 
Mortality rate per 100,000 state prisoners, by selected characteristics, 
2001–2010	                                                        16

Table 19 
Number of state prisoner deaths, by state, 2001–2010	                17

Table 20 
Mortality rate per 100,000 state prisoners, by state, 2001–2010	        18

Table 21 
Number of state prisoner deaths, by cause of death and selected 
characteristics, 2001–2010	                                        19

Table 22 
Percent of state prisoner deaths, by cause of death and selected 
characteristics, 2001–2010	                                        19

Table 23 
Average mortality rate per 100,000 state prisoners, by cause of death and 
selected characteristics, 2001–2010	                                20

Table 24 
Number of state prisoner deaths, by cause of death and state, 2001–2010
	                                                                21

Table 25 
Average mortality rate per 100,000 state prisoners, by cause of death and 
state, 2001–2010	                                                22

************
Methodology
************

**************************
Data collection coverage
**************************

The Deaths in Custody Reporting Program (DCRP) is an annual data 
collection conducted by the Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS). The DCRP 
collects national, state, and incident-level data on persons who died 
while in the physical custody of the 50 state departments of corrections 
or the roughly 3,000 local adult jail jurisdictions nationwide. The DCRP 
began in 2000 under the Death in Custody Reporting Act of 2000 (P.L. 106-
297), and it is the only national statistical collection to obtain 
comprehensive information about deaths in adult correctional facilities. 
BJS uses DCRP data to track national trends in the number and causes (or 
manners) of deaths occurring in state prison or local jail custody.

Mortality data measured by the DCRP include decedent characteristics, 
such as sex, race and ethnicity, age, date of admission, conviction 
status, admission offense, and the location and type of facility (prison 
or jail) where the inmate died. The DCRP also collects data about 
circumstances surrounding the death, including the cause, time and 
location death occurred, and information on whether an autopsy was 
conducted and the availability of results to the respondent. In cases of 
deaths due to illness, the DCRP collects data on whether the decedent had 
a pre-existing medical condition for which he or she received medical 
treatment prior to death. Data on executions are excluded from this 
report but are accessible on the BJS website along with the DCRP 
mortality data. Statistics presented in this report are current as of 
September 1, 2012. For more information on mortality in correctional 
settings, see Mortality in Local Jails, 2000–2007, BJS website, NCJ 
222988, July 2010; Medical Causes of Death in State Prisons, 2001–2004, 
BJS website, NCJ 216340, January 2007; and Suicide and Homicide in State 
Prisons and Local Jails, BJS website, NCJ 210036, August 2005.

The DCRP data collection instruments are administered annually to both 
state prisons and local jails. Respondents provide an aggregate count of 
the number of deaths that occurred during the referenced calendar year. 
State prison respondents provide counts through the National Prisoner 
Statistics data collection, and local jails provide aggregate counts 
through the Annual Survey of Jails. The jail (CJ-9) and prison (NPS-4A) 
survey instruments used to obtain data on each prison and jail death are 
available on the BJS website. 

In addition to the death count, BJS requests that jails provide summary 
statistics about their population and admissions. All jails, including 
those with no deaths to report, which includes about 80% of jails in any 
given year, are asked to complete the annual summary survey form. BJS 
obtains a separate report describing decedent characteristics and the 
circumstances surrounding the death for each death occurring in a state 
prison or local jail. State prison and local jail respondents can submit 
individual records on decedents at any time during a collection cycle 
through a BJS web-based collection system, accessible at 
https://bjsdcrp.rti.org/.

BJS has modified the survey instruments slightly over time, including 
changes to clarify questions and respondent burden. Several questions 
were added to capture any medical treatment received by the inmate prior 
to death. Changes also allowed respondents to elaborate on cause of death 
by adding text boxes to the intoxication, suicide, and inmate-involved 
homicide death questions. These fields had previously only been available 
for deaths due to illness, accident, homicides not caused by other 
inmates, and other unspecified causes. In addition, BJS clarified 
respondent instructions on the prison forms and removed a question 
collecting the conviction status of an inmate after an analysis showed 
that more than 99% of prison inmates were convicted at the time of death. 
BJS also streamlined the survey layout to simplify the progression 
through questions related to autopsies. Rather than initially submitting 
an incomplete instrument that indicated pending autopsy results, 
respondents were permitted to complete the entire survey only after 
autopsy results were available. This change reduced follow-up contact and 
respondent burden. 

Starting in 2001, and annually thereafter, BJS has collected DCRP data 
directly from state prison systems, maintaining a 100% response rate. 

The jail universe includes all jails currently operating and jails that 
have been contacted for the DCRP but have closed, consolidated, or 
otherwise eliminated operations. This universe allows BJS to determine 
jail participation in the DCRP. The most recent jail universe, 
constructed in 2012, identified 2,821 jurisdictions, representing 3,236 
jail facilities. Of these, 2,753 (97.6%) participated in the DCRP, a 
slight decrease from the 98% to 99% participation in previous years. 

A jail jurisdiction is a legal entity that has responsibility for 
managing jail facilities. Jail jurisdictions typically operate at the 
county level, in which a sheriff’s office or jail administrator manages 
the local facilities. The DCRP data identify the jail facility in which a 
jail inmate dies, but the data are arrayed at the jail jurisdiction 
level. BJS defines a jail as a locally operated correctional facility 
that confines persons before or after adjudication for more than 72 
hours, excluding temporary lockups. Typically, there is one facility per 
jail jurisdiction, but the 2006 Census of Jail Facilities found that 15% 
of jail jurisdictions had multiple facilities under a central authority 
(see BJS website for more information).

*****************************
Determining eligibility for 
reporting to DCRP
******************************

In the DCRP, the term “custody” refers to the holding of an inmate in a 
facility or to the period during which a correctional authority maintains 
a chain of custody over an inmate. For instance, if a jail transports an 
ill inmate to a hospital for medical services and that inmate dies while 
in the chain of custody of the jail, that death is counted as a death in 
custody. A death that occurs when an inmate is not in the custody of 
correctional authority is considered beyond the scope of DCRP. Out-of-
scope deaths include inmates on escape status or under the supervision of 
community corrections on probation, parole, or home-electronic 
monitoring.  

BJS instructs both state prison and local jail officials to determine 
whether the inmate was in the physical custody of the jurisdiction at the 
time of death, regardless of the reason an inmate was being held. For 
state prisons responding to the survey, inmates in physical custody 
include those held in any private prison facility under contract to the 
responding state’s department of corrections or in any of their state-
operated facilities, including halfway houses, prison camps or farms, 
training or treatment centers, and prison hospitals. 

BJS instructs state prison officials to exclude deaths of inmates who 
were transferred to local jails while still serving a prison term because the 
DCRP obtains information about such deaths through the jail reports. Jail 
inmate custody includes inmates who are temporarily out of the jail 
facility but are within the chain of custody of the jail. For example, a 
death in custody would include jail inmates who died after being 
transferred to an offsite facility that cares for critically ill persons. 
Between 2000 and 2010, the DCRP data show that more than a third (41%) of 
jail inmate deaths occurred in medical facilities outside of the jail 
facility. 

Custody is further complicated by the dual law enforcement and jail 
administration functions of some sheriffs’ offices. As a result, some 
deaths reported as jail deaths actually occurred before the jail had 
custody of the decedent. BJS identifies and excludes from DCRP these 
deaths that occurred in the process of arrest by using information about 
the circumstances surrounding the death.

**************************** 
Identifying and excluding 
duplicate records 
****************************

Duplicate death records may occur in the DCRP due to overlapping 
correctional populations as well as overlapping duties within 
correctional facilities. For example, a jail jurisdiction may have more 
than one unit responsible for reporting data to BJS, or a jail may be 
holding a state prison inmate. Multiple entities may report the same 
death, or state prison systems may report on the death of an inmate who 
was transferred to a local jail but was serving a prison sentence at the 
time. 

To identify duplicate death records, BJS reconciles the aggregate summary 
counts of deaths occurring during a calendar year with the number of 
individual death records obtained from a reporting jurisdiction. When 
discrepancies are found, BJS contacts reporting jurisdictions to clarify 
matters. However, even if summary counts and individual reports are 
reconciled, there may be duplicates if multiple reporting units within a 
jurisdiction provide reconciled data. 

Duplicate records occur primarily in reports from jail jurisdictions that 
have multiple reporting entities. To identify duplicate records, BJS 
performs record-matching based on inmate name and date of birth, date of 
death, and date of admission into a correctional facility. After the 
aggregate count review, BJS searches for deaths reported to both the jail 
and prison DCRP collections, which most commonly occur when a local jail 
is housing an inmate for the state department of corrections. The death 
is considered part of the count of the facility that had custody of the 
inmate at the time of death, and the duplicate record is deleted. 
Overall, BJS’ review of death records between 2000 and 2010 found 108 
jail and 346 prison deaths to be duplicates or beyond the scope of the 
DCRP. This results in error rates of 0.0099 for jails and 0.0108 for 
prisons. Duplicate and out-of-scope records are excluded from the 
analyses presented by BJS. 

***************************
Cause of death information
***************************

The DCRP instructs respondents to report death information as determined 
by an autopsy or other official medical death investigation. For this 
collection, intoxication deaths, accidental deaths, suicides, and 
homicides are considered discrete causes of death. While there is a 
distinction between manner and cause of death from a medico-legal 
standpoint, no such distinction is made in the DCRP. When reporting a 
death due to illness, accident, suicide, intoxication, or homicide, BJS 
requests that respondents describe the events surrounding these deaths. 
Illness death descriptions are later converted by clinical data 
specialists into standard medical codes according to the World Health 
Organization’s International Statistical Classification of Diseases and 
Related Health Problems, Tenth Revision (ICD-10).

***********************************
Other BJS sources of correctional 
mortality data
***********************************

BJS collects other data reported to the DCRP on correctional mortality 
and deaths that occur in the process of arrest. These other collections 
include--

* Capital Punishment, which provides data on legal executions. Further 
discussion on executions is accessible on the BJS website.

* National Prisoner Statistics (NPS), which annually collected aggregate 
counts of deaths in state and federal prisons prior to the establishment 
of the DCRP. Prior to 2007, the NPS also collected counts of deaths by 
cause of death, including deaths due to execution, illness, AIDS, 
suicide, accident, homicide, and other causes. After 2006, the federal 
Bureau of Prisons (BOP) continued to submit counts of deaths by cause of 
death using the DCRP, but no longer provided counts of deaths using the 
NPS. Further discussion of the NPS is accessible on the BJS website.

* The Census of Jail Inmates, conducted every 5 to 6 years, provides 
counts of inmate deaths in local jails. Further discussion of the Census 
of Jail Inmates is accessible on the BJS website.

* The Survey of Jails in Indian Country (SJIC), which provides aggregate 
counts of the number of deaths occurring in all known Indian country 
correctional facilities operated by tribal authorities or the U.S. 
Department of Interior’s Bureau of Indian Affairs. Further discussion of 
the SJIC is accessible on the BJS website.

* Arrest-Related Deaths (ARD), which obtains data on deaths that occurred 
during the process of arrest. State-level respondents provide details of 
deaths that occurred during arrest. Further discussion of ARD is 
accessible on the BJS website.

*********************
Reported statistics 
*********************

Mortality data are shown in statistical tables by type of correctional 
institution (state prisons and local jails) and include the number of 
deaths and mortality rates by year, cause of death, selected decedent 
characteristics, and state. Mortality rates are calculated per 100,000 
inmates, with the denominators providing estimates of the number of 
person-years of exposure in custody in institutional corrections. 

The mortality rate for state prisons is calculated as the number of 
deaths per year divided by the midyear state prison population in custody 
multiplied by 100,000. Midyear custody counts for state prisons provide 
estimates of person-years for prison populations. BJS uses data from the 
NPS to provide midyear custody counts of prisoners. 

The mortality rate in local jails is calculated as the number of deaths 
per year divided by the average daily jail inmate population (ADP) 
multiplied by 100,000. The ADP for local jails is defined as the average 
daily number of jail inmates held in a jail jurisdiction during a 
calendar year, from January 1 through December 31. 

The ADP is used as the denominator for jail mortality rates to 
accommodate the high turnover and daily fluctuation in local jail 
populations. Also, the ADP better reflects the number of inmate days per 
year than a one-day count. Jail populations have a higher turnover than 
prison populations; mean stay in local jails is about 21 days as compared 
to 2 years for state prisons. 

The jail ADP also reflects the annual number of admissions and mean 
length of stay, and can be expressed as the product of these two values. 
When mean length of stay is expressed in years, the ADP is equivalent to 
the number of person-years spent by jail inmates during a given year. BJS 
obtains the jail ADP data directly from jails through the DCRP (using the 
summary form, CJ-9A). Starting in 2002, BJS collected the ADP directly 
from respondents. Prior to 2002, BJS calculated the jail ADP by taking 
the average of the January 1 count from the prior year and the December 
31 count from the reference year, which is an appropriate proxy measure 
for ADP.

Both denominators provide for annualizing mortality rates, which are 
calculated separately by group or characteristic. The annualized 
mortality rates in state prisons and local jails are comparable to annual 
crude mortality rates reported by the National Center for Health 
Statistics (NCHS). 

NCHS calculates crude mortality rates as the number of events for a 
period (e.g., a year) divided by the population estimate at the midpoint 
of the period. For general population mortality statistics, NCHS employs 
the midyear population as an approximation to the average population 
exposed to risk of death during any given year. For more information, see 
Siegal, J. & Swanson, D. (2004). The Methods and Materials of Demography, 
Second Edition. San Diego, CA: Elsevier Academic Press, 269.

The crude mortality rates reported in the DCRP annual statistical tables 
are not directly comparable to the crude mortality rates within the 
(nonincarcerated) general population, and the crude mortality rates in 
state prisons are not directly comparable to those of local jails. The 
composition of the general population (age, sex, and race) differs from 
population in state prisons and local jails. Because mortality is 
correlated with age, race, and sex, the crude mortality rates in state 
prisons, local jails, and the general population should not be compared.

Individual inmate death records collected annually in the death file are 
included in the national death count. Independent jail-specific summary 
death counts are collected on the annual summary form (CJ-9A) and serve 
as control death totals. If the death count in the summary form file is 
greater than the count in the individual inmate death file, the summary 
file count is used as the total count in calculating a jail mortality 
rate. For year 2010, individual records for jail inmate deaths were 
adjusted to match independent counts of deaths occurring in each jail and 
the mortality rates were adjusted accordingly.

*********************************************
Estimating inmate population characteristics 
for use in calculating mortality rates by 
demographic subgroups
*********************************************

BJS does not obtain annual data for all demographic characteristics of 
prison and jail inmates in all jurisdictions. BJS uses data from sources 
other than the DCRP to estimate the nationwide age, race, and sex 
composition of state prison and local jail inmate populations. These data 
sources consist primarily of periodic surveys of inmates in custody in 
prisons and jails. The inmate characteristic distributions obtained from 
these surveys are applied to denominators (counts of inmates or ADP) to 
estimate the number of inmates in each demographic subgroup. 

BJS estimated the demographic distribution of the state prison population 
data from the National Prisoner Statistics (NPS) and National Corrections 
Reporting Program (NCRP) collections. For a discussion on the methodology 
for obtaining estimates of the age, race, and sex distributions of state 
prisoners, see Prisoners in 2010 on the BJS website.

Prior to BJS using NPS and NCRP to estimate demographic distributions, 
reports of mortality rates for state prison inmates used demographic 
distributions derived from BJS’ 2004 Survey of Inmates in State and 
Federal Correctional Facilities (SISCF). Consequently, the state prison 
mortality rates shown in these tables may differ from previously 
published rates. A rate comparison between the two sources showed very 
little difference in the resultant mortality rates. In most instances, 
the rates either matched or nearly matched. In only three instances did 
the rates differ (Hispanic in 2001; females and inmates ages 55 or older 
in 2002). In each instance, the rates calculated using population data 
from the NCRP and NPS were slightly higher (less than a 1% increase) than 
rates calculated using population data from the SISCF.

To estimate the distributions of demographic attributes of the ADP for 
inmates, BJS used data from several surveys to generate distributions of 
age, sex, and race, and applied these distributions to the ADP. BJS’ 
Annual Survey of Jails (ASJ) provided estimates of the sex distribution 
of inmates for each year of the DCRP collection and applied these to each 
year’s ADP from the DCRP to estimate the average daily population of male 
and female jail inmates. The Jail Inmates at Midyear 2010 report 
documents that the distributions of inmate characteristics have changed 
slowly over time. For the most recent information on the ASJ, see the BJS 
website.

To estimate the race and ethnic distribution of adult jail inmates, BJS 
used data from the Survey of Inmates in Local Jails (SILJ) and the 
National Inmate Survey (NIS) to estimate the relative distribution of 
adults by race and ethnic category for different periods. The SILJ 
estimates were used to cover the period from 2000 to 2004 and the NIS 
estimates were used to cover the period from 2005 to 2010. In both cases, 
the percentages associated with each race and ethnic category were 
applied to the adult jail average daily population.

BJS did not annually collect data on the age distribution of jail 
populations. Rather, BJS obtained estimates of the age distribution of 
jail inmates from periodic surveys of jail inmates, including the 2002 
Survey of Inmates in Local Jails (SILJ) and the National Inmate Survey 
(NIS) from 2007 through 2009, which are accessible on the BJS website. 
For more information about jail inmates in 2002, see Profile of Jail 
Inmates on the BJS website. 

To estimate the age distribution of the jail inmate population, BJS first 
obtained an estimate of the number of jail inmates under 18 years of age 
from the Annual Survey of Jails (ASJ). According to Jail Inmates at 
Midyear 2010 (table 6), annually from 2000 through 2010, the number of 
jail inmates under age 18 ranged between 6,100 and 7,615. By applying the 
annual percentage of jail inmates under age 18 to the annual average 
daily jail inmate population, we obtained an estimate of the average 
daily population of jail inmates under age 18. 

To estimate the age distribution of adult jail inmates, BJS used data 
from the Survey of Inmates in Local Jails (SILJ) and the National Inmate 
Survey (NIS) to estimate the relative distribution of adults by age 
category for different periods. We used the SILJ estimates to cover the 
period from 2000 to 2006 and the NIS estimates to cover the period from 
2007 to 2009. In both cases, we applied the percentages associated with 
each age category to the adult jail average daily population.

*****************************
Random error and suppression 
*****************************

The DCRP data on deaths in state prisons and local jails are not subject 
to sampling error. However, mortality data from a complete or near 
complete enumeration may be subject to random error. Following the 
methodology of Brillinger and NCHS, “the number of deaths that actually 
occurred may be considered as one of a large series of possible results 
that could have arisen under the same set of circumstances” (NCHS, 2007). 
The random variation can be large when the number of deaths is small; 
hence considerable caution is warranted when interpreting statistics 
based on small numbers of deaths. According to NCHS standards, mortality 
rates based on fewer than 100 deaths per year should be interpreted with 
caution. For more information on vital rates, see Brillinger, D. R. 
(1986). The natural variability of vital rates and associated statistics. 
Biometrics 42:693-734. See also the National Vital Statistics Reports. 
Deaths: Final Data for 2007, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 
National Center for Health Statistics (NCHS), retrieved from 
http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/nvsr/nvsr58/nvsr58_19.pdf.

Continuing to use NCHS and Brillinger methods, we quantify random 
variation by assuming that the appropriate underlying distribution is a 
Poisson probability distribution. This provides for a computationally 
simple, as well as reasonable, approach to estimate variances for 
mortality statistics when the probability of dying is low. We calculated 
variances based on the assumption of a Poisson process and from these 
variances calculated “relative random error” estimates, which are 
comparable to relative standard error, in that the relative random error 
is the ratio of random error derived from the Poisson variance to the 
number of deaths. Following NCHS, when the relative random error exceeded 
30 percent, we flagged estimated mortality rates due to the instability 
of the rate. 

**************************
Survey performance issues
**************************

Survey administration and modifications to the survey form generated data 
for years 2007 through 2009 that may not be wholly compatible with prior 
DCRP data. In 2012, BJS identified a previously undetected data error 
mischaracterized over 600 illness-related deaths as illness-related 
deaths missing detailed cause of death information, leading to an 
inflated frequency of prison deaths in reference year 2007 being 
characterized as ‘all other illnesses’ while simultaneously depressing 
frequencies of known illnesses (i.e. heart disease, cancer, liver 
disease, etc). The error was identified and resolved, correcting the 
distributions. In 2008, local jail officials were unable to provide 
causes of death for 22% of jail inmate deaths. During 2009, BJS made 
modifications to the collection instruments to improve reporting and 
reduce burden. 

* Item nonresponse in 2008 jail data and unknown cause of death: An 
abnormally large number of cases were missing a response for cause of 
death in the 2008 jail file (n=203; 21.4% of all jail deaths in 2008). 
This coincided with the final year the U.S. Census Bureau acted as the 
data collection agent for DCRP. In prior years of the DCRP jail data 
collection, an average of 6% of all causes of death was classified as 
“other” or “unknown.” For the purposes of this report, BJS categorized 
all of these 203 jail deaths from 2008 as missing data about cause of 
death.

* 2009 data collection: Prior to fielding the 2009 DCRP collection, BJS 
reviewed the data collection instrument and data submission procedures, 
and assessed the communications with DCRP respondents with the goal to 
reduce burden on respondents. The survey was modified to facilitate 
navigation and to encourage online response. The modifications led to 
delays in implementing data collection. As a result, death reports were 
not collected in the year the deaths occurred, but were instead collected 
retrospectively during 2010 for the first time.  Data collection for 
subsequent years resumed on a normal schedule.

*********************************************************
The Bureau of Justice Statistics is the statistical agency 
of the U.S. Department of Justice. James P. Lynch is the 
director.

Margaret E. Noonan and RTI analyzed the data; the report was 
prepared by Margaret E. Noonan. E. Ann Carson verified the 
report.

Kim Aspinwall carried out the data collection and processing 
with assistances provided by Sarah Love, under the 
supervision of Chris Ellis, RTI International. Scott Ginder 
and Todd Heinrich provided statistical and technical 
assistance, respectively.

Catherine Bird, Jill Thomas, and Morgan Young edited the 
report, and Barbara Quinn produced the report, under the 
supervision of Doris J. James.

December 2012, NCJ 239911
******************************************************

******************************************************
Office of Justice Programs * Innovation * Partnerships 
* Safer Neighborhoods * http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov
******************************************************
______________________
12/3/12/JER/2:35pm Revised 12/5/2012 4:50pm


