U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Programs
Bureau of Justice Statistics

********************************************************
This file is text only without graphics and many of the
tables. A Zip archive of the tables in this report in
spreadsheet format (.csv) and the full report including
tables and graphics in .pdf format are available on BJS
website at: http://www.bjs.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbdetail&iid=5407
*********************************************************

Special Report

Multistate Criminal History Patterns of Prisoners 
Released in 30 States

Matthew R. Durose, Howard N. Snyder, Ph.D., 
and Alexia D. Cooper, Ph.D., BJS Statisticians

During their criminal careers prior to and for 5 years 
following release, the 404,638 prisoners released in 2005 in 30 
states were arrested an estimated 5.5 million times. This total 
included arrests made by federal, state, and local law 
enforcement agencies in all 50 states, the District of 
Columbia, and U.S. territories. An arrest can involve more than 
one type of charge. For instance, one arrest could include a 
charge for a violent crime and a charge for a drug crime. In 
this report, arrest counts are based on unique arrests, not 
individual charges. In-state refers to arrests made by law 
enforcement agencies inside the state that released the 
prisoner in 2005, and out-of-state refers to arrests made in 
states other than the one where the prisoner was released in 
2005. 


An estimated 25% of released prisoners had at least one out-of-
state arrest prior to their release in 2005. This rate ranged 
from 17% to 57% across the study’s 30 states (map 1). Out-of-
state arrests accounted for 10% of the 4.3 million arrests of 
prisoners prior to their release in 2005. This percentage also 
varied by state, ranging from 6% to 40% (appendix table 3).


*********************************************************
*************
Highlights
*************

* A quarter (25%) of the released prisoners had at least one 
prior out-of-state-arrest. For the majority of prisoners (75%), 
pre-release criminal records did not include arrests outside 
the state where they served time..

* The percentage of released prisoners who had prior arrests in 
multiple states varied widely across each of the study’s 30 states.

* The average age of multistate offenders prior to release was 
39, while the average age of the pre-release single-state 
offenders was 34.

* Within 5 years of release, 1 in 9 (11%) prisoners were 
arrested at least once outside of the state that released them.

* The likelihood of the prisoners being arrested out of state 
following release increased with the volume of out-of-state 
arrests in their prior criminal history. 

* Within 5 years of release, 6% of inmates with no prior out-
of-state arrests were arrested in a state other than the one 
that released them, compared to 34% of those who had four or 
more prior out-of-state arrests.

* After the 5-year follow-up period, the recidivism rate based 
on in-state and out-of-state criminal history information (77%) 
was higher than the recidivism rate based on in-state criminal 
history information only (72%).

* During the 5-year follow-up period, prisoners released on 
community supervision were arrested within the state of release 
at higher rates (73%) than those granted unconditional release 
(69%). 

* Prisoners released conditionally (9%) were less likely than 
those released unconditionally (15%) to be arrested in another 
state at the end of the 5 years.  
*********************************************************

During the 5-year period following release, 11% of released 
prisoners had at least one out-of-state arrest, including 8% 
with 1 to 2 out-of-state arrests, 2% with 3 to 4 out-of-state 
arrests, and 1% with 5 or more out-of-state arrests (not 
shown). The estimated rate of prisoners who were arrested in 
another state within 1, 3, and 5 years of release varied across 
each of the study’s 30 states. The state-specific out-of-state 
arrest rate at the end of the 5-year follow-up period ranged 
from a minimum of 6% to a maximum of 26%, with a median of 14% 
(figure 1).

Nine percent of the 1.2 million arrests of prisoners in the 5 
years following their release occurred outside the state of 
release. This proportion varied by state, ranging from 3% to 
27% (appendix table 7). 

Data in this report came from the criminal history records 
maintained by the FBI and state repositories on persons 
released from state prisons in 30 states in 2005 to track their 
arrest patterns across state boundaries both prior to and for 5 
years following release. A representative sample of inmates 
released in 2005 was developed for each of the 30 states using 
data reported by state departments of corrections to the Bureau 
of Justice Statistics’ (BJS) National Corrections Reporting 
Program (NCRP), resulting in a total sample of 68,597 inmates. 
This sample was used to produce estimates on the 404,638 
persons released in 2005 in the 30 states. In 2005, these 30 
states were responsible for about three-quarters of all state 
prisoners released nationwide. States were selected for the 
study based on their ability to provide prisoner records and 
the FBI or state identification numbers on persons released 
from correctional facilities in 2005.


********************************************
Older inmates were more likely than younger 
inmates to have prior out-of-state arrests
********************************************

In 2005 in 30 states, nearly 9 in 10 (89%) released prisoners 
were male, and the mean age of the prisoners at the time of 
release was age 35 (table 1). About 1 in 4 (26%) were in prison 
for a violent crime. The proportions of non-Hispanic black and 
non-Hispanic white prisoners were similar (about 40% each).
  
The composition of the group of released prisoners with at 
least one prior out-of-state arrest differed from the group 
that had no prior out-of-state arrests. A released prisoner is 
defined as a pre-release multistate offender if he or she had 
at least one prior out-of-state arrest. The composition of the 
pre-release single-state and multistate offender groups varied 
by race. Non-Hispanic whites made up half (50%) of pre-release 
multistate offenders, compared to about a third (36%) of pre-
release single-state offenders.

On average, pre-release multistate offenders were older, with a 
mean age of 39, while the mean age of pre-release single-state 
offenders was age 34. An estimated 46% of the pre-release 
multistate offenders were age 40 or older at release, compared 
to 27% of pre-release single-state offenders.

Prior to their release in 2005, three-quarters (75%) of the 
released prisoners had no arrests outside the state where they 
had served time, while 1 in 4 (25%) had been arrested at least 
once in another state (table 2). The percentage of prisoners 
who had an out-of-state arrest prior to release varied by 
personal characteristics. The prior criminal histories of older 
inmates were more likely than those of younger inmates to 
include an out-of-state arrest. For example, 10% of released 
prisoners age 24 or younger were multistate offenders prior to 
release, compared to 18% of released prisoners ages 25 to 29, 
24% of those ages 30 to 34, 29% of those ages 35 to 39, and 36% 
of released prisoners age 40 or older at the time of release.

Male prisoners (25%) were more likely than female prisoners 
(22%) to have a prior arrest in another state. White prisoners 
(31%) were more likely than black (22%) and Hispanic (16%) 
prisoners to have a prior out-of-state arrest. 

Prior to being released from prison, an estimated 27% of 
prisoners who had been in prison for a property offense had 
been arrested in at least one other state. Prisoners released 
for a violent or drug offense (23% each) were less likely than 
those released for a property offense to have a prior out-of-
state arrest.

********************************************
Prior to release, the majority of multistate 
offenders had arrest records in two states
********************************************

An estimated 25% of released prisoners had at least one out-of-
state arrest prior to their release, including 9% who had four 
or more prior out-of-state arrests, 7% who had two to three 
prior out-of-state arrests, and 9% who had one out-of-state 
arrest (table 3). Among the released prisoners who had prior 
arrests in more than one state, 72% had arrests in two states, 
while 18% had arrests in three states, and 9% had arrests in 
four or more states (not shown).

Among the estimated 100,000 prisoners released in 30 states in 
2005 with prior arrests in multiple states--

* 39% had a prior arrest record that moved sequentially from 
state to state without returning to a prior state.

* 61% had a prior arrest record that moved back and forth 
among states.

********************************************
Inmates with prior out-of-state arrests were
more likely than other inmates to have an 
out-of-state arrest following release
********************************************

An estimated 11% of all released prisoners had at least one o
ut-of-state arrest in the 5 years following their release from 
prison. The likelihood of the prisoners being arrested out of 
state following release increased with the number of out-of-
state arrests in their prior criminal history. Within 5 years 
of release, 34% of those who had four or more prior out-of-
state arrests were arrested in a state other than the one that 
released them, compared to 6% with no prior out-of-state arrests.

For prisoners with prior out-of state arrests who were arrested 
within 5 years of release, 79% of their first post-release 
arrests were in the state that released them, 15% were in 
another state where they had been previously arrested, and 6% 
were arrested in a new state that was not in their prior 
criminal history (not shown). For prisoners without prior out-
of-state arrests who were arrested within 5 years of release, 
96% of their first post-release arrests were in the state that 
released them and 4% were in another state. 

********************************************
Recidivism patterns based on national 
criminal history records differed from those 
limited to criminal history records within 
the state of release
********************************************

Within 1 year of release in 2005, an estimated 43% of prisoners 
released in 2005 in 30 states were arrested for a new crime 
either within or outside the state of release (figure 2). When 
measuring recidivism only as an arrest within the state of 
release, an estimated 41% of the inmates were arrested within 
1 year following release. At the end of the 5-year period, the 
recidivism rate based on national (i.e., in-state and out-of-
state) criminal history information was 77%, compared to 72% 
for the rate based solely on in-state criminal history 
information. During the 5-year follow-up period, 5% of the 
prisoners had only out-of-state arrests following release and 
were not arrested within the state that released them (appendix 
table 9). The difference of in-state recidivism rates when out-
of-state arrests were included for the 30 states shows the 
limitations of recidivism studies that have access only to in-
state criminal history information.

Within 5 years of release, 29% of prisoners released in 2005 in 
30 states were arrested for a violent offense within or outside 
the state of release (appendix table 16). When limiting 
criminal histories to arrests only for violent crimes within 
the state of release, 26% of the inmates were arrested within 
5 years following release for a violent crime.

Among state prisoners released in 30 states in 2005, 3% of the 
inmates were arrested at least once outside the state that 
released them within a year. After 3 years following release, 
the percentage of inmates with an out-of-state arrest increased 
state that released them at least once within 5 years of their
release. 

Within 5 years of release from prison, 3% of inmates were arrested 
for a violent offense in another state (not shown). Less than 1% 
of prisoners were arrested for a violent crime both within and 
outside the state of release during the 5-year follow-up period.

Among all released inmates, 5% were arrested for a property crime 
in a state other than the one that released them. During the 5-year 
follow-up period, 4% of the released prisoners were arrested for a 
drug crime in another state. An estimated 7% of the released 
prisoners were arrested for a public order offense outside of 
the state that released them, such as a probation violation, 
weapons offense, or disorderly conduct.


Of the prisoners released in 2005 in the study’s 30 states, the 
majority (74%) were granted conditional release and placed on 
parole, probation, or some other form of community supervision 
(not shown). About 1 in 4 (26%) were granted an unconditional 
release. Overall, those prisoners granted conditional release 
(77%) were arrested at similar rates to those granted an 
unconditional release (77%) during the following 5 years (table 
4). During this period, the prisoners who were released on 
community supervision were arrested within that state at higher 
rates (73%) than those granted an unconditional release (69%). 
In contrast, prisoners released conditionally (9%) were less 
likely than those released unconditionally (15%) to be arrested 
in another state at the end of the 5-year follow-up period. 

One year after release from prison, males (44%) were more 
likely than females (34%) to have been arrested at least once 
either in the state where they were released or in another 
state. At the end of the 5-year follow-up period, more than 
three-quarters (78%) of males and two-thirds (68%) of females 
had either an in-state or an out-of-state arrest. Males also 
had higher recidivism rates than females when measured as being 
arrested in a state other than the one that released them. 
Within 1 year of release, 3% of males and 2% of females had an 
out-of-state arrest. During the 5 years following release, 11% 
of males compared to 9% of females had an out-of-state arrest. 

At the end of the 5-year follow-up period, the recidivism rate 
based on arrests within and outside the state of release was 
higher among blacks (81%) than whites (73%) and Hispanics (75%). 
In comparison, the recidivism rate based only on arrests 
outside the state of release was higher among whites (13%) 
than blacks (10%) and Hispanics (8%).

Although older inmates were more likely than younger inmates to 
have a prior out-of-state arrest in their criminal history, 
this pattern was not observed in the out-of-state recidivism 
rates. Younger inmates were more likely than older inmates to have 
an out-of-state arrest following release. An estimated 12% of 
inmates under age 40 had an out-of-state arrest following 
release, compared to 8% of those age 40 or older.

********************************************
For most states, their released prisoners 
had arrest histories in about 50 states
********************************************

Among the prisoners released in 2005 in 30 states who were 
sampled for this study, the number of states and U.S. 
territories that each state’s sample had arrests in ranged from 
42 to 52 (appendix table 11). Out-of-state arrests of former 
prisoners were most frequently, but not always, in bordering 
states or ones close in proximity. For instance, the persons 
released from New Jersey state prisons in 2005 were arrested in 
New Jersey and 46 other states either prior to being released 
or during the 5 years following their release. While the 
majority of the arrests of the prisoners released in New Jersey 
were within that state, the most common states outside of New 
Jersey where its prisoners were arrested included New York, 
Pennsylvania, and Florida. 

***********************************************************

********************************************
Direct comparisons of recidivism rates 
in this report to prior BJS studies are 
limited due to improvements in records
********************************************
 
Direct comparisons of the out-of-state recidivism rates of the 
15 states in the Bureau of Justice Statistics’ (BJS) 1994 study 
to the rates of the 30 states in this study are not appropriate 
due to differences in the two samples of prisoners. In addition 
to the expanded geographic coverage of states contributing 
information about released prisoners to the new study, other 
differences involved changes in prisoner demographic 
characteristics and criminal histories of those released, which 
are attributes known to be related to recidivism. For instance, 
the proportion of inmates who were age 40 or older at release 
increased from 17% in the 1994 study to 32% in the 2005 study. 
The proportion who were in prison for a violent offense 
increased from 22% to 27%. 

Comparisons between recidivism rates in the 1994 and 2005 
studies are also difficult because the 2005 study used new data 
collection capabilities to directly access the criminal history 
record systems of all 50 states and obtain more comprehensive 
out-of-state information than was available for the 1994 study.

Due to efforts funded by individual states and the BJS’s 
National Criminal History Improvement Program (NCHIP) to help 
states improve their criminal history recordkeeping, state 
criminal history repositories may now capture more information 
on offenders’ criminal activities than in the past. However, 
the potential effects of these improvements to the nation’s 
criminal history recordkeeping on the observed out-of-state 
recidivism rates are difficult to quantify, and statistical 
adjustments for their effects cannot be made.

With these limitations in mind, and for general discussion 
purposes only, BJS conducted analyses of the out-of-state 
recidivism rates of the inmates released in the 11 states that 
had out-of-state criminal history records available for both 
the 1994 and 2005 studies. For these 11 states, an estimated 
7% of the inmates released in 1994 were arrested within 3 years 
outside the state that released them, compared to an estimated 
9% of the inmates released in 2005..

********************************************************

***************
Methodology
***************

This report estimates the multistate criminal history patterns 
of 404,638 persons released in 2005 from state prisons in 30 
states. A representative sample of inmates released in 2005 was 
developed for each of the 30 states using data reported by 
state departments of corrections to the Bureau of Justice 
Statistics’ (BJS) National Corrections Reporting Program 
(NCRP), yielding a total sample of 70,878 persons (table 5). 
This sample excluded transfers to the custody of another 
authority, releases due to death, releases on bond, releases to 
seek or participate in an appeal of a case, and prisoners who 
escaped or were absent without leave. Inmates whose sentence 
was less than a year were also excluded. For persons released 
multiple times during 2005, the first release was selected.

The 30 state departments of corrections that supplied BJS with 
the required data included Alaska, Arkansas, California, 
Colorado, Florida, Georgia, Hawaii, Iowa, Louisiana, Maryland, 
Michigan, Minnesota, Missouri, Nebraska, Nevada, New Jersey, 
New York, North Carolina, North Dakota, Ohio, Oklahoma, Oregon, 
Pennsylvania, South Carolina, South Dakota, Texas, Utah, 
Virginia, Washington, and West Virginia.

The International Justice and Public Safety Network (Nlets) 
developed an automated system for BJS to collect multistate 
(i.e., national) criminal history records. Nlets also produced 
software to extract key data elements from individual state and 
federal criminal history records into a uniform file layout 
that supported statistical analysis. NORC at the University of 
Chicago converted the state-specific fields extracted from the 
criminal history records (e.g., offense statutes and 
disposition descriptions) into a common national coding 
structure.

In 2011, on behalf of BJS, Nlets sent the state and FBI 
identification numbers, which were supplied by the departments 
of corrections, to the FBI’s Interstate Identification Index 
(III) to collect the criminal history records on 70,878 former 
prisoners. These records contained arrests from state and 
federal criminal justice agencies across the 50 states and the 
District of Columbia prior to and following the prison releases 
in 2005. Traffic violations (with the exception of vehicular 
manslaughter, driving while intoxicated, and hit-and-run) were 
excluded from the study because the coverage of these events in 
the criminal history records varied widely by state.

This study used the death information from the FBI’s III and 
the Social Security Administration’s public Death Master File 
to identify individuals who died during the 5-year follow-up 
period. The 1,595 prisoners who died according to either source 
of information were excluded from the study, along with 
4 additional cases that were later determined to be invalid 
release records.

Among the 69,279 eligible prisoners sampled from 30 states, BJS 
did not obtain criminal history records on 406 subjects because 
the departments of corrections were unable to provide their FBI 
or state identification number. An additional 276 prisoners had 
an identification number, but no criminal history record linked 
to this number was found in the FBI or state record 
repositories. To account for the missing data, the sample 
weights for the 682 cases without a criminal history record 
were equally distributed among the weights of the other 68,597 
cases with the same commitment offense, demographic 
characteristics, and state of release. The adjusted weights for 
the final sample of 68,597 persons were used to produce 
recidivism estimates on the 404,638 persons released from 
prison in the 30 states in 2005.

**********************************************
Conducting tests of statistical significance
**********************************************

Because this study was based on a sample and not a complete 
enumeration, the estimates in this report are subject to 
sampling error (i.e., a discrepancy between an estimate and 
a population parameter based on chance). One measure of the 
sampling error associated with an estimate is the standard 
error. The standard error can vary from one estimate to the 
next. In general, for a given metric, an estimate with a 
smaller standard error provides a more reliable approximation 
of the true value than an estimate with a larger standard 
error. Estimates with relatively large standard errors are 
associated with less precision and reliability and should be 
interpreted with caution. BJS conducted tests to determine 
whether differences in estimated numbers and percentages were 
statistically significant once sampling error was taken into 
account.

All differences discussed in this report are statistically 
significant at or above the 95% confidence level. Standard 
errors were generated using SPSS Complex Samples and SUDAAN, 
both statistical software packages that estimate sampling error 
from complex sample surveys. Standard errors for each table 
are available at the end of the report.

*********************
Offense definitions
*********************

Violent offenses--include homicide, rape or sexual assault, 
robbery, assault, and other miscellaneous or unspecified 
violent offenses.

Property offenses--include burglary, fraud or forgery, larceny, 
motor vehicle theft, and other miscellaneous or unspecified 
property offenses.

Drug offenses--include possession, trafficking, and other 
miscellaneous or unspecified drug offenses.

Public order offenses--include those that violate the peace or 
order of the community or threaten the public health or safety 
through unacceptable conduct, interference with governmental 
authority, or the violation of civil rights or liberties. This 
category includes weapons offenses, driving under the 
influence, probation and parole violation, obstruction of 
justice, commercialized vice, disorderly conduct, and other 
miscellaneous or unspecified offenses.

*************************************************
The Bureau of Justice Statistics of the U.S. Department of 
Justice is the principal federal agency responsible for 
measuring crime, criminal victimization, criminal offenders, 
victims of crime, correlates of crime, and the operation of 
criminal and civil justice systems at the federal, state, 
tribal, and local levels. BJS collects, analyzes, and 
disseminates reliable and valid statistics on crime and justice 
systems in the United States, supports improvements to state 
and local criminal justice information systems, and 
participates with national and international organizations to 
develop and recommend national standards for justice 
statistics. William J. Sabol is director.

This report was written by Matthew R. Durose, Howard N. Snyder, 
Ph.D., and Alexia D. Cooper, Ph.D. Joshua Markman and Marshay 
Lentini verified the report.

Lynne McConnell and Jill Thomas edited the report. Tina Dorsey 
and Barbara Quinn produced the report.

September 2015, NCJ 248942
*************************************************

*************************************************
Office of Justice Programs
Innovation * Partnerships * Safer Neighborhoods
www.ojp.usdoj.gov
*************************************************

**********************************************
9/8/2015 1:00pm JER Revised 9/21/2015 9:25am
**********************************************
