U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Programs
Bureau of Justice Statistics

-------------------------------------------------

This file is text only without graphics and many 
of the tables. A Zip archive of the tables in this 
report in spreadsheet format (.csv) and the full 
report including tables and graphics in .pdf 
format are available on BJS website at 
http://www.bjs.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbdetail&iid=5866

This reports is one in series. More recent 
editions may be available. To view a list of all 
reports in the series go to 
http://www.bjs.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbse&sid=76
------------------------------------------------- 

Statistical Tables

Mortality in State Prisons, 2001-2014 - 
Statistical Tables

Margaret E. Noonan, BJS Statistician

In 2014, there were 3,927 inmate deaths in state 
(3,483) and federal (444) prisons, up slightly 
from 3,879 in 2013. This is the largest number of 
inmate deaths reported in state and federal 
prisons since the Deaths in Custody Reporting 
Program (DCRP) began collecting data in 2001. 

Between 2001 and 2014, there were 50,785 inmate 
deaths in state and federal prisons in the United 
States (figure 1). The number of deaths in state 
prison was stable between 2013 and 2014 but 
increased by 11% in federal prisons. Deaths in 
state prisons declined in both California (down 
13%) and Texas (down 7%) between 2013 and 2014. 
Together, these states accounted for a fifth of 
the state prison population and a fifth of state 
prisoner deaths in 2014. *** Footnote 1 Carson, E. 
A. & Mulako-Wangato, J. Count of total custody 
population (including private prisons). 
Corrections Statistical Analysis Tool – Prisoners. 
Bureau of Justice Statistics, www.bjs.gov.***

While males continued to account for the majority 
(96%) of state prisoner deaths in 2014, the number 
of female deaths increased 9%. More than half of 
state prisoners who died in 2014 were non-Hispanic 
whites (55%), while nearly a third (32%) were non-
Hispanic blacks and around a tenth (11%) were 
Hispanics. More than half (59%) of state prisoners 
who died were age 55 or older.

Illness remained the most common cause of death in 
state prisons, accounting for 87% of deaths in 
2014. From 2013 to 2014, the number of deaths 
among state prisoners due to illness declined 2%, 
from 3,082 to 3,031 deaths. AIDS-related deaths 
increased 23% during the period and respiratory 
disease deaths increased 20%. The number of 
suicides in state prisons increased by 30% from 
2013 to 2014. This increase followed a 6% decrease 
from 2012 to 2013. Suicides represented 7% of all 
deaths in state prisons in 2014, the largest 
percentage of deaths due to suicide since 2001.

Data in this report were developed from the Bureau 
of Justice Statistics’ (BJS) DCRP, an annual data 
collection of inmate deaths in local jails and 
state prisons. The DCRP is the only national 
statistical collection that obtains comprehensive 
information about deaths in adult correctional 
facilities. This report covers deaths that 
occurred in state prisons between 2001 and 2014. 
It includes information on cause of death, 
selected decedent characteristics, and prisoner 
mortality rates by state. Federal data presented 
in this report are based on aggregate counts from 
the Bureau of Prisons. 

Unless otherwise stated, findings pertain to state 
prisons only. Data on mortality in local jails are 
located in a separate report (Mortality in Local 
Jails, 2000-2014 - Statistical Tables, NCJ 250169, 
BJS web, December 2016).

*************
Highlights
*************

Inmate death in state and federal prisons
*******************************************

* Between 2001 and 2014, there were 50,785 
prisoner deaths in state and federal prisons. The 
majority (45,640) of prisoner deaths occurred in 
state prisons (table 1).

* The state prisoner average annual mortality rate 
(256 per 100,000 state prisoners) was 14% higher 
than the federal prisoner mortality rate (225 per 
100,000 federal prisoners) between 2001 and 2014.

Cause of death
******************

* The number of suicides in state prisons 
increased 30% between 2013 and 2014 (from 192 to 
249 deaths). Liver disease deaths, the third most 
common cause of death, declined 12% between 2013 
and 2014 (from 354 to 313 deaths) (table 2).

* Illness-related deaths accounted for 87% of all 
deaths in state prisons in 2014, with cancer (30%) 
and heart disease (26%) accounting for more than 
half (table 3).

* Between 2005 and 2014, the percentage of 
illness-related state prisoner deaths was stable, 
ranging between 87% and 90% annually.

* The overall mortality rate for state prisoners 
was stable from 2013 to 2014, from 273 to 275 per 
100,000 in 2014 (table 4).

Decedent characteristics
***************************

More female state prisoners died in 2014 (154) 
than in any year since 2008 (163) (table 6).

* The majority of state prisoners who died in 2014 
were persons age 55 or older (59%), followed by 
prisoners ages 45 to 54 (24%) (table 7).

* In 2014, males accounted for nearly all (96%) 
state prisoner deaths and non-Hispanic whites made 
up more than half (55%) of state prisoners deaths. 

* For cancer, heart disease, and liver disease, 
the mortality rate for male state prisoners was 
twice the rate for females. 

* Female and male state prisoners died from drug-
alcohol intoxication at nearly equal rates between 
2001 and 2014.

Deaths reported by state
*************************

* Texas (409), Florida (346), and California (317) had 
the highest number of deaths in state prisons in 
2014 (table 11).

* In 2014, the prisoner death rate by state varied 
from no deaths per 100,000 to 631 deaths per 
100,000 state prisoners. The median state-level 
mortality rate among prisoners was 267 per 100,000 
state prisoners (table 12).

* Twenty-seven states accounted for 90% of all 
deaths in state prison from 2001 through 2014 
(45,640). Texas (5,804) and California (5,102) 
accounted for about a quarter of all deaths in 
state prison between 2001 and 2014 (table 13).

* Overall mortality rates and mortality rates by 
state and by cause of death may not be directly 
compared between states due to differences in age, 
sex, race or Hispanic origin, and other decedent 
characteristics (table 14).

* The number of state prisoners age 55 or older 
increased 12%, from an estimated 58,900 prisoners 
in 2005 to 125,000 prisoners in 2014 (appendix 
table 1).

Moving averages and population 
trends by prisoner mortality
*********************************

* The mortality rate of state prisoners for 
illness-related deaths increased to 238 per 
100,000 state prisoners in 2014, up from 235 per 
100,000 in 2013 (appendix table 2).

* The cancer mortality rate increased each year 
between 2008 (63 per 100,000 state prisoners) and 
2014 (82 per 100,000) (appendix table 3).

* The heart disease mortality rate among state 
prisoners increased between 2010 (63 per 100,000 
state prisoners) and 2014 (68 per 100,000) 
(appendix table 4).

****************
List of tables
****************

Table 1. Number of state and federal prison inmate 
deaths, by cause of death, 2001–2014

Table 2. Number of state and federal prisoner 
deaths, by cause of death, 2001 and 2005–2014

Table 3. Percent of state prisoner deaths, by 
cause of death, 2001 and 2005–2014

Table 4. Mortality rate per 100,000 state 
prisoners, by cause of death, 2001 and 2005–2014

Table 5. Mortality rate per 100,000 federal 
prisoners, by select cause of death, 2001 and 
2005–2014

Table 6. Number of state prisoner deaths, by 
selected decedent characteristics, 2001 and 2005–
2014

Table 7. Percent of state prisoner deaths, by 
selected decedent characteristics, 2001 and 2005–
2014

Table 8. Mortality rate per 100,000 state 
prisoners, by selected decedent characteristics, 
2001 and 2005–2014

Table 9. Number of state prisoner deaths, by cause 
and selected decedent characteristics, 2001–2014

Table 10. Average annual mortality rate per 
100,000 state prisoners, by cause of death and 
selected decedent characteristics, 2001–2014

Table 11. Number of state and federal prisoner 
deaths, by jurisdiction, 2001 and 2005–2014

Table 12. Mortality rate per 100,000 state and 
federal prisoners, by jurisdiction, 2001 and 2005–
2014

Table 13. Number of state and federal prisoner 
deaths, by cause and jurisdiction, 2001–2014

Table 14. Average annual mortality rate per 
100,000 state and federal prisoners, by cause of 
death and location, 2001–2014


Table 15. Preliminary count of the number of 
deaths in state prisons, 2015

**************************
List of appendix tables
**************************

Appendix table 1. Estimated number of state and federal 
prisoners in custody, by selected inmate 
characteristics, 2001 and 2005–2014

Appendix table 2. Illness mortality rate per 100,000 
state prison inmates, by selected characteristics, 
2003 and 2005–2014

Appendix table 3. Cancer mortality rate per 100,000 
state prison inmates, by selected characteristics, 
2003 and 2005–2014

Appendix table 4. Heart disease mortality rate per 
100,000 state prison inmates, by selected 
characteristics, 2003 and 2005–2014

Appendix table 5. Liver disease mortality rate per 
100,000 state prison inmates, by selected 
characteristics, 2003 and 2005–2014

Appendix table 6. Respiratory disease mortality rate per 
100,000 state prison inmates, by selected 
characteristics, 2003 and 2005–2014

Appendix table 7. Mortality rate for all other illnesses 
per 100,000 state prison inmates, by selected 
characteristics, 2003 and 2005–2014

Appendix table 8. Mortality rate for unnatural deaths 
per 100,000 state prison inmates, by selected 
characteristics, 2003 and 2005–2014

*************************************************
Preliminary count of state prisoner deaths, 2015
As of October 2016, data for collection year 2015 
is being processed and finalized. The response 
rate for collection year 2015 was 97% as of July 
2016, with 49 of 50 states submitting 3,290 state 
prisoner death records (table 15). Finalization of 
the data files, which includes data cleaning and 
processing cause of death information, will 
continue into 2017. Full details on mortality of 
state prisoners in 2015 will be published in 2017.
**************************************************

*************
Methodology
*************

Data collection coverage
*************************

The Deaths in Custody Reporting Program (DCRP) is 
an annual Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS) data 
collection that obtains national, state, and 
incident-level data on persons who died while in 
the physical custody of the 50 state departments 
of corrections or the approximately 2,800 local 
adult jail jurisdictions nationwide. This 
methodology pertains to the prison portion of the 
DCRP collection only. See Mortality in Local 
Jails, 2000–2014 - Statistical Tables (NCJ 250169, 
BJS web, December 2016) for data and the 
methodology on deaths occurring in local jails.

The DCRP began in 2000 in response to the Death in 
Custody Reporting Act of 2000 (P.L. 106-297) and 
is the only national statistical collection that 
obtains comprehensive information about deaths in 
adult correctional facilities. Starting in 2001 
and annually thereafter, BJS has collected DCRP 
data directly from state prison systems, 
maintaining a 100% response rate. BJS uses this 
data to track national trends in the number and 
cause (or manner) of death occurring in state 
prisons.

Mortality data measured by the DCRP include the 
location and type of facility where the inmate 
died, decedent characteristics (such as age, sex, 
race or Hispanic origin), date of admission, 
conviction status, and admission offense. The DCRP 
also collects data about circumstances surrounding 
the death, including the cause, time, and location 
where the death occurred, and information on 
whether an autopsy was conducted and the 
availability of autopsy results to the respondent. 
Data on executions are excluded from this report 
but are accessible on the BJS website (see Capital 
Punishment in the United States, 2013, NCJ 248448, 
BJS web, December 2014). Statistics presented in 
this report are current as of September 26, 2016. 
For more information on mortality in correctional 
settings, see Assessing Inmate Cause of Death: 
Deaths in Custody Reporting Program and National 
Death Index (NCJ 249568, BJS web, April 2016), 
Mortality in Local Jails, 2000–2007 (NCJ 222988, 
BJS web, July 2010); Medical Causes of Death in 
State Prisons, 2001–2004 (NCJ 216340, BJS web, 
January 2007); and Suicide and Homicide in State 
Prisons and Local Jails (NCJ 210036, BJS web, 
August 2005).

The DCRP state prison data collection instruments 
are administered annually to state departments of 
corrections. Respondents provide an aggregate 
count of the number of deaths that occurred during 
the referenced calendar year (NPS-4), as well as 
individual death forms (NPS-4A). The prison survey 
instruments are available on the BJS website at 
www.bjs.gov. State prison respondents can submit 
individual records on decedents at any time during 
a collection cycle through a BJS web-based 
collection system.

Determining eligibility for reporting to the DCRP
*************************************************

In the DCRP, custody refers to the physical 
holding of an inmate in a facility or to the 
period during which a correctional authority 
maintains a chain of custody over an inmate. A 
death that occurs when an inmate is not in the 
custody of a correctional authority is considered 
beyond the scope of the DCRP. Out-of-scope deaths 
include inmates on escape status or under the 
supervision of community corrections, such as on 
probation, parole, or home-electronic monitoring. 
For state prisons responding to the survey, 
inmates in physical custody include those held in 
any private prison facility under contract to the 
responding state’s department of corrections or in 
any of their state-operated facilities, including 
halfway houses, prison camps or farms, training or 
treatment centers, and prison hospitals.

BJS instructs state prison officials to exclude 
deaths of inmates who were transferred to local 
jails while still serving a prison term because 
the DCRP obtains information about such deaths 
through the jail reports.

Identifying and excluding duplicate records
*********************************************

Duplicate and out-of-scope records are excluded 
from the analysis. Duplicate death records may 
occur in the DCRP due to overlapping correctional 
populations and overlapping duties within 
correctional facilities. For example, a state 
prison system may report the death of an inmate 
who was transferred to a local jail while serving 
a prison sentence. The death is considered part of 
the count of the correctional facility that had 
custody of the inmate at the time of death (in 
this case, the jail), and the duplicate record (in 
this case, from the prison facility) is deleted.

To identify duplicate death records, BJS 
reconciles the aggregate summary counts of deaths 
occurring during a calendar year with the number 
of individual death records obtained from a 
reporting prison system. When discrepancies are 
identified, BJS contacts reporting prison systems 
for clarification.

Cause-of-death information
******************************

DCRP respondents are instructed to report death 
information as determined by autopsy or other 
official medical death investigation. For this 
collection, intoxication deaths, accidents, 
suicides, and homicides are considered discrete 
causes of death. Although there is a distinction 
between manner and cause of death from a medico-
legal standpoint, no such distinction is made in 
the DCRP. When reporting a death due to illness, 
accident, suicide, intoxication, or homicide, BJS 
requests that respondents describe the events 
surrounding these deaths.

Clinical data specialists convert illness-related 
death text entries into standard medical codes 
from the World Health Organization’s International 
Statistical Classification of Diseases and Related 
Health Problems, Tenth Revision (ICD-10).

Homicides include all types of intentional 
homicide and involuntary manslaughter as ruled by 
a medical examiner or pathologist at autopsy. For 
example, an inmate may die of positional asphyxia 
(suffocation caused by body position) while being 
removed from a cell. A legal-intervention homicide 
committed while the inmate is trying to escape is 
included in the homicide count. Homicides also 
encompass cases that are ruled a homicide at 
autopsy when events that led to the death occurred 
prior to incarceration, such as an inmate 
previously shot in the community who later died 
from complications of the gunshot wound while in 
custody.

Other BJS sources of correctional mortality data 
**************************************************
BJS collects other data reported to the DCRP on 
prisoner mortality. These other collections 
include--

Capital punishment, which provides data on legal 
executions. Additional details on executions are 
available on the BJS website.

The National Prisoner Statistics (NPS) program 
collected counts of deaths by cause of death, 
including deaths due to execution, illness, AIDS 
(and AIDS-related causes, such as HIV), suicide, 
accident, homicide, and other causes. Detailed 
death counts were dropped in 2007. The NPS 
currently collects a total count of deaths, 
because it is a type of prison release. After 
2006, the Federal Bureau of Prisons submitted 
counts of deaths by cause of death to the DCRP, 
but discontinued submitting counts to the NPS. 
Additional details of the NPS are available on the 
BJS website.

Reported statistics
*********************

Mortality data shown in statistical tables include 
the number of deaths and mortality rates by year, 
cause of death, selected decedent characteristics, 
and the state where the death occurred.

Mortality rates are calculated per 100,000 
inmates, with the denominators providing estimates 
of the number of person-years of exposure in 
custody in institutional corrections. Until 2010, 
the mortality rate for state prisons was 
calculated as the number of deaths per year 
divided by the midyear state prison population in 
custody multiplied by 100,000. Starting in 2011, 
the rate was calculated using yearend custody 
counts because BJS shifted the reference period 
for its prison collections to December 31. For 
more information on the NPS, see the BJS website.

Denominators allow for annual mortality rates, 
which are calculated separately by group or by 
characteristic. The National Center for Health 
Statistics (NCHS) calculates crude mortality rates 
as the number of events for a period, (e.g., a 
year), divided by the population estimate at the 
midpoint of the period. For general population 
mortality statistics, the NCHS employs the midyear 
population as an approximation of the average 
population exposed to risk of death during any 
given year.***Footnote 2 See Siegal, J. & Swanson, 
D. (2004). The Methods and Materials of 
Demography, Second Edition. San Diego, CA: 
Elsevier Academic Press, 269.***

The crude mortality rates reported in the DCRP 
annual statistical tables are not directly 
comparable to the crude mortality rates of the 
non-incarcerated general population, because the 
composition of the general population (age, sex, 
and race or Hispanic origin) differs from the 
population in state prisons and federal prisons.

Preliminary 2015 numbers
***************************

The 2015 number of death is preliminary as of 
August 1, 2016. At that time, 49 of the 50 state 
departments of correction had reported both a 
summary count of deaths and provided the 
corresponding individual death records. As of 
August 1, 2016, one state had submitted a summary 
count of deaths, but was still finalizing the 
individual death records. BJS does not consider a 
submission complete until the summary count and 
the individual records have both been submitted 
and the summary and individual death counts match. 
The 2015 DCRP prison file is currently being 
finalized and is scheduled to be delivered to BJS 
in the final quarter of 2016. Final data for 2015 
is scheduled to be published in 2017.

Estimating inmate population characteristics 
to calculate mortality rates by demographic 
subgroups
*********************************************

BJS estimated the demographic distribution of the 
state prison population using the NPS and National 
Corrections Reporting Program (NCRP) collections. 
For more information on the methodology for 
obtaining state prisoner population estimates by 
age, sex, and race or Hispanic origin, see 
Prisoners in 2014 (NCJ 248955, BJS web, September 
2015).

Prior to using the NPS and NCRP to estimate 
demographic distributions, reports of mortality 
rates for state prison inmates used demographic 
distributions derived from BJS’s 2004 Survey of 
Inmates in State and Federal Correctional 
Facilities (SISFCF). As a result, the state prison 
mortality rates shown in these tables may differ 
from rates published prior to 2008. A comparison 
between the two sources showed very little 
differences in the rates. In most instances, the 
rates either matched or nearly matched. They 
differed in only three instances: Hispanics in 
2001, females in 2002, and inmates age 55 or older 
in 2002. In each case, the rates calculated using 
population data from the NCRP and NPS were 
slightly higher (by less than 1%) than those using 
population data from the SISFCF.

Moving averages
******************

Moving averages were used to smooth short-term 
irregularities and to estimate long-term trends. 
For example, moving averages were computed to 
examine data trends for certain causes of death in 
prisons while smoothing short-term fluctuations. 
The data were cut into several 2-year overlapping 
periods spanning 11 years of prison data.

The moving averages in this report describe some 
changes in cause-specific mortality rates over 
time, such as whether the overall decline in the 
AIDS-related mortality rate was steady or the 
increase of suicides in jails was recent. Moving 
averages were not computed for all causes of death 
in custody because the resultant rates would have 
been unstable and therefore statistically 
meaningless due to small cell sizes.

Random error and suppression
******************************

The DCRP data on deaths in state prisons are not 
subject to sampling error because it is a full 
enumeration of deaths. However, according to 
Brillinger and NCHS, mortality data from a 
complete enumeration may be subject to random 
error, because “the number of deaths that actually 
occurred may be considered as one of a large 
series of possible results that could have arisen 
under the same set of circumstances”—or, death 
occurs at random. ***Footnote 3 See Brillinger, 
D.R. (1986). The Natural Variability of Vital 
Rates and Associated Statistics. Biometrics, 42: 
693–734.*** ***Footnote 4 See Xu, J. et al. 
(2010). Deaths: Final Data for 2007. National 
Vital Statistics Report, 58(19). Retrieved from  
http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/nvsr/nvsr58/nvsr58_19
.pdf. The random variation can be large when the 
number of deaths is small. Therefore, caution is 
warranted when interpreting statistics based on 
small numbers of deaths. According to NCHS 
standards, mortality rates based on fewer than 100 
deaths per year should be interpreted with 
caution.

Continuing to use the NCHS and Brillinger methods, 
BJS quantified random variation by assuming that 
the appropriate underlying probability 
distribution for the number of deaths is a Poisson 
distribution. This provides a computationally 
simple and reasonable approach for estimating 
variances in mortality statistics when the 
probability of dying is low. BJS calculated 
variances based on the assumption of a Poisson 
process. From these variances, BJS calculated 
relative random error estimates, which are 
comparable to relative standard error since the 
relative random error is the ratio of random error 
derived from the Poisson variance, to the number 
of deaths. Following NCHS practice, when the 
relative random error exceeded 30%, BJS flags 
estimated mortality rates with a “!” symbol due to 
the instability of the rate (interpret with 
caution, there are too few sample cases to provide 
a reliable rate).

*************************************************
The Bureau of Justice Statistics of the U.S. 
Department of Justice is the principal federal 
agency responsible for measuring crime, criminal 
victimization, criminal offenders, victims of 
crime, correlates of crime, and the operation of 
criminal and civil justice systems at the federal, 
state, tribal, and local levels. BJS collects, 
analyzes, and disseminates reliable and valid 
statistics on crime and justice systems in the 
United States, supports improvements to state and 
local criminal justice information systems, and 
participates with national and international 
organizations to develop and recommend national 
standards for justice statistics. Jeri M. Mulrow 
is acting director.

This report was written by Margaret Noonan. Zhen 
Zeng verified the report.

Monika Potemra and Brigitte Coulton edited the 
report. Tina Dorsey and Barbara Quinn produced the 
report.

December 2016, NCJ 250150
**************************************************

**************************************************
Office of Justice Programs
Building Solutions • Supporting Communities • 
Advancing Justice
www.ojp.usdoj.gov
**************************************************

**************************
12/5/2016 JER 11:10am
*************************




