U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Programs
Bureau of Justice Statistics

-------------------------------------------------------
This file is text only without graphics and many of the
tables. A Zip archive of the tables in this report in
spreadsheet format (.csv) and the full report including
tables and graphics in .pdf format are available on BJS
website at: 
http://www.bjs.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbdetail&iid=5112

-------------------------------------------------------

Program Report

The Nation’s Two Crime Measures

Michael Planty and Lynn Langton of BJS and Cindy Barnett-Ryan, FBI.,

The U.S. Department of Justice administers two statistical programs to 
measure the magnitude, nature, and impact of crime in the nation: the 
FBI’s Uniform Crime Reporting (UCR) Program and the Bureau of Justice 
Statistic’s National Crime Victimization Survey (NCVS). Each of these 
programs produces valuable information about aspects of the nation’s 
crime problem. Because the UCR and NCVS programs have different 
purposes, use different methods, and focus on somewhat different 
aspects of crime, the complementary information they produce together 
provides a more comprehensive understanding of the nation’s crime 
problem than either could produce alone.

***************************
Uniform Crime Reports—FBI
***************************

The International Association of Chiefs of Police (IACP) began 
publishing information for the UCR Program in 1929, 2 years after the 
IACP had established a committee to research the uniform reporting of 
crime statistics. Since September 1930, the FBI has administered the 
program. The UCR Program currently collects information on murder and 
nonnegligent manslaughter, forcible rape, robbery, aggravated assault, 
burglary, larceny-theft, motor vehicle theft, arson, and human 
trafficking. Law enforcement agencies report arrest data for 22 
additional crime categories.

The UCR Program compiles data from monthly law enforcement reports or 
individual crime incident records transmitted directly to the FBI or to 
centralized agencies that then report to the FBI. The program 
thoroughly examines each report it receives for reasonableness, 
accuracy, and deviations that may indicate errors. Large variations in 
crime levels may indicate modified records procedures, incomplete 
reporting, or changes in a jurisdiction’s boundaries. To identify any 
unusual fluctuations in an agency’s crime counts, the program compares 
monthly reports to previous submissions of the agency and with those 
for similar agencies.

The UCR Program presents national crime counts, as well as counts for 
regions, states, counties, cities, towns, tribal law enforcement, and 
colleges and universities. This permits analysis among neighboring 
jurisdictions and among those with similar populations and other common 
characteristics.

The FBI annually publishes its findings in a preliminary release in the 
spring of the following calendar year, followed by a detailed annual 
report, Crime in the United States, issued in the fall. In addition to 
crime counts and trends, this report includes data on crimes cleared, 
persons arrested (age, sex, and race), law enforcement personnel, and 
the characteristics of homicides (including age, sex, and race of 
victims and offenders; victim–offender relationships; weapons used; and 
circumstances surrounding the homicides). The UCR Program also 
generates other periodic reports.

Many local and state law enforcement agencies participating in the UCR 
Program submit their data via the more comprehensive National Incident-
Based Reporting System (NIBRS). The NIBRS provides agencies the 
opportunity to submit additional details about each criminal incident 
in 23 offense categories.

****************************************
National Crime Victimization Survey—BJS
****************************************

The Bureau of Justice Statistics’ (BJS) NCVS provides a detailed 
picture of crime incidents, victims, and trends. The NCVS began in 1973 
as the National Crime Survey (NCS). In 1992, the NCS was renamed the 
NCVS to reflect a substantial redesign effort that focused primarily on 
methodological changes to the survey. The redesign improved the initial 
questions used to screen for victimization incidents, updated the 
survey methods to take advantage of new technologies, and broadened the 
scope of crimes measured. The current NCVS collects detailed 
information on the frequency and nature of the crimes of rape and other 
sexual assault, robbery, aggravated and simple assault, personal 
larceny, household burglary, motor vehicle theft, and other theft.

Each year, BJS interviews a nationally representative sample of 
approximately 169,000 persons age 12 or older living in U.S. 
households. Households remain in the sample for 3.5 years. New 
households rotate into the sample on an ongoing basis. 

The NCVS collects information on crimes experienced by individuals and 
households during the 6 months preceding the interview, whether or not 
those crimes were reported to law enforcement. A unique feature of the 
NCVS is that it collects both reported and unreported crimes and 
reasons the crime was or was not reported. The survey also captures 
specific details about each crime incident. The NCVS collects 
information about victims (such as age, sex, race, ethnicity, marital 
status, income, and educational level), offenders (such as sex, race, 
approximate age, and victim–offender relationship), and crimes 
(including time and place of occurrence, use of weapons, nature of 
injury, and economic consequences). In addition, the NCVS asks 
questions about the experiences of victims with the criminal justice 
system, self-protective measures used by victims, and possible 
substance abuse by offenders. The NCVS periodically includes additional 
questions on particular topics. Recent supplements have covered issues 
concerning school crime, identity theft, contacts between police and 
citizens, and stalking.

BJS publication of NCVS data includes Criminal Victimization, an annual 
report that covers the broad range of detailed information collected by 
the NCVS, and the NCVS Victimization Analysis Tool, an online database 
through which users can examine victimization rates, counts, and 
percentages by a range of victim and crime characteristics. BJS 
publishes detailed reports on topics such as intimate partner violence, 
workplace violence, hate crime, and crime against persons with 
disabilities. The National Archive of Criminal Justice Data at the 
University of Michigan archives the NCVS datafiles to enable 
researchers to perform independent analyses.

***************************
Comparing UCR and the NCVS
***************************

Because BJS designed the NCVS in part to complement the UCR Program, 
the two programs share many similarities. As much as their different 
collection methods permit, the two measure the same subset of serious 
crimes: rape, robbery, aggravated assault, burglary, theft, and motor 
vehicle theft. Rape, robbery, theft, and motor vehicle theft are 
defined virtually identically by both the UCR and the NCVS. (Prior to 
2013, the UCR Program measured a more limited definition of forcible 
rape against women only while the NCVS measured a broader definition of 
rape against both sexes. Now the NCVS and UCR measure rape 
analogously.)

Although they cover a set of similar crimes, the programs differ in 
significant ways. First, the programs serve different purposes. The UCR 
Program’s primary objective is to provide a reliable set of criminal 
justice statistics for law enforcement administration, operation, and 
management. BJS established the NCVS to provide previously unavailable 
information about crime (including crime not reported to police), 
victims, and offenders.

Second, the programs measure an overlapping but nonidentical set of 
crimes. The NCVS includes, but the UCR excludes, sexual assault 
(completed, attempted, and threatened), attempted robberies, verbal 
threats of rape, simple assault, and crimes not reported to law 
enforcement. The UCR includes, but the NCVS excludes, homicide, arson, 
commercial crimes, and crimes against children under age 12. The UCR 
captures crimes reported to law enforcement, but collects only arrest 
data for simple assault and sex offenses other than forcible rape.

Third, because of methodology, the NCVS and UCR definitions of some 
crimes differ. For example, the UCR defines burglary as the unlawful 
entry or attempted entry of a structure to commit a felony or theft. 
The NCVS defines burglary as the entry or attempted entry of a 
residence by a person who had no right to be there.

Fourth, for property crimes (burglary, theft, and motor vehicle theft), 
the programs calculate crime rates using different bases. The UCR rates 
for these crimes are per capita (number of crimes per 100,000 persons), 
whereas the NCVS rates for these crimes are per household (number of 
crimes per 1,000 households).

Because the number of households may not grow at the same rate each 
year as the total population, trend data for rates of property crimes 
measured by the two programs may not be comparable. In addition, some 
differences in the data from the two programs may result from sampling 
variation in the NCVS and from estimating for nonresponse in the UCR.

BJS derives the NCVS estimates from interviewing a sample. Therefore, 
estimates are subject to a margin of error. This error is known and is 
reflected in the standard error of the estimate. The UCR Program bases 
its data on the actual counts of offenses reported by law enforcement 
agencies. In some circumstances, the UCR Program estimates its data for 
nonparticipating agencies or those reporting partial data. Apparent 
statistical discrepancies between the two programs are often due to 
definitional and procedural differences or resolved when comparing NCVS 
sampling variations (i.e., confidence intervals) of crimes reported to 
police to UCR statistics.

Each program has unique strengths. The UCR provides a measure of the 
number of crimes reported to law enforcement agencies throughout the 
country. The UCR’s Supplementary Homicide Reports provide reliable, 
timely data on the extent and nature of homicides in the nation. In 
addition to providing annual point and change estimates on criminal 
victimization, the NCVS is the primary source of information on the 
characteristics of criminal victimization incidents and on the number 
and types of crimes not reported to law enforcement authorities.

By understanding the strengths and limitations of each program, the UCR 
and NCVS can be used to achieve a greater understanding of crime trends 
and the nature of crime in the United States. For example, changes in 
police procedures, shifting attitudes towards crime and police, and 
other societal changes can affect the extent to which people report and 
law enforcement agencies record crime. NCVS and UCR data can be used in 
complementary ways to explore why trends in reported and police-
recorded crime may differ.

***********************************************
The Bureau of Justice Statistics of the U.S. Department of Justice is 
the principal federal agency responsible for measuring crime, criminal 
victimization, criminal offenders, victims of crime, correlates of 
crime, and the operation of criminal and civil justice systems at the 
federal, state, tribal, and local levels. BJS collects, analyzes, and 
disseminates reliable and valid statistics on crime and justice systems 
in the United States, supports improvements to state and local criminal 
justice information systems, and participates with national and 
international organizations to develop and recommend national standards 
for justice statistics. William J. Sabol is acting director.

This report was written by Michael Planty and Lynn Langton of BJS and 
Cindy Barnett-Ryan, FBI.

Vanessa Curto and Jill Thomas edited the report. Barbara Quinn produced 
the report.

September 2014, NCJ 246832
***********************************************

************************************************
Office of Justice Programs
Innovation * Partnerships * Safer Neighborhoods
www.ojp.usdoj.gov
************************************************

**********************
8/19/2014/JER/12:05am
**********************
