U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Programs
Bureau of Justice Statistics

-------------------------------------------------------
This file is text only without graphics and many of the
tables. A Zip archive of the tables in this report in
spreadsheet format (.csv) and the full report including
tables and graphics in .pdf format are available on BJS
website at: 
http://www.bjs.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbdetail&iid=5068
-------------------------------------------------------

*******************
Program Report
*******************

***************************************
The Nation’s Two Measures of Homicide
***************************************

The United States uses two national data collection systems to track detailed 
information on homicides: the Federal Bureau of Investigation’s Supplementary 
Homicide Reports and the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention’s Fatal 
Injury Reports. Both measures were developed as part of a federal effort to 
improve national statistical systems in the early twentieth century and have 
gone through a number of changes since then to improve their consistency and 
coverage. Each program provides valuable information on the nature, trends, 
and patterns of homicides in the United States. Although the two measures 
generally capture information on the same types of events, they are designed 
for distinct purposes and collect different types of information. In 
combination, however, they produce a fairly comprehensive understanding of 
homicide, the most serious form of violence.

***************************************
Supplementary Homicide Reports
***************************************

Federal Bureau of Investigation
*********************************

Supplementary Homicide Reports (SHR) are part of the Uniform Crime Reporting 
(UCR) Program. UCR data provide important information on crime at the local, 
state, and national level for law enforcement, policymakers, researchers, and 
the public. Administered by the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) since 
1930, the UCR summary program provides data on the total number of crimes 
known to law enforcement agencies in the United States. In most states, 
reports from individual law enforcement agencies are compiled monthly by 
state-level agencies before being forwarded to the FBI.

The UCR provides aggregate annual counts of the number of homicides occurring 
in the United States. Beginning in the early 1960s, the FBI began to collect 
more detailed information on each homicide reported in the UCR aggregate 
count through the SHR form. The SHR data provide additional details about 
each homicide incident, including the jurisdiction, month, year, victim and 
offender demographic characteristics, weapon, the circumstances surrounding 
the incident (e.g., argument, robbery, gang-related), and the relationship 
between the victim and offender, if known. The detail provided on each 
incident permits the examination of specific types of homicides, 
characteristics surrounding the event, and victim-offender relationships.

The SHR form has two sections: one for all murders and nonnegligent 
manslaughters (including justifiable homicides) and one for negligent 
manslaughters. Murder and nonnegligent manslaughter homicides include cases 
that are suspected to be murders, violence-related manslaughters, law 
enforcement-related killings, and homicides committed in self-defense. 
Negligent manslaughter homicides include cases that are determined to be 
unintentional killings of one person by another (excluding motor vehicle 
crashes).

SHR data are collected on only those crimes occurring in the United States 
that come to the attention of law enforcement through citizen reports or 
observation. ***Footnote 1 Territories are not excluded from the SHR 
collection, but historically have had inconsistent participation in the UCR 
program.***  The SHR captures deaths by location of offense, and thus includes 
all homicides occurring in state and local law enforcement jurisdictions. Because 
the UCR program does not include federal law enforcement agencies, SHR data 
do not measure homicides occurring in federal prisons, on military bases, and 
on Indian reservations.***Footnote 2 Although some crimes occurring on tribal 
lands are reported to the UCR by tribal law enforcement agencies, an unknown 
proportion of more serious crimes, including homicide, fall under the 
jurisdiction of federal law enforcement and are not reported to the UCR. 
Homicides occurring on tribal lands and reported to the UCR by local law 
enforcement agencies cannot be distinguished from homicides occurring on 
nontribal lands also under the agency’s jurisdiction.*** The information 
provided on the SHR form reflects what agencies know based on their initial 
police investigation and does not reflect subsequent decisions made by 
prosecutors or courts.

Due to the voluntary nature of the FBI program, a number of law enforcement 
agencies either do not consistently submit SHR forms to the FBI or do not 
submit any at all. Historically, between 85% and 90% of all homicides 
reported in the UCR summary data also have a corresponding SHR form. 
Homicides reported through the SHR can, however, have missing information 
about various characteristics of the homicide because the data were not 
available at the time of submission or not reported by the agency. 

Approximately 1% of SHR cases are missing victim information, including the 
victim’s age, gender, and race, and approximately 30% of SHR cases have an 
unknown offender. The proportion of SHR cases that are missing information on 
the relationship between the victim and the offender has increased from 25% 
in 1976 to more than 40% since 2000. This is most likely due to the 
substantial decline in the percentage of homicides cleared since the 1960s, 
which has produced large numbers of cases with unknown offender information.

The FBI publishes data from the SHR in its annual Crime in the United States 
series. Preliminary data from the UCR are generally released 6 months after 
the reference year. SHR data are not included until after the UCR data are 
finalized, approximately 1 year after the end of the reference year.Online 
analysis with SHR data can be conducted through a web-based tool maintained 
by the Office of Juvenile Justice and Delinquency Prevention. Public use data 
are available from 1976 from the University of Michigan’s Inter-University 
Consortium for Political and Social Research (ICPSR), the FBI’s website, and 
the National Archive of Criminal Justice Data (NACJD). 

***************************************
National Vital Statistics System, 
Fatal Injury Reports
***************************************

Centers for Disease Control 
and Prevention
*********************************

Fatal Injury Reports are developed from the National Vital Statistics System 
(NVSS), which includes data derived from the registration of births and 
deaths at the state and local level. The modern system dates back to 1933 
when uniform collection and national-level reporting of birth and death 
certificates began. One public health function of the system is to permit 
identification of and public response to preventable causes of death.

The NVSS is maintained by the National Center for Health Statistics (NCHS) at 
the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). NVSS data are provided 
by vital registration systems operated in the various jurisdictions legally 
responsible for registering vital events—births, deaths, marriages, divorces, 
and fetal deaths. In the United States, legal authority for registering these 
events resides individually with the 50 states, 2 cities (Washington, D.C., 
and New York City), and 5 territories (Puerto Rico, the Virgin Islands, Guam, 
American Samoa, and the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands).

The NVSS mortality data are produced from standardized death certificates 
filed throughout the United States. The death certificate data that the NVSS 
compiles include decedent age, race, ethnicity, marital status, resident 
status, educational attainment, residence, cause of death, and the nature of 
the injuries sustained. The death certificate does not include any 
information on the suspected perpetrator of a homicide or the victim/offender 
relationship.

State laws require that a medical examiner or coroner investigate all 
homicides and other sudden unexpected deaths. In homicide cases, medical 
examiners and coroners also typically complete the medical part of the death 
certificate, including manner of death. Funeral directors complete the 
demographic and other portions through interviews with a member or friend of 
the family. The death certificates are submitted to state vital statistics 
offices and forwarded to the National Center for Health Statistics (NCHS). 
NCHS then classifies each death according to the International Classification 
of Diseases (ICD). Information on manner of death (e.g., homicide, suicide, 
unintentional) is combined with information on cause of death to classify 
deaths using ICD codes, including codes for deaths due to external causes of 
injury and poisoning.

Each year, a very small number of deaths remain without a manner of death or 
may be missing from the NVSS. It is believed that the NVSS covers 99% of the 
birth and death events in the United States. However, there are no published 
estimates on the coverage of the NVSS with regard to homicide specifically. 
Each jurisdiction maintains individual vital statistics files and sets its 
own criteria for closing those files. NCHS closes the national file after all 
states have submitted their records and all data are coded, classified, and 
standardized between states. The level of standardization and data review 
varies across states and may be dependent on state-level and annual 
variations in the number of deaths with the underlying caused coded as “other 
ill-defined and unspecified causes of mortality.” A small number of death 
certificates may not be included in the NVSS if they are filed after the NCHS 
file has closed. Some studies have examined the reliability of NVSS 
demographic data by comparing it to U.S. Census Bureau data and surveying 
funeral directors who are responsible for completing demographic information 
about the decedent. These studies have concluded that fatal injury reports 
may undercount American Indian and Alaska Native deaths by 20% to 30% and 
undercount Asian deaths by 11% to 13%. Race misclassification can be more 
likely depending on the population make up of the jurisdiction and the cause 
of death.

Data from the NVSS are typically reported according to the victim’s place of 
residence. Data on place of injury are available but not routinely reported 
in official statistics. Deaths of non-U.S. residents are also collected but 
typically not included in official statistics.

Fatal Injury Reports are published annually and are available for public use 
from the CDC website as part of the NVSS. Preliminary data are generally 
released approximately 
2 years after the end of the reference year. The site provides online 
analysis tools and customized tables, as well as annual mortality files for 
download. Publicly available data files include state-level estimates of 
fatal injury report data. The CDC regularly publishes additional reports on 
mortality that include statistics not part of the regular annual reports. 
These may include special analyses by cause of death, age, and other 
demographic variables; geographic analyses; and trend analyses.

***************************************
Comparing the SHR and the NVSS
***************************************

There is considerable overlap in homicides reported to the SHR and the NVSS 
(see table). Coroners and medical examiners often work closely with law 
enforcement on homicide cases. Thus, there is generally agreement on the 
cause of death and victim information reported to the CDC and the FBI, 
because cases are investigated and documented through collaborative efforts 
and then reported through NVSS and SHR.

Both systems follow the same rules in applying homicide labels to incidents 
and victims; however, each system has different subcategories of homicide, 
which are well-defined and can be used to identify similar types of homicides 
in the two systems. For example, the FBI classifies homicides as intentional, 
justifiable, or negligent. Homicides reported through the NVSS are classified 
according to the ICD system into two general categories: homicide or legal 
intervention. Both intentional and negligent homicides are defined as 
“homicides” in the NVSS, which makes no judgment of criminal intent. The 
legal intervention deaths in NVSS generally align with the FBI definition of 
“justifiable homicide,” while the single NVSS category of “homicide” includes 
the SHR’s two categories of intentional and negligent homicide. Unlike the 
SHR, the NVSS homicide classification includes assault by the crashing of a 
motor vehicle, but this category generally accounts for less than 100 deaths 
per year.***Footnote 3 3NVSS fatal injury data are publicly available through 
the WONDER and WISQARS systems. The WON-DER system combines legal 
intervention deaths and operations of war into the same category. The WISQARS 
system presents legal intervention deaths only, excluding the small number of 
operations of war deaths that occur in the United States each year (generally 
fewer than 25 deaths per year).***

Both systems have potential issues with data quality, which can affect the 
information’s accuracy and lead to misclassification of death incidents. Data 
quality may also be affected when records are not submitted in a timely 
manner or when the cause of death or other information is not updated as more 
accurate information becomes available. 

The NVSS consistently shows a higher number and rate of homicides in the 
United States compared to the SHR, likely due to the differences in coverage 
and scope and the voluntary versus mandatory nature of the data collection as 
described above. Despite these differences, the two sources show similar 
trends for the rate of homicides over time at the national level (see 
figure). Greater discrepancies between the two sources exist at the state 
level. Most states report more homicides through the NVSS than the SHR, yet 
in some states the opposite is true. Furthermore, the state-level ratio of 
homicides reported in the NVSS versus the SHR varies over time. State-level 
variations in reporting may be due to missing data, where cases that fall 
within the scope of the SHR or NVSS are not reported to the appropriate 
system. Variations may also be due to true differences between the homicide 
victim’s state of residence, which would be reported to the NVSS, and the 
state where the homicide incident occurred, as reported to the SHR. These 
differences may be particularly apparent in state or jurisdiction-level rate 
calculations based on the resident population. Since the NVSS is based on the 
residence of the victim, it is considered the more applicable source for 
resident-based rate calculations, while the SHR is more applicable for 
jurisdiction-based crime rates.

Unique features of each measure should be considered when using these data. 
Publicly available SHR datasets provide victim demographic information at the 
agency level, while NVSS homicide victim demographic estimates are not 
publicly avaliable.***Footnote 4 4Users may apply to the CDC to gain access 
to compressed datasets, which contain selected variables for the full 
mortality files at the county level.*** The NVSS will produce more accurate 
homicide trends at the national level than the SHR, because the NVSS includes 
deaths that occur in federal jurisdictions and more complete state and local 
jurisdiction reporting. More complete information on homicide victim 
characteristics is available through the NVSS. In particular, the NVSS 
provides more complete information about victim Hispanic origin compared to 
the SHR and includes measures of victim marital status and educational 
attainment, which are not found in the SHR. Mass homicide events are included 
in the NVSS; however, only deaths specifically labeled as a foreign terrorist 
act by the FBI are identified as such in the NVSS data and can be linked 
together. To date, this includes only the events of September 11, 2001. The 
SHR also includes mass homicide events but excludes deaths that occurred on 
September 11, 2001.

Since the SHR collects information about the offender and incident, SHR data 
are better suited for understanding the circumstances surrounding homicide 
incidents, including events leading up to the homicide, characteristics of 
the offender, and the relationship between the victim and the offender. SHR 
data are also advantageous for examining certain subtypes of homicides, 
including police and child homicides. Research on specific types of homicides 
identified by victim-offender relationship, such as those involving intimate 
partners, are possible with SHR data, but not with the NVSS data. However, 
the SHR has high proportions of homicides for which the offender is unknown 
to law enforcement, particularly for certain victim subgroups. For example, 
among male victims, the victim-offender releationship is undetermined in 
about 50% of incidents. Researchers must determine whether the data are 
appropriate for use and use caution when drawing conclusions about homicide 
offenders.

The SHR is designed to capture homicides known to law enforcement by 
jurisdiction, so SHR data can be used for research on homicides based on 
where they occurred. The NVSS collects data on both where the death occurred 
and where the victim lived, although homicide rates are typically calculated 
using place-of-residence data.

A more comprehensive understanding of homicide in the United States can 
perhaps be achieved by combining the strengths of the two data collection 
systems.

For more information about the SHR, see Crime in the United States available 
online at http://www.fbi.gov/about-us/cjis/ucr/ucr#ucr_cius; online analysis 
tool at http://ojjdp.gov/ojstatbb/ezashr/; and downloadable data files from 
http://www.icpsr.umich.edu/icpsrweb/landing.jsp and 
http://www.icpsr.umich.edu/icpsrweb/NACJD/.

For more information about mortality data in the NVSS, see 
http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/deaths.htm; online analysis tools at 
http://wonder.cdc.gov/ and http://www.cdc.gov/injury/wisqars/fatal.html; and 
downloadable data files from 
http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data_access/Vitalstatsonline.htm.

**********************************************************
The Bureau of Justice Statistics of the U.S. Department of Justice is the 
principal federal agency responsible for measuring crime, criminal 
victimization, criminal offenders, victims of crime, correlates of crime, and 
the operation of criminal and civil justice systems at the federal, state, 
tribal, and local levels. BJS collects, analyzes, and disseminates reliable 
and valid statistics on crime and justice systems in the United States, 
supports improvements to state and local criminal justice information 
systems, and participates with national and international organizations to 
develop and recommend national standards for justice statistics. William J. 
Sabol is acting director.

This report was written by Wendy Regoeczi of Cleveland State University and 
Duren Banks of Research Triangle Institute. Michael Planty and Lynn Langton 
of BJS, J. Lee Annest and Margaret Warner of the CDC, and Cynthia Barnett-
Ryan of the FBI consulted on content. Kyle Shea, BJS Intern, verified the 
report.

Jill Thomas edited the report. Barbara Quinn produced the report.

July 2014, NCJ 247060

***********************************************************
Office of Justice Programs
Innovation * Partnerships * Safer Neighborhoods
www.ojp.usdoj.gov
***********************************************************

************************
7/10/2014 JER 11:10am
************************

