U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Programs
Bureau of Justice Statistics
Bulletin

Prisoners in 2007
December 2008, NCJ 224280
----------------------------------------------------------

This file is text only without graphics and many of the
tables. A Zip archive of the tables in this report in 
spreadsheet format (.csv) and the full report including 
tables and graphics in .pdf format are available from:
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/pubalp2.htm#prisoners.

This report is one in a series. More recent editions may
be available. To view a list of all in the series go to
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/abstract/ppus07st.htm

-----------------------------------------------------------
Heather West
and William J. Sabol, Ph.D. ,
BJS Statisticians

This report presents data from the National Prisoner
Statistics program. It describes the change in the prison
population during 2007 and the characteristics of the
1,598,316 prisoners under state or federal jurisdiction on
December 31, 2007. Additionally, it provides the imprisonment
rates and age, race, gender distributions for the 1,532,817
prisoners sentenced to more than one year. It quantifies
changes in prison admissions and releases, inmates held in
custody, prison capacity, and components of the total
incarcerated population. 

Growth in the prison population slowed during 2007

At yearend 2007, federal and state correctional authorities
had jurisdiction over 1,598,316 prisoners (1,483,896 males;
114,420 females) (table 1). Jurisdiction refers to the legal
authority over a prisoner, regardless of where the prisoner
is held. After increasing 2.8% during 2006, the growth of the
prison population slowed to 1.8% during 2007. The 1.8%
increase was slower than the average annual growth witnessed
from 2000 to 2006 (2.0%). 

During 2007, the prison population increased more rapidly
than the U.S. resident population. The imprisonment rate--the
number of sentenced prisoners per 100,000 residents increased
from 501 prisoners per 100,000 U.S. residents in 2006 to 506
prisoners per 100,000 U.S. residents in 2007. From 2000
through 2007, the imprisonment rate increased from 475 per
100,000 U.S. residents to 506 per 100,000 U.S. residents.
During these seven years, the number of sentenced prisoners
increased by 15% while the general population increased by
6.4%.

As in previous years (with the exception of 2002) the
majority of the 2007 growth in the prison population occurred
during the first 6 months of the year (figure 1). From
December 31, 2006 to June 30, 2007, the prison population
increased by 1.5%, whereas from June 30, 2007 to December 31,
2007, the prison population increased 0.2%.

During 2007, the prison population increased by 27,625
prisoners. The state prison population increased by 21,053--
reaching 1,398,698 prisoners. The federal prison population
increased by 6,572--reaching 199,618 prisoners.

The prison populations in 37 jurisdictions increased during
2007. The federal prison population experienced the largest
absolute increase of 6,572 prisoners, followed by Florida (up
5,250 prisoners), Kentucky (up 2,457 prisoners) and Arizona
(up 1,945 prisoners), resulting in 58.7% of the change in the
overall prison population (table 2). Kentucky (12.3%),
Mississippi (6.5%), Florida (5.6%), West Virginia (5.6%), and
Arizona (5.4%) reported the largest percentage increases in
their prison populations. 

In the 12 months ending December 31, 2007, the prison
populations in the remaining 14 states decreased. Michigan's
(1,344) and California's (1,230) prison populations
experienced the greatest absolute decrease. Vermont (down
3.2%), Montana (down 2.8%), Michigan (down 2.6%), and New
Mexico (down 2.6%) prison populations had the largest percent
decreases. 

Rate of growth in admissions and releases slowed during 2007

During 2007, the number of sentenced prisoners (751,593)
admitted to either state or federal prison was greater than
the number who were released (725,402), a difference of
26,191 sentenced prisoners (table 3). The 0.2% increase in
admissions during 2007 was the slowest growth since yearend
2000. This growth was also slower than the average annual
increase of 2.7% witnessed from 2000 through 2007. In
addition, the 1.7% increase in releases during 2007 was the
lowest increase since yearend 2002 (0.2%) and was lower than
the average annual increase of 2.6% from 2000 through 2007. 

In 2007, federal admissions totaled 53,618 prisoners and
state admissions totaled 697,975 prisoners (table 4). New
court commitments accounted for 64.5% of all admissions,
62.4% of state admissions, and 90.8% of federal admissions
(appendix table 5). Parole violators accounted for 33.8% of
all admissions, 35.7% of state admissions, and 9.2% of
federal admissions. 

1 in every 198 U.S. residents was serving a sentence in state
or federal prison in 2007

Males accounted for most (93.1%) of the 1.5 million sentenced
prisoners under jurisdiction. Black males made up the largest
percentage of the overall sentenced population (36.3%) and
the sentenced male population (39.0%) (table 5). An estimated
471,400 white males made up 30.8% of the overall sentenced
population and 33.0% of the sentenced male population.
Hispanic males made up about a fifth of both populations. The
largest absolute number and percentage of sentenced females
were white (50,500 prisoners or 47.9%), followed by black
females (29,300 prisoners or 27.8%) and Hispanic females 
(17,600 prisoners or 16.7%).

Increases in the sentenced population resulted in higher
imprisonment rates (the number of state or federal sentenced
prisoners under state or federal jurisdiction per 100,000
U.S. residents). As of December 31, 2007, there were 506
sentenced prisoners per 100,000 U.S. residents (1 in every
198 U.S. residents) up from 501 per 100,000 at yearend 2006
(table 6). At yearend 2007, the federal imprisonment rate
reached 59 prisoners per 100,000 U.S. residents. The state
imprisonment rate reached 447 prisoners per 100,000 U.S.
residents.
 
The 2007 sentenced male imprisonment rate (955 prisoners per
100,000 U.S. residents) was almost 14 times that of the
female imprisonment rate (69 per 100,000). Black male
offenders had the highest imprisonment rate (3,138 prisoners
per 100,000 U.S. residents) of all racial groups, male or
female. This was 6.5 times the imprisonment rate of white
males and 2.5 times that of Hispanic males. Similarly, the
black female imprisonment rate (150 prisoners per 100,000
U.S. residents) was almost double the imprisonment rates for
Hispanic (79 prisoners per 100,000) and 3 times the rate for
white females (50 per 100,000). 

Black imprisonment rates have decreased since 2000

Between 2000 and 2007, the number of sentenced prisoners
under state or federal jurisdiction increased by an estimated
201,500 prisoners (table 7). The increase of about 69,500
white males resulted in 34.5% of the overall change. Almost a
third of the growth (29.1%) resulted from the increase of
about 58,600 Hispanic males, followed by an estimated
increase of 24,500 sentenced black males (12.2% of the
overall increase). White women accounted for 8.4% of the
overall change, and Hispanic females for about 2.2%. The
number of imprisoned black females declined by approximately
2,900 during this period.

In 2000, Hispanic males comprised 18.2% of the sentenced male
population. At yearend 2007, this percentage had increased to
19.7%. The percentage of white males also increased slightly
from 30.2% to 30.8% while the percentage of black males
decreased from 40.0% to 36.3%.

White females made up 2.5% of the total prison population in
2000 and 3.3% in 2007. During the same periods, the
percentage of the prison population made up of black females
decreased from 2.4% to 1.9%. The Hispanic female prison
population was fairly stable, comprising 1.0% of all
sentenced prisoners in 2000 and 1.1% in 2007. 

While the imprisonment rates for most groups increased during
the past 7 years, the imprisonment rates for black males and
black females decreased. At yearend 2000, the black male
imprisonment rate was 3,188 prisoners per 100,000 U.S.
residents. White men were imprisoned at a rate of 410
prisoners per 100,000 U.S. residents. By yearend 2007, the
black male imprisonment rate had decreased to 3,138 prisoners
per 100,000 U.S. residents, while the white male imprisonment
rate increased to 481 prisoners per 100,000 U.S. residents.
These changes resulted in a decrease in the ratio of
imprisoned black men to imprisoned white men. In 2000 the
ratio was 8 to 1 and in 2007 the ratio was 7 to 1. 

The ratio of the black female imprisonment rate to white
female imprisonment rate also decreased. The imprisonment
rate for black females dropped from 175 prisoners per 100,000
U.S. residents at yearend 2000 to 150 prisoners per 100,000
at yearend 2007. The white female imprisonment rate increased
from 33 prisoners per 100,000 U.S. residents to 50 prisoners
per 100,000. These changes resulted in a decreased in the
ratio of imprisoned black females to imprisoned white
females. The ratio at yearend 2007 was 3 to 1. In 2000 the
ratio was 5 to 1.

Trends in imprisonment rates, 2000-2007 

From 2000 to 2007, the imprisonment rate increased from 478
prisoners per 100,000 U.S. residents to 506 residents per
100,000. Imprisonment rate refers to the number of prisoners
sentenced to more than one year, under state or federal
jurisdiction, per 100,000 U.S. residents. State (37 states)
and federal imprisonment rates increased between yearend 2000
and yearend 2007. States with the largest increases during
these years were Kentucky (up by 139 prisoners per 100,000
residents), West Virginia (up by 123 prisoners per 100,000),
Alaska (up by 106 prisoners per 100,000), and Indiana (up by
91 prisoners per 100,000) (figure 2). The sentenced
jurisdiction populations of these four states also increased
during these years. With the exception of Alaska, the general
populations of these states increased only slightly.

During the same time period, the imprisonment rates in 12
states decreased. New York experienced the largest decrease
of 62 prisoners per 100,000 residents, followed by Texas,
down 61 prisoners per 100,000 residents, and New Jersey, down
54 prisoners per 100,000 residents. The sentenced prison
populations in New York and New Jersey declined during this
period. In Texas the prison population increased from 2000 to
2007, while the state resident population increased at a
faster rate, leading to the decline in the imprisonment rate.
Kansas was the only state in which there was no change in the
imprisonment rate.

Number of inmates in custody reached nearly 2.3 million

As of December 31, 2007, there were 2,293,157 inmates held in
custody in state and federal prisons and in local jails.
Custody comprises all inmates held in state or federal public
prisons or local jails, regardless of sentence length or the
state having jurisdiction.***The total custody count does not
include inmates held in U.S. territories, military
facilities, U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement 
facilities, jails in Indian Country, and juvenile
facilities.*** This 1.5% increase during 2007 was slightly
smaller than the rate of growth in the jurisdiction and
sentenced populations (table 8). Two-thirds of inmates in
custody (1,512,576 inmates) were held in state or federal
prisons. The remaining third (780,581 inmates) were being
held in local jails. 

During 2007, the incarceration rate rose to 756 inmates per
100,000 U.S. residents--up from 751 per 100,000 in
2006.***2Incarceration rate refers to the number of inmates
held in the custody of state or federal prisons or in local
jails per 100,000 U.S. residents.*** At yearend 2007, 1 in
every 132 persons in the United States was held in custody.

States increased prison capacity during 2007

State and federal correctional authorities provide three
measures of their facilities' capacity:

Rated capacity is the number of beds or inmates assigned by a
rating official to institutions within the jurisdiction.

Operational capacity is the number of inmates that can be
accommodated based on a facility's staff, existing programs,
and services.

Design capacity is the number of inmates that planners or
architects intended for the facility.

Highest capacity is the sum of the maximum number of beds and
inmates reported by the states or federal system across the
three capacity measures, and the lowest capacity is the
minimum of these three measures. Estimates of prison
populations as a percentage of capacity are based on the
custody population. In general, a state's capacity and
custody counts exclude inmates held in private facilities.
Some states include prisoners held in private facilities as
part of the capacity of their prison systems. In these
states, prison population as a percent of capacity includes
private prisoners. 

At yearend 2007, the federal system reported a capacity 
of 122,461 beds. The highest capacity reported by states was
1,280,037 and the lowest capacity was 1,091,934 (table
9).***Capacity numbers for Illinois, Maine, and Nevada are
based on capacity reported at yearend 2006.*** States
operated at 96% of their highest capacity and 113% of their
lowest reported capacity. Since yearend 2006, highest
capacity has increased by 2.1% and lowest capacity by 1.6%. 

During 2007, 19 states and the federal system were operating
at more than 100% of highest capacity. An equal number of
states (19) operated in a range between 90% and 99% of
capacity. The federal system was operating 36% above
capacity. 

The total incarcerated population reached 2.4 million 

At yearend 2007, the total incarcerated population reached
2,413,112 inmates (table 10). The total incarcerated
population comprises all inmates held in custody in state or
federal public prisons, local jails, U.S. territories,
military facilities, U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement
(ICE) facilities, jails in Indian country, and juvenile
facilities. The majority (62.7%) of these inmates were held
in state or federal correctional facilities. Another 32.3% of
these inmates were held in local jails. A very small
percentage (5.0%) were divided among territorial, U.S.
Immigration and Customs Enforcement, military and juvenile
facilities, and jails in Indian country.

During 2007, the incarcerated populations decreased in
military facilities (7.7%), and territorial prisons (3.5%).
The largest absolute decrease occurred in territorial prisons
(527 inmates), followed by the decrease in military
facilities (150). 

Other available information

The following topics are detailed in appendix tables 1-19,
following Methodology:

Appendix table 1. Male prisoners under jurisdiction of state
or federal correctional authorities

Appendix table 2. Female prisoners under jurisdiction of
state or federal correctional authorities

Appendix table 3. Number of sentenced prisoners under the
jurisdiction of state or federal correctional authorities

Appendix table 4. Number of sentenced prisoners admitted and
released from state or federal jurisdiction, by region and
jurisdiction

Appendix table 5. Number of sentenced prisoners admitted and
released from state or federal jurisdiction, by type

Appendix table 6. Imprisonment rates of sentenced prisoners
under the jurisdiction of state or federal correctional
authorities, by region, and jurisdiction

Appendix table 7. Estimated number of persons under state or
federal jurisdiction, by gender, race, Hispanic origin, and
age

Appendix table 8. Estimated number of persons held in state
or federal jurisdiction per 100,000 U.S. residents, by
gender, race, Hispanic origin, and age

Appendix table 9. Imprisonment rates of sentenced male and
female prisoners under the jurisdiction of state or federal
correctional authorities, by gender

Appendix table 10. Estimated number of sentenced prisoners
under state jurisdiction, by offense, gender, race, and
Hispanic origin

Appendix table 11. Estimated percent of sentenced prisoners
under state jurisdiction, by offense, gender, race, and
Hispanic origin

Appendix table 12. Number of sentenced prisoners in federal
prisons by most serious offense

Appendix table 13. Number of state and federal prisoners
under jurisdiction housed in private facilities

Appendix table 14. Number of state and federal prisoners
under jurisdiction housed in local jails

Appendix table 15. Reported state and federal prison
capacities

Appendix table 16. Prisoners in custody of correctional
authorities in the U.S. territories and commonwealths

Appendix table 17. Prisoners under military jurisdiction, by
branch of service

Appendix table 18. Number of detainees held by U.S.
Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE), by facility type

Appendix table 19. Number of detainees held in custody by
U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement authorities, by
offense type
-----------------------------------------------------------
Detailed information is available in appendix tables in the
online version of this report on the BJS website at
<http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/BJS/pub/pdf/p07.pdf>.
------------------------------------------------------------


Methodology

National Prisoner Statistics

Begun in 1926 under a mandate from Congress, the National
Prisoner Statistics (NPS) program collects statistics on
prisoners at midyear and yearend. The Census Bureau serves as
the data collection agent for Bureau of Justice Statistics
(BJS). BJS depends entirely on the voluntary participation by
states' departments of corrections and the Federal Bureau of
Prisons for NPS data.

The NPS distinguishes between prisoners in custody and
prisoners under jurisdiction. To have custody of a prisoner,
a state or federal prison must hold that prisoner in one of
its facilities. To have jurisdiction over a prisoner, a state
or federal prison must have legal authority over the
prisoner. Some states are unable to provide counts that
distinguish between custody and jurisdiction.

The NPS jurisdiction counts include prisoners serving a
sentence within a jurisdiction's facilities, including
prisons, penitentiaries, correctional facilities, halfway
houses, boot camps, farms, training/treatment centers, and
hospitals. They include prisoners who are:

 * temporarily absent (less than 30 days), out to court, or
on work release

 * housed in privately-operated facilities, local jails, or
other state or federal facilities

 * serving concurrent sentences for more than one
correctional authority.

The NPS custody counts include all inmates held within a
respondent's facilities, including inmates housed for other
correctional authorities. The custody counts exclude inmates
held in local jails and in other facilities. With a few
exceptions for several respondents, the NPS custody counts
exclude inmates held in privately-operated facilities.

Additionally NPS data include counts of inmates in combined
jail-prison systems in Alaska, Connecticut, Delaware, Hawaii,
Rhode Island, and Vermont. NPS prisoner counts have excluded
prisoners held by the District of Columbia. Since yearend
2001 the District of Columbia has operated only a jail
system. Prisoners sentenced under the District of Columbia
criminal code are housed in federal facilities.

Ratio estimates were used to generate the jurisdiction counts 
for gender and sentenced individuals in Illinois during 2007
using data provided in 2006. Yearend 2007 data were not
received from Illinois Department of Corrections.

Maine and Nevada were not able to provide data for December
31, 2007. Estimates were calculated using ratio
estimates. All numbers were reviewed and approved by
individuals at the respective departments of corrections. 

For more information about the NPS data collection
instruments, see:
<http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/correct.htm#nps>.

Military Corrections Statistics

BJS obtains yearend counts of prisoners in the custody of
U.S. military authorities from the Department of Defense
Corrections Council. In 1994, the council, composed of
representatives from each branch of military service, adopted
a standardized report (DD Form 2720) with a common set of
items and definitions. This report obtains data on persons
held in U.S. military confinement facilities inside and
outside of the continental United States, by branch of
service, gender, race, Hispanic origin, conviction status,
sentence length, and offense. It also provides data on the
number of facilities and their design and rated capacities.

Other inmate counts

In 1995, BJS began collecting yearend counts of inmates from
the departments of corrections in the U.S. Territories
(American Samoa, Guam, and the U.S. Virgin Islands) and U.S.
Commonwealths (Northern Mariana Islands and Puerto Rico).
These counts include all inmates for whom the territory or
commonwealth had legal authority (jurisdiction) and all
inmates in physical custody (held in prison or local jail
facilities). The counts are collected by gender, race,
Hispanic origin, and sentence length. In addition, BJS
obtains reports on the design, rated, and operational
capacities of these correctional facilities. 

BJS obtains yearend counts of persons detained by U.S.
Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE), formerly the U.S.
Immigration and Naturalization Service, an agency within the
Department of Homeland Security. ICE holds persons for
immigration violations in federal, state, and locally
operated prisons and jails, as well as in 
privately-operated facilities under exclusive contract and
ICE-operated facilities. 

Data on the number of inmates held in the custody of local
jails are from the BJS Annual Survey of Jails (ASJ). The ASJ
provides data on inmates in custody at midyear. For more
information about the ASJ, see Methodology in Jail Inmates at
Midyear 2007. See
<http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/abstract/jim07.htm>.

Data on federal prisoners are obtained from BJS' Federal
Justice Statistics Program (FJSP). The FJSP obtains data from
the Federal Bureau of Prisons. These data include
individual-level records of prisoners in federal facilities
as of September 30. Specifically the FJSP provides counts of
sentenced federal inmates by gender, race, Hispanic origin,
and offense.

Estimates of juvenile inmates for 2007 are based on average
annual change from 2003 to 2006 as reported by the Office of
Juvenile Justice and Delinquency Prevention (OJJDP), Office
of Justice Programs, U.S. Department of Justice.

Estimating age-specific imprisonment rates

Estimates are provided for the number of sentenced prisoners
under state or federal jurisdiction by gender. Further,
within genders, prisoners are characterized by age group,
race (non-Hispanic white and non-Hispanic black), and
Hispanic origin. The detailed race and Hispanic origin
categories exclude estimates of persons identifying two or
more races.

For 2000 and 2007, estimates were produced separately for
prisoners under state and federal jurisdiction, and then
combined to obtain a total estimated population. State 
estimates were prepared by combining information about the
gender of prisoners from the NPS with information on
self-reported race and Hispanic origin from the 2005 Survey
of Inmates of State Correctional Facilities.

For the estimates of federal prisoners, the distributions of
FJSP counts of sentenced federal prisoners by gender, age,
race, and Hispanic origin on September 30, 2007, were applied
to the NPS counts of sentenced federal prisoners by gender at
yearend 2007. 

Estimates of the U.S. resident population for January 1,
2008, by age, gender, race, and Hispanic origin, were 
generated by applying the December 31, 2007 age distributions
within gender, race, and Hispanic origin groups to the
January 1, 2008 population estimates by gender. The
population estimates were provided by the U.S. Census Bureau.
 
Age-specific rates of imprisonment for each demographic group
were calculated by dividing the estimated number of sentenced
prisoners within each age group by the estimated number of
U.S. residents in each age group. That number was multiplied
by 100,000, and then rounded to the nearest whole number.
Gender totals include all prisoners and U.S. residents
regardless of racial or Hispanic origin. Imprisonment rates
for detailed race and Hispanic origin groups exclude persons
identifying two or more races.

NPS jurisdiction notes

Alaska Prisons and jails form one integrated system. All NPS
data include jail and prison populations housed in-state and
out of state. Jurisdictional counts exclude inmates held in
local jails that are operated by communities. 

Arizona Population counts are based on custody data and
inmates in contracted beds.

California Jurisdiction counts include felons and unsentenced
inmates who are temporarily absent, i.e., housed in local
jails, hospitals, etc. 

Colorado Counts include 211 inmates in the Youthful Offender
System, which was established primarily for violent juvenile
offenders. 

Capacity figures exclude seven privately run facilities under
contract with the Department of Corrections.

Delaware Prisons and jails form one integrated system. All
NPS data include jail and prison populations. 
Federal Custody counts include inmates housed in secure
facilities where the BOP contracted directly with a private
operator or subcontracted with a private provider at a local
government facility. Custody includes inmates held in
non-secure privately-operated community corrections centers,
e.g., halfway houses, and on home confinement. 

Florida Counts are not comparable to last year due to new
methods of data collection by Florida correctional officials.

Georgia Counts are based on custody data.

Hawaii Prisons and jails form one integrated system. All NPS
data include jail and prison populations. 

Illinois Data for 2007 were not received. All data for
December 31, 2007 are based on ratio estimates using NPS 1b
data from 2005. Population counts are based on jurisdiction
data. Counts of inmates with a sentence of more than a year
include an undetermined number of inmates with a sentence of
less than a year. These estimates will be updated upon
receipt of data.

Iowa Population counts are based on custody data. Population
counts for inmates with a sentence of more than a year
include an undetermined number of inmates with a sentence of
less than a year and unsentenced inmates. Iowa does not
differentiate between these groups in its data system. Due to
a change in reporting in 2006, out of state inmates have been
included in jurisdiction counts.

Kansas Admission and release data are based on the custody
population. Due to a new, electronic reporting system, 2007
admission and release data are not comparable to previous
years' counts. 

Louisiana Counts are as of December 27, 2007. Counts include
15,789 males and 1,289 females housed in local jails as a
result of a partnership with the Louisiana Sheriffs'
Association and local authorities. Custody and jurisdiction
counts include evacuees from Hurricane Katrina and other
pre-trial offenders from Orleans and Jefferson parish jails.
Due to the effects of Hurricane Katrina, Orleans and
Jefferson parish prison capacities are down. Therefore, local
jail population is down from the 2004 counts. 

Maine Data for 2007 were not available at the time of
publication. Estimates based on 2006 numbers were used for
all tables. These estimates will be updated upon receipt of
data.

Maryland The number of prisoners listed with their race as
"unknown" has increased due to changes in the information
system.

Massachusetts By law, offenders may be sentenced to terms of
up to 2 years and 6 months in locally-operated jails and
correctional institutions. Such populations are included in
counts and rates for local jails and correctional
institutions. About 6,200 inmates with sentences of more than
one year were held in local jails. Jurisdiction and custody
counts include an undetermined number of inmates who were
remanded to court, transferred to the custody of another
state, federal, or locally-operated system, and subsequently
released. 

NPS jurisdiction notes

Minnesota Counts include inmates temporarily housed in local
jails or private contract facilities, or on work release and
community work crew programs. 

Mississippi Operational and design capacities include private
prison capacities.

Missouri Design capacities are not available for older
prisons. Operational capacity is defined as the number of
available beds including those temporarily offline. Missouri
Department of Corrections does not have updated design
capacity for prison extensions or improvements.

Montana Population counts include a small number of inmates
with unknown sentence lengths. 
Capacity figures include two county operated regional prisons
(an estimated 300 beds), one private prison (500 beds), and a
state operated boot camp (60 beds).

In 2006, the Department of Corrections changed the method of
accounting for community corrections offenders placed in
residential treatment programs. To track growth patterns, a
new standard process was applied to historic populations
which resulted in some changes to previous years' counts.

Nevada Due to a system conversion, data for 2007 were
calculated with ratio estimates, and are based on 2006
numbers. All estimates were reviewed by individuals at the
Nevada Department of Corrections.

New Jersey Counts of inmates with a sentence of more than a
year include an undetermined number of inmates with sentences
of just a year. The Department of Corrections has no
jurisdiction over inmates with sentences of less than a year
or over unsentenced inmates. 

Rated capacity figures are not maintained.

North Carolina Capacity figures refer to standard operating
capacity, based on single occupancy per cell and 50 square
feet per inmate in multiple occupancy units.

Ohio Counts of inmates with a sentence of more than a year
include an undetermined number of inmates with sentences of a
year or less.

Oklahoma Population counts for inmates with sentences of less
than a year consist mainly of offenders ordered by the court
to the Delayed Sentencing Program for Young Adults pursuant
to 22 O.S. 996 through 996.3. 

As of November 4, 1998, Oklahoma has one type of capacity,
which includes state prisons, private prisons, and contract
jails.

Oregon Counts include an undetermined number of inmates with
sentences of a year or less. County authorities retain
jurisdiction over the majority of these types of inmates.

Pennsylvania As of May 31, 2004, the Department of
Corrections began using a new capacity reporting system based
on design as well as other crucial factors such as facility
infrastructure, support services, and programming.

Rhode Island Prisons and jails form one integrated system.
All NPS data include jail and prison populations.

South Carolina Population counts include 36 inmates who were
unsentenced, under safekeeping, or ICC status. As of July 1,
2003, South Carolina Department of Corrections (SCDC) began
releasing inmates due for release and housed in SCDC
institutions on the 1st day of each month. Because January 1,
2008 was a holiday, inmates eligible for release on January 1
were released on December 31, 2007. Therefore, the inmate
count was at its lowest point for the month on December 31,
2007.

Texas Jurisdiction counts include inmates serving time in a
pre-parole transfer (PPT) or intermediary sanctions facility
(ISF), substance abuse felony punishment facility (SAFPF),
private facilities, halfway houses, temporary releases to
counties, and paper-ready inmates in local jails.

Vermont Prisons and jails form one integrated system. All NPS
data include jail and prison populations. Improved methods
were used to measure admissions and releases. Admission and
release data for 2006 and 2007 are not comparable.

Virginia Jurisdiction counts are as of December 28, 2007.
Rated capacity is the Department of Corrections' count of
beds, which takes into account the number of inmates that can
be accommodated based on staff, programs, services and
design.

Washington A recently revised law allows increasing numbers
of certain inmates with sentences of less than a year to be
housed in prison.

Wisconsin Operational capacity excludes contracted local
jails, federal and other state and private facilities. 

The Bureau of Justice Statistics is the statistical agency of
the U.S. Department of Justice.  Michael D. Sinclair is the
acting director.  

BJS Bulletins present the first release of findings from
permanent data collection programs.

The Bulletin was written by Heather C. West and William J.
Sabol, Ph.D. Todd Minton verified the report and provided
statistical support.

Steve Simoncini carried out the data collection and
processing under the supervision of Charlene M. Sebold,
Governments Division, Census Bureau, U.S. Department of
Commerce.  Duane H. Cavanaugh provided technical assistance.  

Catherine Bird edited the report. Tina Dorsey and Georgette
Walsh produced the report.  Jayne E. Robinson prepared the
report for final printing under the supervision of Doris J.
James.

December 2008, NCJ 224280

This report in portable document format (includes 19 appendix
tables) and in ASCII and its related statistical data are
available at the BJS World Wide Web Internet site:
<http://www. ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/abstract/p07.htm>.

Office of Justice Programs
Innovation   Partnerships   Safer Neighborhoods
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov

2/13/2009/tld

