U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Programs
Bureau of Justice Statistics

Bulletin

Prisoners in 2008
December 2009   NCJ 228417

------------------------------------------------------------

This file is text only without graphics and many of the
tables. A Zip archive of the tables in this report in
spreadsheet format (.csv) and the full report including
tables and graphics in .pdf format are available from:
http://bjs.ojp.usdoj.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbdetail&iid=1763

This report is one in a series. More recent editions may be
available. To view a list of all in the series go to
http://bjs.ojp.usdoj.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbse&sid=40

------------------------------------------------------------

William J. Sabol, Ph.D., and
Heather C. West, Ph.D., BJS Statisticians 
Matthew Cooper, BJS Intern

At yearend 2008, federal and state correctional authorities
had jurisdiction over 1,610,446 prisoners (figure 1).
Jurisdiction refers to the legal authority over a prisoner,
regardless of where the prisoner is held. 

The prison population increased by 12,201 prisoners from 2007
to 2008, the smallest annual increase since 2000. The 0.8%
growth during 2008 was the second year of decline in the rate
of growth and the slowest growth in eight years. From 2000 to
2008 the growth of the prison population (1.8% per year on
average) was less than a third of the rate observed during
the 1990s (6.5% per year on average) (not shown in figure).

State correctional authorities had jurisdiction over
1,409,166 prisoners at yearend 2008, an increase of 10,539
state prisoners during the year. Federal correctional
authorities (or the federal prison system) had jurisdiction
over 201,280 prisoners, up 1,662 federal prisoners from the
previous year. While the numbers of state and federal
prisoners reached all-time yearend highs in 2008, the
respective growth rates for each slowed to 0.8% (figure 2).
This was the second smallest annual rate of growth in the
state prison population (0.1% growth occurred in 2001) and
the lowest rate for the federal prison population since 2000. 

Detailed information is included in the appendix tables, 
following Methodology. Topics covered in the appendix tables
are shown on page 13. 

---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Highlights

*The U.S. prison population grew at the slowest rate (0.8%)
since 2000, reaching 1,610,466 sentenced prisoners at yearend
2008. 

*Growth of the prison population since 2000 (1.8% per year on
average) was less than a third of the average annual rate
during the 1990s (6.5% per year on average).

*Slower growth in the state prison population was associated
with fewer new court commitments during 2007 and 2008,
reversing the trend of steady growth of state prison
admissions witnessed from 2000 to 2006.

*An increase in the number of prison releases was led by
offenders released to the community without supervision.

*Between 2000 and 2008 the number of blacks in prison
declined by 18,400, lowering the imprisonment rate to 3,161
men and 149 women per 100,000 persons in the U.S. resident
black population. 

*The U.S. imprisonment rate declined for the second time
since yearend 2000; about 1 in every 198 persons in the U.S.
resident population was incarcerated in state or federal
prison at yearend 2008. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------

Twenty states reported a decline in the number of prisoners
under their jurisdiction in 2008 for a total decrease of
9,719 prisoners (appendix table 2). New York (down 2,273
prisoners), Georgia (down 1,537), and Michigan (down 1,495)
reported the largest reductions, accounting for more than
half (54.6%) of the decline in the total number of prisoners.
New York (down 3.6%) recorded the largest rate of decrease in
its prison population during 2008, followed by Kentucky (down
3.3%), and New Jersey (down 3.3%). 

Twenty-nine states and the federal prison system reported a
combined increase of 21,920 prisoners at yearend.
Pennsylvania (up 4,178 prisoners) and Florida (up 4,169) had
the largest increases, followed by Arizona (1,843), the
federal prison system (1,662), and North Carolina (1,512).
Combined, these five jurisdictions accounted for 61% of the
growth among jurisdictions holding more prisoners at yearend.
Pennsylvania also reported the fastest rate of growth (up
9.1%) for 2008. 

Selected characteristics of the prison population under state
and federal jurisdiction

*Men were 93% of prisoners under state or federal
jurisdiction, and women were 7% (table 1). 

*About 34% of all sentenced prisoners were white, 38% were
black, and 20% were Hispanic.

*Males were incarcerated at a rate about 15 times higher than
females (table 2). 

*Black males were incarcerated at a rate six and half times
higher than white males.

Slower growth in the state prison population associated with
fewer new court commitments

Several factors contributed to slowing the growth of the
state and federal prison populations from 2006 to 2008,
including a decrease in the number of prison admissions, a
decline in the number of new court commitments to state
prison, and an increase in the number released from both
state and federal prison. Prison admissions have declined for
the past two years as the number of admissions dropped by
about 6,923 sentenced offenders during 2007 and by 3,743
prisoners during 2008 (table 3). 

The number of offenders released from state and federal
prisons rose by 2.0% to reach 735,454 prisoners while the
number of admissions declined by 0.5% (down 3,743).

Among the states, admissions and releases of sentenced
prisoners have converged since 2006 as admissions declined
and releases of state prisoners increased (figure 3). In
2008, 30 states reported a decrease in prisons admissions,
totaling 19,019 prisoners. The remaining 20 states reported
an increase in prison admissions, totalling 15,783 prisoners.
Four states accounted for 40.7% of the total decrease in
prison admissions from 2007 to 2008 (appendix table 11).
Georgia (down 2,509) reported the largest absolute decrease,
followed by Mississippi (down 1,841), Kansas (down 1,408),
and Washington (down 1,229). 

Fewer new court commitments to state prison accounted for the
declining number of state prison admissions in 2007 and 2008,
reversing the trend in the increasing number of state prison
admissions observed from 2000 to 2006 (figure 4).***Footnote
1 New court commitments include felony offenders sentenced to
state prison and probation violators entering prison for the
first time on a violation of a condition of probation. Parole
violators include any conditionally released parolee admitted
to prison either for a technical violation of the conditions
of supervision or for a new crime.*** The number of new court
commitments to state prison dropped by 10,587 in 2007 and
2,189 in 2008 as the total number of state prison admissions
declined by 3,046 and 3,787, respectively. The number of
parole violators admitted to state prison increased during
2008 at a slower rate than during the previous two years,
offsetting some of the effect of the decline in new court
commitments on the total number of state prison admissions.

Number and rate of prison releases increased in 2008 
The number of offenders released from state and federal
prisons increased by 2% (or 14,293 releases) during 2008 to
reach 735,454. In total, 29 states and the federal system
reported increases in the number of prison releases totaling
23,524 offenders. This increase was offset by a total
decrease of 9,034 releases in the remaining 21 states
(appendix table 11). The increase in the number of prison
releases was led by an 8% (or 16,883 releases) increase in
the number of prisoners released unconditionally during 2008.
***Footnote 2 Unconditional releases include expirations of
sentence, commutations, and other unconditional releases.***

Unconditional releases from state prisons accounted for 91%
of the increase in the total number of prisoners released
unconditionally (not shown in a table). During 2008 the
number released unconditionally from state prisons increased
by about 13,000 (or 8.5%), while conditional releases from
state prisons increased by fewer than 1,000 (or about 0.2%)
(table 4).***Footnote 3 Conditional releases include releases
to probation, supervised mandatory release, and other
unspecified conditional releases.*** As a result of the
increase in unconditional releases from state prisons, the
share of all state prison admissions accounted for by
unconditional releases reached 24% in 2008, a higher share
than any year since 2000. 

Slower growth in the prison population since 2000 was
associated with a decline in the number of sentenced black
prisoners 

A decrease in the number of sentenced black offenders has
been associated with slower growth in the size of the state
and federal prison populations. The number of imprisoned
blacks has declined by about 18,400 since yearend 2000,
reducing the total number of blacks in prison to about
591,900 at yearend 2008 (table 5). Conversely, the numbers of
sentenced white and Hispanic offenders have increased since
2000. the number of imprisoned whites has risen by 57,200
since 2000 to reach 528,200 at yearend 2008. The total number
of imprisoned Hispanics rose by 96,200 to reach 313,100
during this period.

A decrease in the black imprisonment rates accompanied the
decline in the number of imprisoned black offenders (table
6). Between 2000 and 2008 the imprisonment rate for black men
decreased from 3,457 per 100,000 in the U.S. resident
population to 3,161, and the imprisonment rate for black
women declined from 205 per 100,000 in the U.S. resident
population to 149. For Hispanic men the imprisonment rate
remained relatively steady at about 1,200 per 100,000 in the
U.S. resident population during this period. For white men
the imprisonment rate increased from 449 per 100,000 in the
U.S. resident population in 2000 to 487 per 100,000 in 2008.
 
The decline in the black imprisonment rate since 2000 means
that an estimated 61,000 fewer blacks were in state or
federal prisons than expected at yearend 2008 if the
imprisonment rate for blacks had remained at its 2000 level
(not shown in table). In contrast, the increase in the
imprisonment rate for whites resulted in about 54,000 more
sentenced white prisoners at yearend 2008 than expected if
their rate of imprisonment had remained unchanged since 2000.
The number of imprisoned Hispanics and the Hispanic U.S.
resident population experienced about the same rates of
growth from 2000 to 2008. Consequently, there was relatively
little difference (3,600) between the number of sentenced
Hispanics who would have been in prison in 2008 if the
Hispanic imprisonment rate had remained at its 2000 level. 

Fewer blacks imprisoned for drug offenses accounted for most
of the decline in the number of sentenced blacks in state
prison 

From 2000 to 2006 (the most recent offense data available),
the total number of sentenced offenders in state prisons
increased by 124,700 to reach 1,331,100 state prisoners.
Offenders convicted of a violent offense accounted for 63% of
the growth in the state prison population; offenders
convicted of a drug offense accounted for about 12% (table
7). The number of sentenced blacks in state prisons fell to
508,700 in 2006, declining by 53,300 prisoners since 2000.
More than half of this decline (56%) was made up of 29,600
fewer blacks imprisoned for drug offenses. 

The number of sentenced white and Hispanic prisoners
convicted of a drug offense increased from 2000 to 2006,
offsetting the decline in the number of imprisoned black drug
offenders. Imprisoned white drug offenders increased by
13,800 prisoners during this period; the number of Hispanic
drug offenders increased by 10,800. Consequently, the overall
number of sentenced drug offenders in state prison increased
by 14,700 prisoners.

Changes in the types of drugs involved in drug offenses could
not be identified in the available data. BJS's most recent
survey focusing on the types of drugs involved in drug
offenses was conducted in 2004. The data collected through
inmate interviews revealed an increase in the percentage of
state prisoners serving time for drug law violations
involving stimulants, such as methamphetamines. About 10% of
the drug offenders in state prison in 2004 were convicted of
a drug offense involving stimulants, up from 10% in 1997.
Additionally, the percentage of state prisoners convicted of
a cocaine-related drug offense declined from 72% in 1997 to
62% in 2004.***Footnote 4 See Drug Use and Dependence, State
and Federal Prisoners, 2004 available online at
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/abstract/dudsfp04.htm (last
accessed October 16, 2009).***

The U.S. imprisonment rate decreased for the second time
since yearend 2000

The imprisonment rate at yearend 2008 was 504 per 100,000
U.S. residents, a decrease from 506 per 100,000 at yearend
2007 (appendix table 10). About 1 in every 198 persons in the
U.S. resident population was incarcerated in state or federal
prison at yearend 2008. Imprisonment rate refers to the
number of prisoners sentenced to more than 1 year per 100,000
U.S. residents. 

A decrease in the imprisonment rate resulted from a lower
rate of growth in the sentenced prison population (0.5%
increase) than in the U.S. resident population (0.8%
increase). This was the second decline in the U.S.
imprisonment rate since 2000. 

Twenty-eight states reported a decrease in their imprisonment
rates, 20 states reported an increase, and two states
reported no change to their imprisonment rates at yearend
2008 (figure 5). Massachusetts and Texas (both down 31
prisoners per 100,000 U.S. residents) reported the largest
declines in their imprisonment rates. Pennsylvania (up 28
prisoners per 100,000), Florida (up 21 prisoners per
100,000), and Alabama (up 19 prisoners per 100,000) reported
the largest increases in their imprisonment rates at yearend.
 
Selected characteristics of the custody population at yearend
2008

On December 31, 2008--

*State and federal prisons and local jails had custody or
physical guardianship over 2,304,115 inmates, an increase of
0.3% from yearend 2007 (table 8).
 
*About 1 in every 133 U.S. residents was in custody of state
or federal prisons or local jails. 

*The incarceration rate the number of inmates held in custody
of state or federal prisons or in local jails per 100,000
U.S. residents decreased to 754 inmates at yearend 2008, down
from 756 inmates at yearend 2007.

*The total incarcerated population reached 2,424,279
inmates up 0.2% or 5,038 inmates from yearend 2007 (table 9). 
 
*Populations held in ICE facilities (up 2.4%) and in local
jails (up 0.7%) increased during 2008. The largest absolute
increase of inmates occurred in local jails (5,382), followed
by state and federal prisons (692).
 
*Populations held in military facilities (down 8.0%), prisons
in U.S. territories (down 7.5%), and jails in Indian country
(down 1.3%) decreased. The largest absolute decrease of 1,102
inmates occurred in the U.S. territories during 2008.

Men ages 30 to 34 and women ages 35 to 39 had the highest
imprisonment rates

At yearend 2008, 1,434,800 men and 105,300 women were serving
prison sentences of more than one year (appendix table 13).
Men ages 25 to 29 represented the largest share (17.2%) of
sentenced male prisoners in state or federal prison. The
imprisonment rate for men was highest for those ages 30 to 34
(2,366 per 100,000 men in the U.S. resident population),
followed by men ages 25 to 29 (2,238 per 100,000) (appendix
table 14). 

Women ages 35 to 39 made up the largest percentage (19.8%) of
sentenced female prisoners under state or federal
jurisdiction. The imprisonment rate for women was also
highest for those ages 35 to 39 (201 per 100,000 women in the
U.S. resident population), followed by women ages 30 to 34
(190 per 100,000) (appendix table 14). 

State prison capacities were higher in 2008 than in 2000;
percent of capacity occupied decreased in 2008

State and federal correctional authorities provide three
measures of their facilities' capacity.

Rated capacity is the number of beds or inmates assigned by a
rating official to institutions within the jurisdiction.

Operational capacity is the number of inmates that can be
accommodated based on a facility's staff, existing programs,
and services.

Design capacity is the number of inmates that planners or
architects intended for the facility. 

Highest capacity is the sum of the maximum number of beds and
inmates reported by the states and the federal system across
the three capacity measures. Lowest capacity is the minimum
of these three capacity measures reported by the states and
the federal system. Estimates of prison populations as a
percentage of capacity are based on the jurisdiction's
custody population. In general a jurisdiction's capacity and
custody counts exclude inmates held in private facilities.
Some states include prisoners held in private facilities as
part of the capacity of their prison systems. Where this
occurs, prison population as a percent of capacity includes
private prisoners.

The federal system reported a rated capacity of 122,479 beds
at yearend 2008 (appendix table 24). The highest capacity
reported by the states was 1,275,4240, and the lowest capacity
reported was 1,142,129 (table 10). These capacities are
between 11% and 14% higher than the capacities reported by
the states in 2000.

In 2008 the percent of capacity occupied in state prisons
decreased. States were operating at 97% of their highest
capacity and over 8% of their lowest capacity at yearend.
Thirteen states were operating at more than 100% of highest
capacity by yearend 2008, and 20 were operating at more than
100% of lowest capacity.

Trends in the ICE population
 
At yearend 2008, U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement
(ICE) had custody over 34,161 detainees, up 14,646 detainees
from yearend 2000 and up 3,730 detainees from yearend 2007
(table 11). The 12.3% growth in the number of detainees in
custody of ICE during 2008 was greater than the average
annual growth rate (6.6%) of the number of detainees held
from 2000 to 2007. 

More than half (57.5%) of all detainees were held in
facilities in Texas (8,695), California (3,694), Arizona
(2,975), Florida (2,195), and Georgia (2,075). The number of
detainees held in Texas has increased by 5,080 since 2000,
representing 34.7% of the growth in the number of detainees
held nationwide (14,646 detainees) during this period. 

Nationwide, the overall number of ICE detainees held per
facility (state, federal, local, or ICE) has doubled since
2000 (not shown in table). Approximately 53 detainees were
held per facility in 2000, compared to about 115 in 2008. The
number of state, federal, and local jails responsible for
holding this growing population declined from 347 to 256
during this period, and the average number of detainees held
per facility increased from approximately 37 to 95. ICE
increased its number of facilities from 24 in 2000 to 41 in
2008, while its average number of detainees held per facility
fell from about 276 to 243. Texas has independently added a
net of three ICE/INS-owned or -contracted facilities since
2000, and increased the number of detainees held in the
average Texas facility from approximately 79 in 2000 to 248
in 2008. 

Mexican citizens represented over a third (36.2% or 12,360
detainees) of the detainee population in 2008, followed by El
Salvadorans (10.3% or 3,521 detainees), Guatemalans (9.4% or
3,227 detainees), and Hondurans (8.1% or 2,780) (figure 6).
Among these groups the fastest growth occurred in the Mexican
detainee population, increasing from 4,267 ICE detainees in
2000 to 4,623 in 2005. From 2005 to 2007 the Mexican detainee
population more than doubled from 4,623 to 10,358 ICE
detainees. The number of Mexican detainees increased at a
slower pace in 2008, reaching 12,360 at yearend. 

While the El Salvadoran detainee population experienced a
similar pattern of growth, the population increased at a
slower pace during these same periods. The El Salvadoran
detainee population rose from 1,125 in 2000 to 1,727 in 2005.
From 2005 to 2007 this detainee population increased from
1,727 to 3,005 ICE detainees. During 2008 the El Salvadoran
detainee population increased at a slower pace, reaching
3,521 at yearend. 

Methodology

National Prisoner Statistics

Begun in 1926 under a mandate from Congress, the National
Prisoner Statistics (NPS) program collects statistics on
prisoners at midyear and yearend. The Census Bureau serves as
the data collection agent for the Bureau of Justice
Statistics (BJS). BJS depends entirely upon the voluntary
participation by state departments of corrections and the
Federal Bureau of Prisons for NPS data.

The NPS distinguishes between prisoners in custody and
prisoners under jurisdiction. To have custody of a prisoner,
a state or federal prison must hold that prisoner in one of
its facilities. To have jurisdiction over a prisoner, a state
or federal prison must have legal authority over the
prisoner. Some states are unable to provide prisoner counts
that distinguish between custody and jurisdiction.

The NPS jurisdiction counts include prisoners serving a
sentence within a jurisdiction's facilities. These facilities
include prisons, penitentiaries, correctional facilities,
halfway houses, boot camps, farms, training/treatment
centers, and hospitals. Jurisdiction counts include inmates
who are 

*temporarily absent (less than 30 days), out to court, or on
work release

*housed in privately-operated facilities, local jails, other
state or federal facilities

*serving concurrent sentences for more than one correctional
authority.

The NPS custody counts include all inmates held within a
respondent's facilities, including inmates housed for other
correctional facilities. The custody counts exclude inmates
held in local jails and in other jurisdictions. With a few
exceptions for several respondents, the NPS custody counts
exclude inmates held in privately-operated facilities.

Additionally, NPS data include counts of inmates in combined
jail-prison systems in Alaska, Connecticut, Delaware, Hawaii,
Rhode Island, and Vermont. The District of Columbia has
operated only a jail system since yearend 2001. Prisoners
sentenced under the District of Columbia criminal code are
housed in federal facilities. Selected previously published
prisoner counts and percent population change statistics
include DC jail inmates for 2001, the last year of
collection. Additional information is provided in notes to
the tables, where applicable.

Nevada was not able to provide 2007 data. Estimates were
calculated using ratio estimates. All numbers were reviewed
and approved by individuals at the respective department of
corrections.

See <http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/correct.htm#nps> (last
accessed October 20, 2009) for more information about the NPS
data collection instruments.

Military Corrections Statistics

BJS obtains yearend counts of prisoners in the custody of
U.S. military authorities from the Department of Defense
Corrections Council. The council, composed of representatives
from each branch of the military services, adopted a
standardized report (DD Form 2720) with a common set of items
and definitions in 1994. This report obtains data on persons
held in U.S. military confinement facilities inside and
outside of the continental United States, by branch of
service, gender, race, Hispanic origin, conviction status,
sentence length, and offense. It also provides data on the
number of facilities and their design and rated capacities.

Other inmate counts

In 1995 BJS began collecting yearend counts of prisoners from
the department of corrections in the U.S. Territories
(American Samoa, Guam, and the U.S. Virgin Islands) and U.S.
Commonwealths (Northern Mariana Islands and Puerto Rico).
These counts include all inmates for whom the territory or
Commonwealth had legal authority or jurisdiction and all
inmates in physical custody (held in prison or local jail
facilities). The counts are collected by gender, race,
Hispanic origin, and sentence length. Additionally, BJS
obtains reports on the design and rated and operational
capacities of these correctional facilities. 

BJS obtains yearend counts of person detained by U.S.
Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE), formerly the U.S.
Immigration and Naturalization Service. Located within the
Department of Homeland Security, ICE is responsible for
holding persons for immigration violations. ICE holds persons
in federal, state, and locally operated prisons and jails, as
well as privately operated facilities under exclusive
contract and ICE-operated facilities. 

Data on the number of inmates held in the custody of local
jails are from the BJS Annual Survey of Jails (ASJ). The ASJ
provides data on inmates in custody at midyear. For more
information about the ASJ, see Methodology in Jail Inmates at
Midyear 2008   Statistical Tables available online at
<http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/abstract/jim08st.htm> (last
accessed October 20, 2009).

Federal prisoner data used to calculate race and offense
distributions are obtained from BJS' Federal Justice
Statistics Program (FJSP). The FJSP obtains its data from the
Federal Bureau of Prisons. These data include
individual-level records of prisoners in federal facilities
as of September 30. Specifically, the FJSP provides counts of
sentenced federal inmates by gender, race, Hispanic origin,
and offense.

Guam did not submit data for 2008. Data for 2008 are
estimates based on the percent change from 2006 to 2007 as
reported by Guam's Department of Corrections. 

Estimates of juvenile inmates for 2007 and 2008 are based on
data from 2006 as reported by the Office of Juvenile Justice
and Delinquency Prevention (OJJDP), Office of Justice
Programs, U.S. Department of Justice.

Estimating changes in admissions and releases

Technically, the change in the prison population from the
beginning of the year to the end of the year should equal the
difference between the number of admissions and releases
during the year. The formula used to calculate this change is
P(t)-P(t-1)=A(t)-R(t). Within this formula, t equals the year
referenced, P(t-1) equals the start of the year population,
P(t) equals the end of the year population, A(t) equals
admissions during the year, and R(t) equals releases during
the year. However, throughout this report, the references to
differences in prison populations refer to the differences
between two yearend differences, such as the difference
between December 31, 2007, and December 31, 2008. Hence,
comparisons of admissions and releases during the year with
two yearend population counts may be equal, as there may be
changes in the prisoner counts between the last count of the
year (December 31) and the first count of the following year
(January 1). Also, due to information- system processing
issues within states, the two sets of differences do not
always equal the difference between the number of admissions
and releases for various reasons, such as the final data on
admissions and releases may be logged into systems after the
surveys have been submitted to BJS. During the 2008
collections, all but three states submitted data in which the
differences between the start of year and yearend populations
equaled the difference between admissions and releases. 

Estimating age-specific incarceration rates

Estimates are provided for the number of sentenced prisoners
under state or federal jurisdiction by gender. Further,
prisoners are characterized within genders by age group, race
(non-Hispanic white and non-Hispanic black), and Hispanic
origin. The detailed race and Hispanic origin categories
exclude estimates of persons identifying two or more races. 

Estimates were produced separately for prisoners under state
and federal jurisdiction and then combined to obtain a total
estimated population for 2000 and 2007. State estimates were
prepared by combining information about the gender of
prisoners from the NPS with information reported during
inmate interviews on race and Hispanic origin in the 2004
Survey of Inmates of State Correctional Facilities.

For the estimates of federal prisoners, the distributions of
FJSP counts of sentenced federal prisoners by gender, age,
race, and Hispanic origin on September 30, 2008, were applied
to the NPS counts of sentenced federal prisoners by gender at
yearend 2008. 

Estimates of the U.S. resident population for January 1,
2009, by age, gender, race, and Hispanic origin, were
generated by applying the December 31, 2008, age
distributions within gender, race, and Hispanic origin groups
to the January 1, 2009, population estimates by gender. The
population estimates were provided by the U.S. Census Bureau.
 
Age-specific rates of imprisonment for each demographic group
were calculated by dividing the estimated number of sentenced
prisoners within each age group by the estimated number of
U.S. residents in each age group. That number was multiplied
by 100,000, and then rounded to the nearest whole number.
Totals by gender include all prisoners and U.S. residents
regardless of racial or Hispanic origin. Detailed race and
Hispanic origin imprisonment rates exclude persons
identifying two or more races.

Definitions

Average annual change--arithmetic average (mean) annual
change across a specific time period.

Custody--physical location in which an inmate is held
regardless of which entity has legal authority over an
inmates. For example, a local jail may hold, or have custody
over, a state-sentenced prisoner who may be held there
because of overcrowding. The custody population refers to the
number of inmates held in state or federal public prisons or
local jails, regardless of sentence length or the state
having jurisdiction

Design capacity-- the number of inmates that planners or
architects intended for a facility. 

Highest capacity--the sum of the maximum number of beds
reported across three capacity measures: design capacity,
operational capacity, and rated capacity.

Imprisonment rate--the number of prisoners under state or
federal jurisdiction sentenced to more than 1 year, per
100,000 U.S. resident population.
 
Incarceration rate--see total incarceration rate.
Inmates individuals held in the custody of state and federal
prisons and in local jails.

Jail--confinement facilities usually administered by a local
law enforcement agency, intended for adults but sometimes
holding juveniles, before or after adjudication. Facilities
include jails and city/county correctional centers, special
jail facilities such as medical treatment or release centers,
halfway houses, work farms, and temporary holding or lockup
facilities that are part of the jail's combined function.
Inmates sentenced to jail facilities usually have a sentence
of 1 year or less. 

Jails in Indian country--jails, confinement facilities,
detention centers, and other facilities operated by tribal
authorities or the Bureau of Indian Affairs.

Jurisdiction--the entity having legal authority over a
prisoner, regardless of where that prisoner is held. The
prison population under jurisdiction refers to the number of
prisoners under state or federal correctional authority
regardless of the facility in which a prisoner is held. For
example, state-sentenced prisoners held in local jails are
under the jurisdiction of state correctional authorities. 

Lowest capacity--the sum of the minimum number of beds across
three capacity measures: design capacity, operational
capacity, and rated capacity. 

Operational capacity--the number of inmates that can be
accommodated based on a facility's staff, existing programs,
and services.

Prisons--compared to jail facilities, prisons are longer-term
facilities run by a state or the federal government typically
holding felons and prisoner with sentences of more than 1
year. However, sentence length may vary by state.
Connecticut, Rhode Island, Vermont, Delaware, Alaska, and
Hawaii operate integrated systems that combine prisons and
jails.

Prisoners--individuals confined in correctional facilities
under the legal authority (jurisdiction) of state and federal
correctional officials.

Rated capacity--the number of beds or inmates assigned by a
rating official to institutions within the jurisdiction.

Sentenced prisoner--a prisoner sentenced to more than 1 year. 

Total incarceration rate--the number of inmates held in the
custody of state or federal prisons or in local jails, per
100,000 U.S. residents. 

Total inmates in custody--includes inmates held in any public
facility run by a state or the Federal Bureau of Prisons,
including halfway houses, camps, farms, training/treatment
centers, and hospitals. This number also includes the number
of inmates held in local jails as reported by correctional
authorities in the Annual Survey of Jails. Data for jails are
as of the last weekday of June.

Appendix table contents

The following topics are detailed in online appendix tables 1
through 24 at
<http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/abstract/p08.htm>:

*Appendix Table 1. Prisoners under the jurisdiction of state
or federal prisons or in the custody of state or federal
prisons or local jails, December 31, 2000-2008

*Appendix Table 2. Prisoners under the jurisdiction of state
or federal correctional authorities, by jurisdiction,
December 31, 2000, 2007 and 2008

*Appendix Table 3. Male prisoners under the jurisdiction of
state or federal correctional authorities, by jurisdiction,
December 31, 2000, 2007 and 2008

*Appendix Table 4. Female prisoners under the jurisdiction of
state or federal correctional authorities, by jurisdiction,
December 31, 2000, 2007 and 2008

*Appendix Table 5. Sentenced prisoners under the jurisdiction
of state or federal correctional authorities, by
jurisdiction, December 31, 2000, 2007 and 2008

*Appendix Table 6. Number of sentenced male prisoners under
the jurisdiction of state and federal correctional
authorities, December 31, 2000-2008

*Appendix Table 7. Sentenced male prisoners under the
jurisdiction of state or federal correctional authorities, by
jurisdiction, December 31, 2000, 2007 and 2008

*Appendix Table 8. Number of sentenced female prisoners under
the jurisdiction of state or federal correctional
authorities, December 31, 2000-2008

*Appendix Table 9. Sentenced female prisoners under the
jurisdiction of state or federal correctional authorities, by
jurisdiction, December 31, 2000, 2007 and 2008

*Appendix Table 10. Imprisonment rates of sentenced prisoners
under jurisdiction of state and federal correctional
authorities, by gender and jurisdiction, December 31, 2007
and 2008

*Appendix Table 11. Number of sentenced prisoners admitted
and released from state or federal jurisdiction, by
jurisdiction, December 31, 2000, 2007 and 2008

*Appendix Table 12. Number of sentenced prisoners admitted
and release from state or federal jurisdiction, by type,
December 31, 2008

*Appendix Table 13. Estimated number of sentenced prisoners
under state and federal jurisdiction, by gender, race,
Hispanic origin, and age, December 31, 2008

*Appendix Table 14. Estimated number of sentenced prisoners
under state or federal jurisdiction per 100,000 U.S.
residents, by gender, race, Hispanic origin, and age,
December 31, 2008

*Appendix Table 15. Estimated number of sentenced prisoners
under state jurisdiction, by offense, gender, race, and
Hispanic origin, yearend 2006

*Appendix Table 16. Estimated percent of sentenced prisoners
under state jurisdiction by offense, gender, race, and
Hispanic origin, yearend 2006

*Appendix Table 17. Number of sentenced prisoners in federal
prison, by most serious offense, 2000, 2007and 2008

*Appendix Table 18. Number of state or federal prisoners in
private facilities, December, 2000-2008

*Appendix Table 19. Number of state or federal prisoners in
private facilities, by jurisdiction, December 31, 2000,
2006-2008

*Appendix Table 20. Number of state or federal prisoners in
local facilities, December 31, 2000-2008

*Appendix Table 21. Number of state and federal prisoners in
local jail facilities, by jurisdiction, December 31, 2000,
2006-2008

*Appendix Table 22. Prisoners in custody of correctional
authorities in the U.S. territories and commonwealths,
yearend 2007 and 2008

*Appendix Table 23. Prisoners under military jurisdiction, by
branch of service, yearend 2007 and 2008

*Appendix Table 24. Reported state and federal prison
capacities, December 31, 2008

NPS jurisdiction notes

Alaska--Prisons and jails form one integrated system. All NPS
data include jail and prison populations housed in state and
out of state. Jurisdictional counts exclude inmates held in
local jails that are operated by communities. 

Arizona--Population counts are based on custody data and
inmates in contracted beds.

California--Jurisdiction counts include felons and
unsentenced inmates who are temporarily absent, i.e. housed
in local jails, hospitals, etc. This definition is comparable
to the 1998 NPS 1b definition.

Discrepancies between admissions and releases and within-year
change in the prison population are due to incomplete data
about inmate movements, such as inmates out to court or
readmitted on violations.

Colorado--Counts include 222 inmates in the Youthful Offender
System, which was established primarily for violent juvenile
offenders. Capacity figures exclude seven privately run
facilities under contract with the Department of Corrections.

Delaware--Prisons and jails form one integrated system. All
NPS data include jail and prison populations. 

Federal--Custody counts include inmates housed in secure
facilities where the BOP had a direct contract with a private
operator or a sub-contract with a private provider at a local
government facility. Custody includes inmates held in
non-secure privately operated community corrections centers
or Halfway Houses and inmates held on home confinement. 

Florida--Counts are not comparable to 2006 counts due to new
methods of data collection beginning in 2007.

Georgia--Counts are based on custody data.

Hawaii--Prisons and jails form one integrated systems. All
NPS data include jail and prison populations 

Iowa--Population counts are based on custody data. Population
counts for Inmates with a sentence of more than 1 year
include an undetermined number of inmates with a sentence of
less than 1 year and unsentenced inmates. Iowa does not
differentiate between these groups in its data system. Due to
a change in reporting in 2006, out of state inmates have been
included in jurisdiction counts. Discrepancies between
admissions and releases and within-year change in the prison
population are due to data entry corrections made throughout
the year.

Kansas--Admission and release data are based on the custody
population. Due to a new, computerized reporting system, 2007
admission and release data is not comparable to previous
years' counts. 

Louisiana--Counts for 2007 are as of December 27, 2007.
Custody and jurisdiction counts include evacuees from
Hurricane Katrina and other pre-trial offenders from Orleans
and Jefferson parish jails. 

Maryland--The number of prisoners identifying their race as
unknown has increased due to changes in the information
system.

Massachusetts--By law, offenders may be sentenced to terms of
up to 2.5 years in locally-operated jails and correctional
institutions. Such populations are included in counts and
rates for local jails and correctional institutions. Counts
exclude 4,012 inmates with sentences of more than 1 year held
in local jails in 2008 and 6,200 inmates in 2007.
Jurisdiction and custody counts include an undetermined
number of inmates who were remanded to court, transferred to
the custody of another state, federal, or locally-operated
system, and subsequently released. 

Minnesota--Counts include inmates temporarily housed in local
jails or private contract facilities, or on work release and
community work crew programs. 

Mississippi--Operational and design capacities include
private prison capacities.

Missouri--Design capacities are not available for older
prisons. Operational capacity is defined as the number of
available beds include those temporarily offline. Missouri
Department of Corrections does not have updated design
capacity for prison extension or improvements.

Montana--Population counts include a small number of inmates
with unknown sentence lengths. 

Capacity figures include two county operated regional prisons
(an estimated 300 beds), one private prison (500 beds), and a
state operated boot camp (60 beds). In 2006, the Department
of Corrections changed its method of accounting for community
corrections offenders placed in residential treatment
programs. To track growth patterns, a new standard process
was applied to historic populations, resulting in some
changes to previous years' counts.

Nevada--Due to an information system conversion that occurred
during 2007, Nevada officials were unable to report data for
2007. All 2007 data were estimated from 2006 reported data.
All estimates were reviewed by individuals at the Nevada
Department of Corrections. 

New Hampshire--Due to a system conversion, detailed
information on prisoners sentenced to 1 year or less,
unsentenced males, and specific types of admission and
releases cannot be captured.

New Jersey--Counts of inmates with a sentence of more than 1
year include an undetermined number of inmates with sentences
of 1 year. The Department of Corrections has no jurisdiction
over inmates with sentences of less than 1 year or over
unsentenced inmates. Rated capacity figures are not
maintained.

North Carolina--Capacity figures refer to standard operating
capacity, based on single occupancy per cell and 50 square
feet per inmate in multiple occupancy units.

Ohio--Counts of inmates with a sentence of more than 1 year
include an undetermined number of inmates with sentences of 1
year or less. Due to a system conversion, admission and
release data may vary from past years. Returns and
conditional releases involving Transitional Control inmates
are reported only after movement from confinement to actual
release status occurs.

Oklahoma--Population counts for inmates with sentences of
less than 1 year consist mainly of offenders ordered by the
court to the Delayed Sentencing Program for Young Adults
pursuant to 22 O.S. 996 through 996.3. As of November 4,
1998, Oklahoma has one type of capacity, which includes state
prisons, private prisons, and contract jails.

Oregon--Counts include an undetermined number of inmates with
sentences of 1 year or less. County authorities retain
jurisdiction over the majority of these types of inmates.

Pennsylvania--As of May 31, 2004, the Department began using
a new capacity reporting system based on design as well as
other crucial factors such as facility infrastructure,
support services, and programming.

Rhode Island--Prisons and jails form one integrated system. 
Data reported include jail and prison populations. Improved
methods were used to measure admissions and releases during
2007. Admission and release data for 2000 and 2007 are not
comparable.

South Carolina--Population counts include 36 inmate who were
unsentenced, under safekeeping, or ICC status. As of July 1,
2003, South Carolina Department of Corrections (SCDC) began
releasing inmates due for release and housed in SCDC
institutions on the 1st day of each month. Since January 1,
2008 was a holiday, inmates eligible for release on January 1
were released on December 31, 2007. Therefore, the inmate
count was at its lowest point for the month on December 31,
2007.

South Dakota--Discrepancies between admissions and releases
and within-year change in the prison population result
because admission and release data is gathered in a separate
database than the jurisdiction population data.

Texas--Jurisdiction counts include inmates serving time in a
pre-parole transfer (PPT) or intermediary sanctions facility
(ISF), substance abuse felony punishment facility (SAFPF),
private facilities, halfway houses, temporary releases to
counties, and paper-ready inmates in local jails.

Vermont--Prisons and jails form one integrated system. Data
reported include jail and prison populations. Improved
methods were used to measure admissions and releases during
2007. Admission and release data for 2000 and 2007 are not
comparable. 

Virginia--Jurisdiction counts are as of December 28, 2007.
Rated capacity is the Department of Corrections' count of
beds, which takes into account the number of inmates that can
be accommodated based on staff, programs, services and
design.

Washington--A recently revised law allows increasing numbers
of certain inmates with sentences of less than 1 year to be
housed in prison.

Wisconsin--Operational capacity excludes contracted local
jails, federal and other state and private facilities.

-----------------------------------------------------------
                                                   
The Bureau of Justice Statistics is the statistics agency of
the U.S. Department of Justice. Michael D. Sinclair is acting
director.

BJS Bulletins present the first release of findings from
permanent data collection programs.

William J. Sabol, Ph.D., and Heather C. West, Ph.D., BJS
Statisticians, and Matthew Cooper, BJS Intern, wrote this
Bulletin. Todd Minton and Paige M. Harrison verified the
report.

Georgette Walsh and Jill Duncan edited the report, Tina
Dorsey produced the report, and Jayne Robinson prepared the
report for final printing under the supervision of Doris J.
James.

December 2009, NCJ 228417

----------------------------------------------------------
This report in portable document format and in ASCII and its
related statistical data and tables are available at the BJS
World Wide Web Internet site:
<http://bjs.ojp.usdoj.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbdetail&iid=1763>.

-------------------------------------------------------------

Office of Justice Programs
Innovation  Partnerships  Safer Neighborhoods
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov

---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

12/8/2009/JER/ 10:21am