U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Programs
Bureau of Justice Statistics

Prisoners, 2009

December 2010, NCJ 231675

Heather C. West, Ph.D. and William J. Sabol, Ph.D. 
BJS Statisticians, 
and Sarah J. Greenman, BJS Program Assistant

----------------------------------------------------------
This file is text only without graphics and many of the
tables. A Zip archive of the tables in this report in
spreadsheet format (.csv) and the full report including
tables and graphics in .pdf format are available from:
http://bjs.ojp.usdoj.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbdetail&iid=2232

This report is one in a series. More recent editions may be
available. To view a list of all in the series go to
http://bjs.ojp.usdoj.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbse&sid=40
-----------------------------------------------------------



On December 31, 2009, state and federal correctional
authorities had jurisdiction over 1,613,740 prisoners, an
Prisoners under state and federal jurisdiction at yearend,
2000-2009 increase of 3,981 prisoners from yearend 2008
(figure 1).***Footnote 1 This number is 84 prisoners higher
than reported in the BJS Data Brief, Prisoners at Yearend
2009: Advance Counts, NCJ 230189, June 2010. BJS permits
respondents to update their data to reflect their most
accurate counts ***.  This 0.2% increase marked the third
consecutive year of slower 1,750,000  3.0% growth in the U.S.
prison population and the smallest increase  during the
decade. Jurisdiction refers to the legal authority over a 
prisoner, regardless of where the prisoner is held. 

The slowing in the growth of the total U.S. prison population
masked an increase in the federal prison population (3.4%)
during 2009, while the number of prisoners under jurisdiction
of state correctional authorities declined by 0.2%, the first
decline in the state prison population since 1977 (figure 2).
The increase in the growth rate of the federal prison
population reflected a shift 1,250,000 from the general
pattern of declining annual growth rates in that population.
The decline in the growth rate of the state prison population
during 2009 continued the 3-year trend of declining annual
growth rates for state prisoners. 

-------------------------------------------------------------
Highlights 

 
*The U.S. prison population grew at its slowest rate (0.2%)
since 2000, reaching 1,613,740 prisoners at yearend 2009. 

 
*Prison admissions (down 2.5%) and prison releases (up 
2.2%) converged from 2006 through 2009, slowing the 6.0% 
growth of the nation's prison population. 

*The imprisonment rate the number of sentenced prison-4.0% 
ers per 100,000 U.S. residents declined for the second 
straight year, falling to 502 per 100,000 from 506 per 3.0% 
100,000 in 2007. 2.0% 

*From 2000 to 2008, the state prison population increased 
by 159,200 prisoners, and violent offenders accounted for 0 
60% of this increase. The number of drug offenders in state 

----------------------------------------------------------

For a list of all publications in this series go to
http://bjs.ojp.usdoj.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbse&sid=40 
---------------------------------------------------------
                                         
The federal prison population reached 208,118  prisoners at
yearend 2009, while state authorities  had jurisdiction over
1,405,622 prisoners on  December 31, 2009 (table 1). The
number  of male prisoners, accounting for 93% of all 
prisoners, increased by 0.3% during 2009, while  the number
of female prisoners declined by 0.1%. 

Twenty-four state departments of corrections reported
decreases in their prison populations during 2009 (appendix
table 1). Michigan (down 3,260) and California (down 2,395)
reported the largest declines in absolute numbers, followed 
by New York (down 1,660), Mississippi (down 1,272), and Texas
(down 1,257). Rhode Island (down 9.2%) reported the largest
percentage decrease the state prison population between 
yearend 2008 and yearend 2009, followed by Michigan (down
6.7%), Mississippi (down 5.6%), and Maryland and Connecticut
(down 4.6% each). 

Among states that experienced declines in their prison
population during 2009, only in New York, New Jersey, and
Maryland did the decrease continue a longer-term pattern of 
decline over the 8-year period from 2000 to 2008. Illinois,
Michigan, Delaware, and Texas also experienced a decline in
their prison population during 2009, and their growth rates 
from 2000 through 2008 averaged less than one-half of 1
percent. 

The remaining 26 state departments of corrections reported
increases in their prison populations. Pennsylvania (up
2,214) reported the largest increase in absolute numbers, 
followed by Florida (up 1,527), Louisiana (up 1,399), and
Alabama (up 1,366). Alaska (up 5.4%) reported the largest
percentage increase in the state prison population, followed
by West Virginia (up 5.1%), Vermont (up 4.9%), and 
Pennsylvania and Alabama (up 4.5% each). 

The imprisonment rate declined between yearend 2008 and 2009 

The U.S. imprisonment rate the number of sentenced prisoners
per 100,000 U.S. residents  declined slightly from 504 to 502
prisoners per 100,000 U.S. residents between yearend 2008 
and 2009 (appendix table 9). Imprisonment rates decreased in
28 states during this period, and increased in 18 states and
the federal system. Four states reported little change to 
their imprisonment rates during 2009. Alaska (down 73
prisoners per 100,000 U.S. residents) reported the largest
decrease in the state imprisonment rate at yearend 2009;
Louisiana (up 28 prisoners per 100,000 U.S. residents) 
reported the largest increase. 

The decline in the U.S. imprisonment rate stems from a
decline in the imprisonment rate for state prisoners. The
imprisonment rate for the federal prison population increased
during 2009, reaching 61 per 100,000 U.S. residents 
(figure 3). 

While the imprisonment rate of sentenced federal prisoners
trended upward since 1990, the rate of increase slowed from
2000 to 2009. Compared to the increase in the number of 
federal prisoners, the imprisonment rate for this population
has increased more slowly since 2000. The number of sentenced
prisoners increased by an average of 4.6% per year from 
125,044 in 2000 to 187,886 in 2009. The federal imprisonment
rate increased by an average of 3.4% per year over this
period. 

By comparison, the imprisonment rate for sentenced state
prisoners has declined over the past 3 years (figure 4). More
generally, since 2000 the trend in the imprisonment rate for 
state prisoners has diverged from the trend in the number of
state prisoners. The number of state prisoners increased by
about an average of 1.3% per year from 2000 to 2009, but the 
imprisonment rate for state prisoners increased only from 432
to 442 per 100,000 U.S. residents. The relative stability in
the state imprisonment rate means that the U.S. resident
population increased faster than the prison population. 

Prison admissions and releases converged in recent years 

During 2009, a total of 730,989 sentenced prisoners were
admitted into, and 729,295 sentenced prisoners were released
from, the nation's prisons (table 2). Though there were 
fewer prison admissions (down 13,627) and releases (down
6,159) reported in 2009 than in 2008, prison admissions
declined more rapidly (down 1.8%) than releases (down 0.8%). 

The number of state prison admissions during 2009 was 16,118
fewer than admitted during 2008. As there were 2,491 more
admissions into federal prison during 2009 (56,153) than 
in 2008 (53,662), the decline in state prison admissions
accounted for the overall decline in admissions into U.S.
prisons between 2008 and 2009. 

State prison admissions decreased during 2009 (down 2.3%)
after remaining relatively stable from 2006 through 2008.
From 2006 through 2008, the annual rate of growth in state
prison admissions decreased 0.8%. While the number of state
prison admissions increased during 2008, the increase in that
year was comparatively small (1,697 or 0.2%). In contrast,
admissions to federal prison increased in both 2008 (up 0.1%)
and 2009 (up 4.6%). 

From yearend 2006 through 2009, the number of sentenced
prisoners admitted into and released from prison converged
(figure 5), slowing the growth of the nation's prison 
population. This convergence occurred as the number of prison
admissions declined 2.5% (down 18,809 admissions) and the
number of prison releases increased 2.2% (up 15,822 
releases) during the 3-year period. 


From 2006 through 2008, prison population growth slowed
because of declines in admissions and increases in releases.
During 2009, both admissions and releases declined and prison 
population growth slowed due to a larger decrease in
admissions than releases. 

Although small, the 0.8% decrease in the number of prisoners
released from state (down 0.7%) and federal (down 3.1%)
prisons during 2009 was the first decline in the number of 
prison releases since 2000. The decline in the number of
prisoners released in 2009 was the first decrease in state
prison releases since 2002 when releases dropped by 0.4%, and
the second decrease in federal prison releases since 2000. 

Decline in state prison admissions was led by a decrease in
parole violators admitted in California 

The overall decrease in state prison admissions during 2009
(down 16,118) was led by the decline in the number of parole
violators admitted to state prison. The number of parole
violators admitted during 2009 (237,449) was 4.5% fewer than
admitted during 2008. Fewer parole violators (down 11,066
from the 2008) entering state prison in 2009 accounted for
more than two-thirds (69%) of the total decline in the 
number of state prison admissions during the year (table
3).***Footnote 2 See Definitions for admission types***. 

The decline in the number of parole violators admitted to
state prison during 2009 was the first such decline since
2003, when 9,150 fewer parole violators were admitted than
the 207,855 admitted during 2002 (figure 6). 

Fewer new court commitments to state prison during 2009 (down
5,681) continued a longer term trend of decline in the number
of new court commitments. ***Footnote 3 New court commitments
include felony offenders sentenced to state prison and
probation violators entering prison for the first time on a
violation of a condition of probation. Parole violators
include any conditionally released prisoners admitted to
prison either for a technical violation of the conditions of
supervision or for a new crime***. Since peaking at 441,606
in 2006, the number of new court commitments into state
prisons has declined for the past 3 years. The 422,910 new
court commitments admitted into state prison during 2009 was
18,696 fewer than admitted during 2006, and represented a
decline of 1.3% from the 428,591 admitted during 2008. 

The decrease in new court commitments could reflect court
decisions to divert offenders from prison, a decline in
felony convictions, or a combination of both factors. As of
the time of this report, data were not available to determine
which factors convictions or prison sentences accounted for
the decline in new court commitments during 2009. 


More than half (29) of the state departments of corrections
reported decreases in prison admissions between yearend 2008
and yearend 2009 (appendix table 10). California reported a 
decline of 11,122 admissions in 2009, a decrease that was
almost 4 times greater than any other state. California's
change in admissions had a large influence on the number of
state prison admissions nationwide, particularly the decrease 
in the number of admissions to California state prisons for
parole violations (down 9,668) during 2009. Fewer admissions
for parole violations accounted for almost 87% of the 
decline in the number of California state prison admissions,
and about 87% of the decline in the number of parole
violators entering state prison nationwide during the year. 

Excluding California, parole violators admitted to state
prison would have decreased by 1,398 instead of 11,066.
Comparatively, fewer new court commitments to California
state prison made up about a quarter (26%) of the decline 
in new court commitments to state prison nationwide.
Excluding California, the number of new court commitments
would have decreased by 4,227 instead of 5,681 in 2009. 

Decrease in state prison releases led by the decline in the
number of prisoners released unconditionally 

A total of 678,575 prisoners were released from state prison
during 2009, down 4,531 prisoners from yearend 2008. States
reported declines in both conditional (down 0.2%) and 
unconditional (down 2.4%) releases during the year, with the
change in unconditional releases accounting for most (87.4%)
of the decrease in the number of state prison releases (table 
4).***Footnote 4 See Definitions for release types***.
Unconditional releases from state prison declined by 3,962,
from 165,568 during 2008 to 161,606 during 2009. The number
of conditional releases decreased from 505,168 to 504,057
during this period, a difference of 1,111 releases 
from state prison. 

Much like admissions, California (down 8,056) was the largest
contributor to the total decrease in releases, as it reported
a decrease in the number of conditional releases that was at
least 4 times that of any other state. However, California
experienced little change in unconditional releases (up 37) 
between 2008 and 2009. Georgia (down 3,209)reported the
largest decline in unconditional releases, and accounted for
80.1% of the total change in unconditional releases from all
state prisons during 2009. 

Release rates increased 

The release rate is the ratio of the number of sentenced
prisoners released from prison during a year, divided by the
sum of the start of the year population of sentenced
prisoners plus the number of sentenced prisoners admitted
during the year, and is expressed per 1,000 prisoners 
who could be released. The measure used in this report
includes all types of releases, including releases from new
court commitments (so-called first releases), releases of
parole violators, and releases by other means, including
death and other exceptional types of release. The release
rate gives an indication of turnover in the prison population
and consequently of length of stay in prison. As the release
rate increases, the length of stay in prison decreases. 

From 2002 through 2005, the total release rate increased (321
to 337 per 1,000 prisoners), and after dipping slightly in
2006 (332 per 1,000), it has remained relatively stable
through 2009 (table 5). The overall relative stability in 
the release rate masks differences by type of release. From
2006 through 2009, the release rate for conditional releases
(prisoners released to some form of post-prison supervision) 
was comparatively stable (around 246 per 1,000 prisoners),
while the release rate for unconditional releases and those
whose sentences expired increased slightly. For unconditional
releases, the release rate increased from 74 per 1,000
prisoners (in 2006) to 79 per 1,000 (in 2009), and for
prisoners whose sentences expired, the release rate also
increased slightly from 67 (in 2006) to 73 per 1,000 
prisoners (in 2009). 

Accompanying the increase in the release rate of state
prisoners was a slight change in the distribution of time
served until release from prison. During 2000, about half of
all sentenced offenders released from state prison served 1 
year or less in prison, and 71% served 2 years or less (table
6).***Footnote 5 This calculation of time served in prison
does not include time served in jail on a sentence***.  By
2008 (the year of the most recent detailed BJS data available
at the time of this report), 56% of sentenced offenders
released from state prison had served 1 year or less, and 
76% had served 2 years or less. As the share of released
prisoners with shorter lengths of stay increased, the share
of those serving longer time declined. In 2000, about 10% of
sentenced prisoners released from state prison had served 
more than 5 years. This percentage declined to about 8% in
2008. 

Violent offenders accounted for 60% of the growth in the size
of the state prison population from 2000 through 2008 

From 2000 through 2008, the number of sentenced offenders in
state prison increased by 159,200 (table 7).***Footnote 6
Offense data for 2008 were the most recent data available at
the time of this report***. At yearend 2008, the number of
offenders sentenced to state prison for a violent offense
reached 715,400, up 95,400 violent offenders from 2000. This
increase accounted for most (59.9%) of the growth in the
number of sentenced state prisoners during this period, 
followed by public order offenders (33.6%), primarily those
sentenced for a weapons offense. Prisoners sentenced for
other offenses habitual offender laws not classified in a
substantive offense category accounted for 8.6% of the 
growth of the size of the state prison population. 
Among the major offense categories, the number of sentenced
drug offenders declined during this period. There were about
12,400 fewer drug offenders in state prison in 2008 than in
2000. 


While the number of sentenced violent offenders in state
prison increased from 2000 through 2008, the expected length
of stays for these offenders declined slightly during this
period. The mean time served for all violent offenders in
2000 was just under 46 months (table 8). By 2008, expected
length of stay for violent offenders had declined by 2
months, to just under 44 months. The expected lengths of stay
in state prison for property and drug offenses also declined
during this period (about 2 months each), from about 17 
months to about 15 months. 

The expected length of stay for offenders sentenced to more
than 1 year for public-order offenses (up less than 1 month)
and other/unspecified offenses (up 15.2 months) increased
from yearend 2000 through yearend 2008. The expected time 
that prisoners could expect to serve for other/ unspecified
offenses increased 78% during this period. This increase was
due primarily to an increase in offenders sentenced under
habitual offender laws and whose substantive offense was 
not recorded in the database used to generate the estimates
for time served. (See Methodology for a description of
National Corrections Reporting Program (NCRP) data.) 

The decline in the expected time served for a violent,
property, or a drug offense from 2000 through 2008 was due to
a slight increase in the release rate (exit rate) of state
prisoners with sentences of 1 year or more in these offense 
categories. The release rate of state prisoners sentenced for
a violent offense was 234 per 1,000 violent offenders in
state prison in 2000. By 2008, the release rate of violent
offenders from state prison had increased to 246 per 1,000. 

If expected length of stay had remained constant at its 2000
level, there would have been an estimated 40,300 more violent
offenders than the 715,400 actually reported in 2008, as
implied by the decline of 2.1 months in expected length of
stay for violent offenders (table 9). Similarly, there were
more property (45,000) and drug (32,200) offenders in state
prison in 2008 than there would have been if the expected
time served had not decreased from its 2000 level. 

From 2000 through 2008, the increase in the number of
sentenced prison admissions offset the decrease in the
expected length of stay in state prison. State prison
admissions (up 98,300)increased in each major offense
category during this period (table 10). Offenders admitted to
state prison for a public order offense increased by 33,600, 
followed closely by those sentenced to more than 
1 year for a property offense (up 32,500) and a 
violent offense (up 27,600). Offenders admitted to 
state prison for a drug offense increased by 3,400. 



Decline in admissions during 2009 led to the decline in state
prison population size 

During 2009, as admissions decreased, the size of the state
prison population declined. The extent to which specific
offenses contributed to this decline cannot yet be
determined, because length of stay did not contribute to the
decline in state prisoners. As indicated by the constant 
release rate in 2008 and 2009 (332 per 1,000) expected length
of stay did not increase during these two years.Consequently,
the decline in admissions was due to the decline in state 
prisoners. 

Selected characteristics of prisoners under state or federal
jurisdiction 

From December 31, 2008 through December 31, 
2009-- 

*The size of the male prison population increased slightly
(0.3% or 5,168 prisoners) (appendix table 2). 

*Fewer females were imprisoned (down 1.0% or 1,187 prisoners)
at yearend 2009 than at yearend 2008 (appendix table 3). 

*Males had an imprisonment rate (949 per 100,000 U.S.
residents) that was 14 times higher than the rate for females
(67 per 100,000) (appendix table 9). 

*Black non-Hispanic males had an imprisonment rate (3,119 per
100,000 U.S. residents) that was more than 6 times higher
than white non-Hispanic males (487 per 100,000), and almost 
3 times higher than Hispanic males (1,193 per 100,000)
(appendix tables 15 and 16). 

*One in 703 black females was imprisoned, compared to about 1
in 1,987 white females and 1 in 1,356 Hispanic females. 

*Private facilities housed an estimated 8.0% (129,336
prisoners) of the prison population at yearend 2009 (appendix
tables 20). 

Methodology 

National Prisoner Statistics 

Begun in 1926 under a mandate from Congress, the National
Prisoner Statistics (NPS) program collects statistics on
prisoners at midyear and yearend. The U.S. Census Bureau
serves as the data collection agent for the Bureau of Justice 
Statistics (BJS). BJS depends entirely upon the voluntary
participation by state departments of corrections and the
Federal Bureau of Prisons for NPS data. 

The NPS distinguishes between prisoners in custody and
prisoners under jurisdiction. To have custody of a prisoner,
a state or federal prison must hold that prisoner in one of
its facilities. To have jurisdiction over a prisoner, a 
state or federal prison must have legal authority over that
prisoner. Some states are unable to provide counts that
distinguish between custody and jurisdiction. 

The NPS jurisdiction counts include prisoners serving a
sentence within a jurisdiction's facilities. These facilities
include prisons, penitentiaries, correctional facilities,
halfway houses, boot camps, farms, training or treatment 
centers, and hospitals. The NPS includes prisoners who are--


*temporarily absent (less than 30 days), out to court, or on
work release 

*housed in privately operated facilities, local jails, other
state or federal facilities 

*serving concurrent sentences for more than one correctional
authority. 

The NPS custody counts include all inmates held within a
respondent's facilities, including inmates housed for other
correctional facilities. The custody counts exclude inmates
held in local jails and in other jurisdictions. The NPS 
custody counts include inmates held in privately operated
facilities. 

Additionally, NPS data include counts of inmates in combined
jail-prison systems in Alaska, Connecticut, Delaware, Hawaii,
Rhode Island, and Vermont. The District of Columbia has
operated only a jail system since yearend 2001. Prisoners 
sentenced under the District of Columbia criminal code are
housed in federal facilities. Selected previously published
prisoner counts and the percent population change statistics
include DCjail inmates for 2001, the last year of collection. 
Additional information is provided in the notes to 
the tables, where applicable. 

BJS allows respondents state departments of corrections and
the Federal Bureau of Prisons--to update the data previously
submitted. This report includes the most recent data
reported. Additional information about the NPS data 
collection instrument is available on the BJS 
website at http://bjs.ojp.usdoj.gov. 

Other inmate counts 

Federal prisoner data used to calculate race and offense
distributions are obtained from BJS'Federal Justice
Statistics Program (FJSP). The FJSP obtains its data from the
Federal Bureau of Prisons. These data include
individual-level records of prisoners in federal facilities
as of September 30. Specifically, the FJSP provides counts of
sentenced federal inmates by sex, race, Hispanic origin, and
offense. 

Estimating age-specific imprisonment rates 

Estimates are provided for the number of sentenced prisoners
under state or federal jurisdiction by sex. Furthermore,
prisoners are characterized within sexes by age group, race 
(non-Hispanic white and non-Hispanic black), and Hispanic
origin. The detailed race and Hispanic origin categories
exclude estimates of persons identifying two or more races. 

Estimates produced separately for prisoners under state or
federal jurisdiction were combined to obtain a total
estimated population for 2000 and 2009. State estimates were
prepared by combining information about the sex of prisoners
from the NPS with information reported during inmate
interviews on race and Hispanic origin in the 2004 Survey of
Inmates of State Correctional Facilities. 

For the estimates of federal prisoners, the distributions of
FJSP counts of sentenced federal prisoners by sex, age, race,
and Hispanic origin on September 30, 2009, were applied to
the NPS counts of sentenced federal prisoners by sex at 
yearend 2009. 

Estimates of the U.S. resident population for January 1,
2010, by age, sex, race, and Hispanic origin were generated
by applying the December 31, 2009, age distributions within
sex, race, and Hispanic origin groups to the January 1, 2010 
population estimates by sex. The U.S. Census 
Bureau provided the population estimates. 

Age-specific rates of imprisonment for each demographic group
were calculated by dividing the estimated number of sentenced
prisoners within each age group by the estimated number 
of U.S. residents in each age group. The result was
multiplied by 100,000 and rounded to the nearest whole
number. Totals by sex include all prisoners and U.S.
residents regardless of racial or Hispanic origin. Detailed
race and Hispanic origin imprisonment rates exclude persons 
identifying two or more races. 

Calculating admission and release rates 

All admission and release rates were calculated by dividing
the number of admitted or released prisoners for a particular
year by the sentenced population at yearend of the previous
year. The result was was multiplied by 1,000, and then 
rounded to the nearest whole number. 

Estimating expected length of stay 

Admissions and release data from the NPS and individual-level
time served data from the National Corrections Reporting
Program (NCRP) were used to estimate length of stay. 
The NCRP data are administrative data on prisoners entering
and exiting custody or supervision. These data are gathered
annually from all state departments of corrections and 
parole agencies in about 41 states. 

Four separate datasets from NCRP were constructed for the
analysis: 2000 and 2008 prison release and 2000 and 2008
sentenced prison population (prison stock or stock 
population). The prison release datasets consisted of data
from 36 states. Due to lower participation rates, the prison
stock datasets consisted of data from 24 states. Most of the 
selected states submitted data during both 2000 and 2008.
Data from adjacent years (1 to 2 years after 2000, or 1 to 3
years before 2008) were used to supplement the missing values 
for those states that did not submit data during both years.
Two states, Illinois and Mississippi, did not participate in
NCRP between 2004 and 2008. Data from 2003 were drawn to 
supplement the missing values in the 2008 prison release and
prison stock datasets for these two states. 

BJS used a post-stratification weight computed from NPS and
NCRP to adjust the individual-level NCRP counts to the
national totals. The weight is a ratio of the proportion of 
sentenced prisoners in the sample (NCRP) to the proportion of
sentenced prisoners in the population (NPS). For each state
in the NCRP, a post-stratification weight was calculated
using the following formula: 

In this formula, h represents the state stratum, wh is the
post-stratification weight, nh is the number of cases in the
stratum in the NCRP, and Nh is the number of cases in the
stratum in the NPS. The total number of states for the 
stratum (h) equals 50 in NPS, 36 in the prison release
datasets, and 24 in the prison stock datasets. 

The method used to estimate the mean length of stay in prison
was based on the exit rate and adjusts for the growth rate of
the prison population (Patterson and Preston 2008).
***Footnote 7 Evelyn J. Patterson and Samuel H. Preston,
2008. "Estimating Mean Length of Stay in Prison: Methods and
Applications," Journal of Quantitative Criminology, Volume
24, pages 33-49***. 

This measure is represented by the following equation, where
is the estimator, d is the exit rate of the stable
population, r is the growth rate of the prison population, AD
is the mean duration at exit, and AP is the mean duration of 
the stock population: 

Estimating the mean length of stay included several steps.
First, a post-stratification weight was calculated and
applied to the NCRP data reported by each state. The analysis
was limited to inmates with a sentence of more than 12 months
to exclude jail inmates who typically have shorter sentences.
Exit rates (d) for both years (2000 and 2008) were calculated 
by dividing the number of prisoners released during the year
by the size of the sentenced prison population reported in
the NPS at yearend. NPS data were also used to estimate 
growth in the prison population (r) from yearend 1999 through
yearend 2000 and from yearend 2007 to yearend 2008. Weighted
data from the 36 states in the prison release datasets 
were selected to estimate the mean durations at exit (AD) in
2000 and 2008. Similarly, weighted data from the 24 states in
the prison stock Prison capacities datasets were aggregated
to estimate the mean durations of the stock population (AP)
in 2000 and 2008. Lastly, the estimates obtained from the
previous steps were entered into the estimator to compute the
mean length of stay for the overall prison population in 2000
and 2008. 

With the exceptions of the steps taken to calculate the exit
and growth rates, BJS used the above procedures to estimate
the mean lengths of stay for subgroups defined by the 5 main
offense and admission types. For the calculation of the 
exit rates and growth rates for these subgroups, the
percentage of cases in the main offense and admission
categories was obtained from the weighted NCRP data. The
percentage was applied to the state population counts in NPS
to generate group totals for prison releases and prison 
stock in those categories. The adjusted group totals for
prison releases were divided by the corresponding adjusted
totals for the sentenced prison population to calculate the
exit rates. The growth rates for 2000 and 2008 were derived
from the changes in the adjusted sentenced prison populations
in those categories from 1999 to 2000 and from 2007 to 2008,
respectively. 

The analysis also provided estimates of mean length of stay
and percentage change in length of stay for individual states
providing valid prison release and prison stock data to the
NCRP either for 2000 and 2008 or for adjacent years. The 
weighted NCRP data was used to calculate the average lengths
of time served in 2000 and 2008. State-level prison
population data from the NPS were used to calculate exit
rates and growth rates. 

To assess states' contributions to change in length of stay,
the overall length of stay in all state prisons was
reestimated by setting the states' 2008 values in mean time
served on current admission, number of prison releases,
yearend sentenced prison population, and prison growth at
their 2000 levels. The difference between the new estimate
and the previous estimate was divided by the total amount of
changes in estimated length of stay from 2000 to 2008 in the
overall state prison population. The result, when presented
in the form of percent change, indicates the extent to which
the overall estimated length of stay in prison would have
risen or fallen had the changes in the state from 2000 to
2008 not occurred. 

Prison capacities

State and federal correctional authorities provide three
measures of their facilities' capacity: design capacity,
operational capacity, and rated capacity. Estimates of the
prison populations as a percentage of capacity are based on a
state or Federal Bureau of Prison's custody population. 
In general, a state's capacity and custody counts exclude
inmates held in private facilities. Some states include
prisoners held in private facilities as part of the capacity
of their prison systems. Where this occurs, prison population
as a percent of capacity includes private facilities. 

Definitions 

Average annual change--arithmetic average (mean) annual
change across a specific period. 

Conditional releases --Includes releases to probation,
supervised mandatory releases, and other unspecified
conditional releases. 

Conditional release violators--admissions that include
prisoners released by discretionary parole release, mandatory
parole release, release to probation, or expiration of
sentence with post-custody supervision. 

Custody--the number of inmates held in state or federal
prisons or local jails, regardless of sentence length or
authority having jurisdiction. 

Design capacity--the number of inmates that planners or
architects intended for a facility. 

Expected length of stay or mean expected time to be served an
estimate of the amount of time that offenders admitted into
prison can expect to serve prior to release. It differs from
other measures of time served that are based solely on data
of offenders released from prison. The  estimate of mean
time to be served takes into account the dynamics of growth
in the prison population. See Methodology. 

Highest capacity--the sum of the maximum number of beds
reported across the three capacity measures: design capacity,
operational capacity, and rated capacity. 

Imprisonment rate--the number of prisoners 
under state or federal jurisdiction sentenced to 
more than 1 year per 100,000 U.S. residents. 

Incarceration rate--see total incarceration rate. 

Inmates--individuals held in custody in state 
or federal prisons or in local jails. 

Jail--confinement facilities usually administered 
by a local law enforcement agency, intended for 
adults, but sometimes holding juveniles, before 
and after adjudication. Facilities include jails 
and city/county correctional centers, special jail 
facilities such as medical treatment or release 
centers, halfway houses, work farms, and 
temporary holding or lockup facilities that are 
part of the jail's combined function. Inmates 
sentenced to jail facilities usually have a sentence 
of 1 year or less. 

Jurisdiction--the number of prisoners under the legal
authority of state or federal correctional officials,
regardless of where the prisoner is held. 

Lowest capacity--the sum of the minimum number of beds across
three capacity measures: design capacity, operational
capacity, and rated capacity. 

Mandatory releases -conditional release with post-custody supervision 
generally occurring in jurisdictions using determinate sentencing statutes.

Operational capacity--the number of inmates that can be
accommodated based on a facility's staff, existing programs,
and services. 

Parole violators--admissions that include all conditional
release violators returned to prison for either violation of
conditions of release or new crimes. Some states include
prisoners on post-custody supervision. See Jurisdiction
notes. 

Prisons--compared to jail facilities, prisons are longer-term
facilities run by a state or the federal government, and
typically hold felons and prisoners with sentences of more
than 1 year. However, sentence length may vary by state. 
Connecticut, Rhode Island, Vermont, Delaware, Alaska, and
Hawaii operate integrated systems, which combine prisons and
jails. 

Prisoners -idividuals confined in correctional facilities
under the legal authority (jurisdiction) of state and federal
correctional officials. 

Rated capacity the number of beds or inmates assigned by a
rating official to institutions within the jurisdiction. 

Release rate the number of sentenced prisoners released from
prison during the year divided by the sum of the start of the
year sentence prisoner population plus the number of
sentenced prisoners admitted during the year. 

Sentenced prisoner-- a prisoner sentenced to more than 1
year. 

Total incarceration rate--the number of inmates held in
custody of state or federal prisons or in local jails, per
100,000 U.S. residents. 

Unconditional release Includes expirations of sentence, 
commutations, and other unconditional releases. 

----------------------------------------------------------

NPS jurisdiction notes

Alabama --Operational capacity represents physical capacity 
for inmates but is not based on staffing, programs, and
services.

Alaska--Prisons and jails form one integrated system. All
NPS data include jail and prison populations housed both in
and out of state. Jurisdiction totals include individuals in
electronic and special monitoring programs.

Arizona--Population counts are based on custody data and
inmates in contracted beds.

California --Jurisdiction counts include felons and
unsentenced inmates who are temporarily absent ( i.e. housed
in local jails, hospitals). Population counts for
"unsentence dinmates" include civil addicts who are
temporarily absent because they are under the California
Department of Corrections' jurisdiction and are typically
returned to prison within 30 days.

Colorado--Counts include 222 male and 10 female inmates
in the Youthful Offender System, which was established
primarily for violent juvenile offenders.

Connecticut--Prisons and jails form one integrated
system. All NPS data include jail and prison populations.
Legislation in July 1995 abolished the capacity law. The
capacity of a facility is a fluid number based upon the
needs of the department. The needs are dictated by security
issues, populations, court decrees, legal mandates, staffing,
and physical plant areas or facilities that are serving other
purposes or have been decommissioned. The actual capacity
of a facility is subject to change.

Delaware--Prisons and jails form one integrated system. All
NPS data include jail and prison populations.
Federal Bureau of Prisons Expirations of sentence include
good conduct releases that usually have a separate and
distinct term of supervision.

Georgia--Counts are based on custody data. Population
counts exclude an undetermined number of inmates housed
in local jails awaiting transfer to prison. Number may not
compare to previous years due to a system conversion.

Hawaii--Prisons and jails form one integrated systems. All
NPS data include jail and prison populations.

Illinois--Population counts for prisoners with a sentence
of more than 1 year include an undetermined number of
prisoners with sentences of 1 year.

Iowa--The jurisdiction count for December 31, 2009
is not comparable to previous years due to a change
in measurement. As of 2009, the Iowa Department of
Corrections began including the Operating While Intoxicated
population, prisoners on work release, and prisoners housed
in out of state prisons. Numbers reported in prior years were
custody numbers.

Kansas--Admission and release data for the years 2006
through 2009 are not comparable to previous years due to
change in reporting.

Maine--Parole is not valid in the state of Maine. Parole
numbers reflect post sentence probation.

Massachusetts--Jurisdiction count excludes approximately
4,012, male inmates in local jails and houses of corrections
serving a sentence of more than 1 year. 

Montana--Counts may not be comparable to previous years     
due to a change in reporting.

New Jersey--Jurisdiction counts for prisoners with sentences
of more than 1 year include prisoners with sentences of 1
year.

North Carolina -Standard operational capacity is equal to 
one inmate per cell or 50 square feet per inmate in a
dormitory setting.

Ohio--Population counts for prisoners with a sentence  of
more than 1 year include an undetermined number of prisoners
with sentences of 1 year or less.

Oklahoma--Population counts for inmates with sentences
of less than a year consist mainly of offenders ordered by
the court to the Delayed Sentencing Program for Young Adults
pursuant to 22 O.S. 996 through 996.3.

Oregon--Counts include an undetermined number of inmates with
sentences of a year or less. County authorities retain
jurisdiction over the majority of these types of inmates.

Rhode Island--Prisons and jails form one integrated system.
All NPS data include jail and prison populations.

Vermont--Prisons and jails form one integrated system. All
NPS data include jail and prison populations.

Wisconsin--The population decline from yearend 2008
through yearend 2009 may reflect the initiation of earned
release policies. The decline in admissions reflects the
impact of the truth-in-sentencing.

--------------------------------------------------------

Appendix table contents 

Appendix table 1. Prisoners under the jurisdiction of state
or federal correctional authorities, by jurisdiction,
December 31, 2000, 2008, and 2009 

Appendix table 2. Male prisoners under the jurisdiction 
of state or federal correctional authorities, by
jurisdiction, December 31, 2000, 2008, and 2009 

Appendix table 3. Female prisoners under the jurisdiction 
of state or federal correctional authorities, by
jurisdiction, December 31, 2000, 2008, and 2009 

Appendix table 4. Sentenced prisoners under the jurisdiction 
of state or federal correctional authorities, by
jurisdiction, December 31, 2000, 2008, and 2009 

Appendix table 5. Number of sentenced male prisoners under 
the jurisdiction of state and federal correctional
authorities, December 31, 2000-2009 

Appendix table 6. Sentenced male prisoners under the 
jurisdiction of state or federal correctional authorities, by 
jurisdiction, December 31, 2000, 2008, and 2009 

Appendix table 7. Number of sentenced female prisoners 
under the jurisdiction of state or federal correctional 
authorities, December 31, 2000-2009 

Appendix table 8. Sentenced female prisoners under the 
jurisdiction of state or federal correctional authorities, by 
jurisdiction, December 31, 2000, 2008, and 2009 

Appendix table 9. Imprisonment rates of sentenced prisoners 
under jurisdiction of state and federal correctional
authorities, by sex and jurisdiction, December 31, 2008 and
2009 

Appendix table 10. Number of sentenced prisoners admitted 
and released from state or federal jurisdiction, by
jurisdiction, December 31, 2000, 2008, and 2009 

Appendix table 11. Number of sentenced prisoners admitted 
and released from state or federal jurisdiction, by type, 
December 31, 2009 

Appendix table 12. Estimated number of sentenced prisoners 
under state or federal jurisdiction, by gender, race, and 
Hispanic origin, December 31, 2000-2009 

Appendix table 13. Estimated number of sentenced prisoners 
under state or federal jurisdiction, by gender, race,
Hispanic origin, and age, December 31, 2009 

Appendix table 14. Estimated rate of sentenced prisoners 
under state or federal jurisdiction, per 100,000 U.S.
residents, by gender, race, and Hispanic origin, December 31,
2000-2009 

Appendix table 15. Estimated number of sentenced prisoners 
under state or federal jurisdiction per 100,000 U.S.
residents, by gender, race, Hispanic origin, and age,
December 31, 2009 

Appendix table 16a. Estimated number of sentenced prisoners 
under state jurisdiction, by offense, gender, race, and
Hispanic origin, yearend 2006 

Appendix table 16b. Estimated number of sentenced prisoners 
under state jurisdiction, by offense, gender, race, and
Hispanic origin, yearend 2007 

Appendix table 16c. Estimated number of sentenced prisoners 
under state jurisdiction, by offense, gender, race, and
Hispanic origin, yearend 2008 

Appendix table 17a. Estimated percent of sentenced prisoners 
under state jurisdiction, by offense, gender, race, and
Hispanic origin, yearend 2006 

Appendix table 17b. Estimated percent of sentenced prisoners 
under state jurisdiction, by offense, gender, race, and
Hispanic origin, yearend 2007 

Appendix table 17c. Estimated percent of sentenced prisoners 
under state jurisdiction, by offense, gender, race, and
Hispanic origin, yearend 2008 

Appendix table 18. Number of sentenced prisoners in federal 
prison, by most serious offense, 2000, 2008, and 2009 

Appendix table 19. Number of state or federal prisoners in 
private facilities, December 31, 2000-2009 

Appendix table 20. Number of state and federal prisoners in 
private facilities, by jurisdiction, December 31, 2000, 2008,
and 2009 

Appendix table 21. Number of state or federal prisoners in
local facilities, December 31, 2000-2009 

Appendix table 22. Number of state and federal prisoners in 
local facilities, by jurisdiction, December 31, 2000, 2008,
and 2009 

Appendix table 23. Reported state and federal prison 
capacities, December 31, 2009


Office of Justic Programs * Innovation * Partnerships * Safer
Neighborhoods * http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov

The Bureau of Justice Statistics is the statistical agency of
the U.S.Department of Justice. James P. Lynch is Director.

This Bulletin was written by Heather C. West, Ph.D, William
J. Sabol,Ph.D., and Sarah J. Greenman, BJS Program Assistant.
Spencer Li, BJS Statistician, contributed analyses to this
report. Todd Minton and Lauren Glaze provided statistical
review and verification on the report.

Joshua Giunta carried out the data collection and processing
under the supervision of Steve Simoncini, Governments
Division, Census Bureau, U.S. Department of Commerce.

Georgette Walsh and Jill Duncan edited the report, Barbara
Quinn produced the report, and Jayne E. Robinson prepared the
report for final printing under the supervision of Doris J.
James.

December 2010, NCJ 231675

This report in portable document format and in ASCII and its
related statistical data and tables are available at the BJS
website: http://bjs.ojp.usdoj.gov/index.
cfm?ty=pbdetail&iid=2232.

8/1/2011/TLD/4:00pm