U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Programs
Bureau of Justice Statistics

----------------------------------------------------------
This report is one in a series. More recent editions 
may be available. To view a list of all reports in the 
series go to http://www.bjs.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbse&sid=40

This file is text only without graphics and many of the
tables. A Zip archive of the tables in this report in
spreadsheet format (.csv) and the full report including
tables and graphics in .pdf format are available on BJS
website at: http://www.bjs.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbdetail&iid=4737
-----------------------------------------------------------

*******************
Bulletin
*******************

Prisoners in 2012 - Advance Counts

E. Ann Carson and Daniela Golinelli, BJS Statisticians

The U.S. prison population declined for the third 
consecutive year, falling to an estimated 1,571,013 
prisoners at yearend 2012 (figure 1). This was down 27,770 
prisoners (1.7%) from yearend 2011. California had the 
greatest population decline, with 15,035 fewer prisoners 
than in 2011 in part due to the state’s Public Safety 
Realignment policy. In 2012, the overall state prison 
population decreased 2.1% (down 29,223 inmates), while the 
federal prison population grew 0.7% (up 1,453 prisoners). 
Overall imprisonment rates fell for both males and females, 
from 932 male prisoners per 100,000 U.S. male residents in 
2011 to 910 in 2012, and from 65 female prisoners per 
100,000 U.S. female residents in 2011 to 63 in 2012. In 
2012, the number of female prisoners (108,866 inmates) fell 
to the lowest level since 2005—a 2.3% decrease from 2011. 
The total imprisonment rate in 2012 was 480 prisoners per 
100,000 U.S. residents, or 626 per 100,000 U.S. adult 
residents.

The statistics in this report are based on the Bureau of 
Justice Statistics’ (BJS) National Prisoner Statistics (NPS) 
Program, which collects annual data from all 50 states and 
the Federal Bureau of Prisons (BOP) on prisoner counts, 
characteristics, admissions, and releases, as well as prison 
capacity. The 2012 NPS collection is number 88 in a series 
that began in 1926.

***********************************************************

***********
HIGHLIGHTS
***********

* The U.S. prison population declined for the third 
consecutive year in 2012, from a high of 1,615,487 inmates 
in 2009 to 1,571,013 at yearend 2012.

* The U.S. imprisoned 27,770 fewer prisoners (down 1.7%) at 
yearend 2012 than at yearend 2011.

* The federal prison population increased by 1,453 prisoners 
in 2012 (up 0.7%), while the state prison population 
declined by 29,223 prisoners (down 2.1%).

* California accounted for 51% of the decrease in the total 
state prison population.

* Nine states had a decrease of over 1,000 prisoners in 
2012: California, Texas, North Carolina, Colorado, Arkansas, 
New York, Florida, Virginia, and Maryland.

* Louisiana and the federal prison system had increases of 
more than 1,000 prisoners in 2012.

* The total imprisonment rate for prisoners sentenced to 
more than 1 year in state or federal prison decreased by 
2.4%, from 492 per 100,000 U.S. residents in 2011 to 480 in 
2012.

* The imprisonment rate for females decreased by 2.9% from 
2011 to 2012, from 65 female prisoners per 100,000 U.S. 
female residents to 63 per 100,000.
************************************************************

This report is based on data submitted by 47 states and the 
Federal Bureau of Prisons (BOP). Data for the three states 
that had not yet submitted NPS data at the time of 
publication have been estimated (see Methodology). In late 
2013, BJS will publish a more extensive report, Prisoners in 
2012, which will include 2011 and 2012 updates from states 
that had not reported in time to be incorporated in this 
advance report, and information on prison admissions, 
releases, capacity, and the age distribution of sentenced 
inmates.

***************************************
States drove the third consecutive 
decline in the U.S. prison population
***************************************

After reaching a peak of 1,407,369 inmates in 2009, the 
state prison population declined during the next 3 years 
(table 1). The total state prison population decreased by 
2.1% in 2012, following a 1.5% decrease in 2011. The federal 
prison population grew by 0.7% in 2012, continuing a trend 
that began in 1998.

In 2012, the prison population declined in 28 states, and 9 
states reported decreases of more than 1,000 inmates (table 
2). California observed the largest decline and accounted 
for more than half of the drop in the overall U.S. prison 
population, with about 10% (15,035) fewer inmates at yearend 
2012 than in 2011. (See text box on California Public Safety 
Realignment on page 4.) Texas reported the second largest 
decline in prison population in 2012 (down 5,852), followed 
by North Carolina (down 2,304). Colorado, Arkansas, New 
York, Florida, Virginia, and Maryland also reported at least 
1,000 fewer inmates during the same period.

Louisiana (up 1,538 prisoners or 3.9%) and the federal 
prison system (up 1,453 prisoners or 0.7%) reported an 
increase of at least 1,000 inmates. The prison population in 
Mississippi, Michigan, and Kentucky each increased by more 
than 500 inmates in 2012.

************************************************************

*******************************************************
California prison populations continued to decline 
during the second year of Public Safety Realignment
*******************************************************

In 2012, California continued to reduce the number of 
inmates housed in state prisons, as mandated by laws enacted 
on October 1, 2011, to alleviate overcrowding. While some 
decrease was observed during the last 3 months of 2011, 2012 
marked the first full year of implementation of the 
California Public Safety Realignment (PSR) program. (See 
Prisoners in 2011, NCJ 239808, BJS Web, December 2012.) By 
December 31, 2011, the state’s prison population decreased 
by 15,188 sentenced inmates from the 2010 yearend total 
(table 3). California imprisoned 14,814 fewer sentenced 
inmates at yearend 2012 than in 2011, a decline of 9.9%. The 
female population decreased by 25% over the same period, 
from 8,053 sentenced female inmates in 2011 to 6,031 in 
2012. The total imprisonment rate for sentenced prisoners in 
California decreased from 393 prisoners per 100,000 
residents of California in 2011 to 351 in 2012.

PSR was written to divert new admissions of “nonviolent, 
nonserious, and nonsex “***Footnote 1 Offenses as specified 
in the Public Safety Realignment Act.***  offenders to local 
jail facilities after October 1, 2011, while still admitting 
individuals convicted of violent, sex, or serious offenses 
to prison. While the California prison system had a decrease 
in the absolute number of prisoners between 2010 and 2012, 
the redistribution of inmates by offense type shows the 
effect of the PSR policy. Of all males sentenced to at least 
1 year in California prison, 70% were serving time for 
violent offenses on December 31, 2012—11% more than in 2010 
(table 4). About 62% of the female population was imprisoned 
for violent crimes in 2012, up 41% from 2010. 

The proportion of offenders serving sentences for drug or 
property crimes in the California prison population 
decreased in 2012, particularly among women. A total of 
26,570 fewer inmates served time for “nonviolent, 
nonserious, and nonsex offenses” in 2012 than in 2010, while 
the number of violent offenders decreased by 2,709 over the 
same period.

************************************************************

************************************
The growth in federal prisons was 
driven by unsentenced inmates
************************************

The number of prisoners sentenced to more than 1 year in 
federal or state prison, representing 96% of the overall 
prison population, decreased by 1.7% in 2012 (table 5). The 
number of sentenced federal prisoners declined slightly 
(down 0.2%) in 2012, while the total federal population 
increased. The increase was driven primarily by population 
increases among inmates without sentences or with sentences 
of 1 year or less (1,929, not shown in table). The number of 
sentenced state prisoners also declined, with 25,987 (down 
1.9%) fewer sentenced inmates in 2012 than in 2011. 
California accounted for 57% of this decline. Overall, the 
number of sentenced male inmates in state or federal prison 
declined by 1.7% (down 24,109) from 2011 to 2012, and the 
number of sentenced female inmates decreased by 2.3% (down 
2,354) during the same period.

Among the reporting jurisdictions, 25 out of the 47 states 
and the federal prison system showed declines in their 
sentenced prison population (table 6). Five states had 
decreases of more than 10% in their sentenced female prison 
population, while five others showed increases among females 
of more than 10% from 2011 to 2012. However, the majority of 
these states had a small overall prison population.

************************************
Both state and federal imprisonment 
rates declined from 2011 to 2012
************************************

Driven by an overall decrease in the number of sentenced 
inmates, imprisonment rates declined from 2011 to 2012 for 
both state and federal prison systems (table 7). In addition 
to the total imprisonment rate for the U.S. resident 
population, this report includes adult imprisonment rates 
(based on the U.S. resident population age 18 or older) for 
all prisoners by sex for the first time. Adult imprisonment 
rates allow the rate of persons in prison to be compared to 
BJS’s published rates of incarceration in local jails and 
community corrections programs.
 
The total imprisonment rate (480 inmates per 100,000 U.S. 
residents of all ages) in 2012 was 2.4% lower than in 2011. 
In 2012, males were imprisoned at the lowest rate since 2002 
(910 male prisoners per 100,000 U.S. male residents of all 
ages in 2012, or 1,202 male inmates per 100,000 U.S. male 
residents age 18 or older). State prisons reported the 
lowest overall imprisonment rate in over a decade (418 
prisoners per 100,000 U.S. residents of all ages).

With the exception of the federal prison system, which 
increased an average of 2.7% each year between 2002 and 
2011, the average annual percentage decrease in imprisonment 
rates among the total U.S. prison population and among male 
and female prisoners was less than 1% between 2002 and 2011. 
From 2011 to 2012, rates for the total U.S. prison 
population, male and female prisoners, and the federal 
prison population declined by at least 1%. Among the 
reporting jurisdictions, 29 of the 47 states that reported 
data had a decrease in their total imprisonment rate during 
this period (table 8). California reported the largest 
imprisonment rate decline from 2011 to 2012 (down 11%), from 
393 inmates per 100,000 state residents to 351 in 2012. 

In 2012, states with the highest imprisonment rates included 
Louisiana (893 per 100,000 state residents), Mississippi 
(717 per 100,000 state residents), Alabama (650 per 100,000 
state residents), Oklahoma (648 per 100,000 state 
residents), and Texas (601 per 100,000 state residents). The 
federal prison system reported the lowest imprisonment rate 
in 2012 (62 per 100,000 U.S. residents), followed by Maine 
(145 per 100,000 state residents), Minnesota (184 per 
100,000 state residents), and Rhode Island (190 per 100,000 
state residents).

******************************************
Violent offenders comprised the majority 
of the state prison population in 2011
******************************************

Inmates sentenced to more than 1 year of imprisonment for 
violent offenses continued to account for the majority (53%) 
of the state prison population in 2011, the latest year for 
which the most complete state offense data are available 
(table 9). The distribution of offense categories was more 
evenly divided among female inmates than male inmates, with 
37% of females imprisoned for violent offenses, 28% for 
property offenses, and 25% for drug crimes. Among male 
inmates, 54% were incarcerated for violent crimes, 18% for 
property offenses, and 16% for drug offenses.

The percentage of Hispanic inmates sentenced for violent 
offenses (58%) exceeded that of non-Hispanic black (56%) and 
non-Hispanic white (49%) inmates (table 10). Footnote 2 For 
distribution of prisoners by race categories, see Prisoners 
in 2011, NCJ 239808, BJS Web, December 2012.***
The number of black inmates imprisoned for violent crimes 
(284,631) surpassed that of white (228,782) or Hispanic 
(162,489) inmates. Among black inmates sentenced for violent 
crimes, the leading cause of incarceration was robbery (19% 
of the total black prison population), followed by murder 
and nonnegligent manslaughter (13%). Black and Hispanic 
inmates were incarcerated at similar percentages for violent 
offenses, with 13% of the Hispanic prison population held 
for murder and nonnegligent manslaughter, 13% for robbery, 
and 14% for aggravated or simple assault. Among white 
inmates convicted of violent crimes, the leading cause for 
incarceration was rape or sexual assault (17% or 79,282 
prisoners). When combined with rape or sexual assault 
convictions, the overall number of white inmates imprisoned 
for rape or sexual assault exceeded the number of black and 
Hispanic inmates sentenced for rape or sexual assault 
combined (75,838). The number of white inmates sentenced for 
property crime (108,560) was larger than the number of black 
(78,197) and Hispanic (38,264) inmates sentenced for 
property crime, while more black inmates were sentenced for 
drug offenses than inmates of other races or Hispanic 
origin.

************************************************************

***********************************************
National Prisoner Statistics jurisdiction notes
*********************************************** 

Alaska--Prisons and jails form one integrated system. All 
NPS data include jail and prison populations housed in-state 
and out-of-state. Jurisdictional totals include individuals 
in electronic and special monitoring programs who are under 
the jurisdiction of the state of Alaska.

Arizona--Jurisdiction counts are based on custody data and 
inmates in contracted beds.

California--Population counts for inmates with over 1 year 
maximum sentence(s) include felons who are temporarily 
absent, such as in court, jail, hospital, etc. The majority 
of temporarily absent inmates are absent for fewer than 30 
days. Population counts for unsentenced inmates include 
civil addicts who are enrolled for treatment and are not 
serving a criminal conviction sentence, but are under the 
jurisdiction of the California Department of Corrections and 
Rehabilitation. California is unable to differentiate 
between inmates held in federal facilities and in other 
states’ facilities. 

Colorado--opulation counts include a small undetermined 
number of inmates with a maximum sentence of 1 year or less. 

Connecticut--Prisons and jails form one integrated system. 
All NPS data include jail and prison populations. 

Delaware--Prisons and jails form one integrated system. All 
NPS data include jail and prison populations. 

Federal Bureau of Prisons--Jurisdiction counts include 
inmates housed in secure private facilities through private 
contracts and subcontracts, and inmates housed in jail or 
short-term detention and others held in state-operated 
secure facilities. Counts also include 8,932 inmates held in 
nonsecure privately operated residential reentry centers and 
2,659 offenders on home confinement. The Federal Bureau of 
Prisons does not house inmates age 17 or younger in federal 
facilities.

Georgia--Females are not housed in privately operated 
correctional facilities in Georgia. Subtotals of race, sex, 
and sentence length for jurisdiction and custody counts were 
adjusted by the Georgia Department of Corrections using 
interpolation to match the overall totals.

Hawaii--Prisons and jails form one integrated system. All 
NPS data include jail and prison populations. In custody and 
jurisdiction counts, sentenced felon probationers and 
probation violators are included with the counts of a total 
maximum sentence of 1 year or less. Jurisdiction counts 
include dual jurisdiction (state of Hawaii or federal) 
inmates currently housed in federal facilities and in 
contracted beds. 

Iowa--As of 2009, the Iowa Department of Corrections began 
including offenders on work release, the Operating While 
Intoxicated population, and Iowa inmates housed in out-of-
state prisons and jurisdiction counts. Iowa data included in 
BJS reports prior to 2009 were custody counts only. 
Jurisdiction counts include Iowa offenders housed in prisons 
in other jurisdictions who are under Iowa’s jurisdiction. 
Data quality and collection methodology have been updated in 
2012, so changes from previous years’ counts may reflect 
these changes.

Kansas--Jurisdiction counts of inmates with sentences of 
less than 1 year are available in 2012, but were not in 
2011.

Louisiana--Jurisdiction and capacity counts were as of 
December 27, 2012.

Massachusetts--By law, offenders in Massachusetts may be 
sentenced to terms of up to 2.5 years in locally operated 
jails and correctional institutions. This population is 
excluded from the state count, but is included in published 
population counts and rates for local jails and correctional 
institutions. Jurisdiction counts exclude approximately 
3,271 inmates in the county system (local jails and houses 
of correction) serving a sentence of over 1 year, but these 
inmates are included in imprisonment rate calculations at 
the request of the Massachusetts Department of Corrections. 
Jurisdiction and custody counts may include a small but 
undetermined number of inmates who were remanded to court; 
transferred to the custody of another state, federal, or 
locally operated system; or subsequently released.

Maryland--The number of inmates with maximum sentences of 
more than 1 year is estimated by taking the percentages for 
these prisoners from the automated totals and applying them 
to the manual totals submitted for NPS. The number of male 
inmates included in the jurisdiction count of prisoners held 
in other state facilities may include a small number of 
female inmates.

Minnesota--Jurisdiction counts include inmates temporarily 
housed in local jails, on work release, or on community work 
crew programs. 

Mississippi--Custody counts exclude county regional 
facilities, while jurisdiction counts include these 
facilities. Local jails and county regional facilities were 
included in the jurisdiction count of inmates housed at 
local facilities. 

Nebraska--By statute, inmates are housed where they are 
sentenced by the judge and are never housed in local jails 
or by another state to ease prison crowding. 

New Hampshire--The new offender database management system 
reports the number of inmates under New Hampshire’s 
jurisdiction but housed in other state facilities in a 
different manner from NPS submissions prior to 2010.

New Jersey--Population counts for inmates with a maximum 
sentence of more than 1 year include inmates with sentences 
of 1 year. The New Jersey Department of Corrections has no 
jurisdiction over inmates with sentences of less than 1 year 
or over unsentenced inmates. 

New Mexico--Jurisdiction counts do not include inmates from 
other states housed in New Mexico under the interstate 
compact agreement.

North Carolina--As of December 1, 2011, North Carolina 
prisons no longer housed misdemeanor offenders with 
sentences of less than 180 days. 

Ohio--Population counts for inmates with a maximum sentence 
of more than 1 year include an undetermined number of 
inmates with a sentence of 1 year or less. Counts of inmates 
under Ohio’s jurisdiction but housed in federal or other 
state facilities are estimates. 

Oklahoma--Jurisdiction counts exclude inmates from other 
states who were serving time in Oklahoma prisons under the 
interstate compact. Most of the inmates with sentences of 
less than 1 year were part of the Oklahoma Delayed 
Sentencing Program for Young Adults. Counts of prison 
release by escape reflect inmates escaping state-run prisons 
only. Because these inmates were included in the 2011 
jurisdiction counts, the 2012 jurisdiction is not comparable 
to 2011. 

Oregon--Most offenders with a maximum sentence of less than 
1 year remain under the custody of local counties rather 
than the Oregon Department of Corrections.

Pennsylvania--All Pennsylvania inmates housed in Virginia 
were brought back to serve time in Pennsylvania in March 
2012.

Rhode Island--Prisons and jails form one integrated system. 
All NPS data include jail and prison populations. 
Jurisdiction counts include inmates who have dual 
jurisdiction, or those serving Rhode Island sentences out of 
state while serving that state’s sentence as well. 

South Carolina--The December 31, 2012, custody count of 
unsentenced individuals includes Interstate Compact 
Commission (ICC) inmates. As of July 1, 2003, the South 
Carolina Department of Corrections (SCDC) began releasing 
inmates due for release and housed in SCDC institutions on 
the first day of each month. Since January 1, 2012, was a 
holiday, inmates eligible for release on January 1 were 
released on December 31, 2011. Therefore, the inmate count 
was at its lowest point for the month on December 31, 2012. 
All inmates in private facilities in South Carolina were 
housed in private medical facilities. 

South Dakota--Custody and jurisdiction counts of inmates 
serving a maximum sentence of 1 year or less included those 
under the sentence of probation who, as a condition of 
probation, must serve up to 180 days in state prison. The 
custody count of unsentenced inmates included all holds for 
the U.S. Marshals Service (sentenced and unsentenced). 

Texas--Offenders in custody were all offenders serving time 
in a facility owned and operated by the Texas Department of 
Criminal Justice at the time of data collection. 
Jurisdiction counts include offenders in custody and 
offenders held in privately operated prisons, intermediate 
sanction facilities, substance abuse felony punishment 
facilities, pre-parole transfer facilities, and halfway 
houses; offenders temporarily released to a county for less 
than 30 days; and offenders awaiting paperwork for transfer 
to state-funded custody. 

Vermont--Prisons and jails form one integrated system. All 
NPS data include jail and prison populations. 

Virginia--Jurisdiction counts were for December 31, 2012. As 
of September 1, 1998, the state is responsible for inmates 
with a sentence of 1 year or more, or a sentence of 12 
months and 1 day. The state was responsible for a 1-year 
sentence, while local authorities were responsible for a 12-
month sentence. Inmates with a sentence of 12 months or less 
were not the responsibility of the state. 

Wisconsin--Custody and jurisdiction counts include 722 
temporary probation and parole placements.
************************************************************

************************************************************
***********************
Terms and definitions
***********************

Adult imprisonment rate--The number of prisoners under state 
or federal jurisdiction sentenced to more than 1 year per 
100,000 U.S. residents age 18 or older.

Average annual change--Average (mean) annual change across a 
specific period.

Custody--Prisoners held in the physical custody of state or 
federal prisons or local jails, regardless of sentence 
length or authority having jurisdiction.

Imprisonment rate--The number of prisoners under state or 
federal jurisdiction sentenced to more than 1 year per 
100,000 U.S. residents of all ages.

Inmate--A person incarcerated in a local jail, state, or 
federal prison or a private facility under contract to 
federal, state, or local authorities. 

Jail--A confinement facility usually administered by a local 
law enforcement agency that is intended for adults, but 
sometimes holds juveniles, for confinement before and after 
adjudication. Such facilities include jails and city or 
county correctional centers; special jail facilities, such 
as medical treatment or release centers; halfway houses; 
work farms; and temporary holding or lockup facilities that 
are part of the jail’s combined function. Inmates sentenced 
to jail facilities usually have a sentence of 1 year or 
less. Connecticut, Rhode Island, Vermont, Delaware, Alaska, 
and Hawaii operate integrated systems, which combine prisons 
and jails.

Jurisdiction--The legal authority of state or federal 
correctional officials over a prisoner, regardless of where 
the prisoner is held. 

Prison--A long-term confinement facility run by a state or 
the federal government that typically holds felons and 
offenders with sentences of more than 1 year. However, 
sentence length may vary by state. Connecticut, Rhode 
Island, Vermont, Delaware, Alaska, and Hawaii operate 
integrated systems, which combine prisons and jails.

Prisoner--An individual confined in a correctional facility 
under the legal authority (jurisdiction) of state or federal 
correctional officials. 

Sentenced prisoner--A prisoner sentenced to more than 1 
year.
************************************************************

************
Methodology
************

Begun in 1926 under a mandate from Congress, the National 
Prisoner Statistics (NPS) Program collects annual data on 
prisoners at yearend. The Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS) 
sponsors the survey, and the U.S. Census Bureau serves as 
the data collection agent. BJS depends entirely on voluntary 
participation by state departments of corrections and the 
Federal Bureau of Prisons for NPS data.

The NPS distinguishes between inmates in custody and 
prisoners under jurisdiction. To have custody of a prisoner, 
a state or the Federal Bureau of Prisons (BOP) must hold 
that inmate in one of its facilities. To have jurisdiction 
over a prisoner, the state or BOP must have legal authority 
over that prisoner, regardless of where the prisoner is 
incarcerated or supervised. Some states were unable to 
provide counts that distinguish between custody and 
jurisdiction. (See NPS jurisdiction notes to determine which 
states did not distinguish between custody and jurisdiction 
counts.)

The NPS jurisdiction counts include persons held in prisons, 
penitentiaries, correctional facilities, halfway houses, 
boot camps, farms, training or treatment centers, and 
hospitals. Counts also include prisoners who were--

* temporarily absent (less than 30 days), out to court, or 
on work release

* housed in privately operated facilities, local jails, or 
other state or federal facilities

* serving concurrent sentences for more than one 
correctional authority.

The NPS custody counts include all inmates held within a 
respondent’s facilities, including inmates housed for other 
correctional facilities. The custody counts exclude inmates 
held in local jails and in other jurisdictions. With a few 
exceptions, the NPS custody counts include inmates held in 
privately operated facilities.

Respondents to NPS surveys are permitted to update the prior 
counts of prisoners held in custody and under jurisdiction. 
Some statistics on jurisdiction and sentenced prison 
populations for prior years have been updated in this 
report. All tables showing data based on jurisdiction 
counts—including tables of imprisonment rates—were based on 
the updated and most recently available data provided by 
respondents. 

The NPS has historically included counts of inmates in the 
combined jail–prison systems in Alaska, Connecticut, 
Delaware, Hawaii, Rhode Island, and Vermont. The District of 
Columbia (D.C.) has not operated a prison system since 
yearend 2001. Felons sentenced under the D.C. criminal code 
are housed in federal facilities. Jail inmates in D.C. are 
included in the Annual Survey of Jails. Some previously 
published prisoner counts and the percentage change in 
population include D.C. jail inmates for 2001, the last year 
of collection. 

Additional information about the NPS, including the data 
collection instrument, is available on the BJS website at 
www.bjs.gov.

********************
Nonreporting states
********************

As of June 12, 2013, three states had not yet reported 2012 
total and sex-specific jurisdiction or custody counts to the 
NPS. BJS compared data submitted to NPS by these states from 
past years to all jurisdiction or custody counts from past 
years available on each states’ departments of corrections 
website (between 3 and 12 years’ worth of data were 
available across the states). Within each year, BJS 
calculated the ratio of the reported NPS count to the count 
published on the website. The average of these ratios was 
applied to the count reported on each states’ website that 
was closest to the count on December 31, 2012, to obtain the 
total imputed jurisdiction count for each state. This was 
repeated for total male and female jurisdiction counts. In 
the case of Washington, sex-specific counts were not 
available for 2012 on the DOC website, so BJS used the 
average ratio of males to females to impute the number of 
females. Finally, the within-state ratio of those sentenced 
to total jurisdiction by sex was applied to the imputed 
total jurisdiction values to obtain imputed counts for males 
and females sentenced to more than 1 year.

The imputed counts were used to calculate overall state and 
national totals of prisoners, but are not reported on the 
individual state level. BJS will publish the final total 
estimated and state-specific reported counts in the annual 
Prisoners in 2012 report in late 2013.

***********************************************
Estimating offense distribution in the state 
prison population by race or Hispanic origin
***********************************************

National-level estimates of the number of state prisoners by 
race were based on adjusting NPS counts to comport with 
Office of Management and Budget (OMB) definitions of race 
and Hispanic origin. OMB defines persons of Hispanic or 
Latino origin as a separate category. Race categories are 
defined exclusive of Hispanic origin. Not all NPS providers’ 
information systems categorize race and Hispanic origin in 
this way. BJS adjusts the NPS data on race and Hispanic 
origin by the ratio of the relative distribution of 
prisoners by race and Hispanic origin in self-report inmate 
surveys that use OMB categories for race to the relative 
distribution of prisoners by race and Hispanic origin in the 
NPS data. This ratio was calculated for the year(s) in which 
BJS had an inmate survey and NPS data. For this report, the 
2004 Survey of Inmates in State Correctional Facilities was 
used to calculate this ratio. The ratio obtained by 
comparing the within-year relative distributions by race and 
Hispanic origin was then multiplied by the NPS distribution 
in a year to generate the estimate of persons by race and 
Hispanic origin. 

BJS employed a ratio adjustment method to weight the 
individual-level race or sex-specific offense data from the 
National Corrections Reporting Program (NCRP) to the state 
control totals for sex and the estimated race or ethnicity 
control totals from NPS, thereby yielding a national offense 
distribution for state prisoners. Because data submission 
for NCRP typically lags behind that of NPS, offense 
distribution estimates are published for the previous 
calendar year.

************************************************************
The Bureau of Justice Statistics is the statistical agency 
of the U.S. Department of Justice. William J. Sabol is the 
acting director.

This report was written by E. Ann Carson and Daniela 
Golinelli. Margaret Noonan, Todd Minton, and Sheri Simmons 
verified the report.

Morgan Young and Jill Thomas edited the report, and Barbara 
Quinn produced the report under the supervision of Doris J. 
James.

July 2013, NCJ 242467
************************************************************

****************************************************
Office of Justice Programs
Innovation * Partnerships * Safer Neighborhoods
www.ojp.usdoj.gov
****************************************************

7/22/13/JER/11:15am

