U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Programs
Bureau of Justice Statistics

-------------------------------------------------------
This file is text only without graphics and many of the
tables. A Zip archive of the tables in this report in
spreadsheet format (.csv) and the full report including
tables and graphics in .pdf format are available on BJS
website at: 
http://www.bjs.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbdetail&iid=4880

This report is one in a series. More recent editions 
may be available. To view a list of all in the series 
go to http://bjs.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbse&sid=40
-------------------------------------------------------

*******************
Bulletin
*******************

Prisoners in 2012
Trends in Admissions and Releases, 1991–2012

E. Ann Carson and Daniela Golinelli, BJS Statisticians

The prisoner population in the United States in 2012 declined 
for the third straight year, from 1,599,000 at yearend 2011 
to 1,570,400 at yearend 2012. On December 31, 2012, the 
number of persons sentenced to serve more than 1 year 
(1,511,500) in state or federal prison facilities decreased 
by 27,400 prisoners from yearend 2011 and by 42,600 from 
yearend 2009, when the U.S. prison population was at its peak 
(figure 1). Between 1978 and 2009, the number of prisoners 
held in federal and state facilities in the United States 
increased almost 430%, from 294,400 on December 31, 1978, to 
1,555,600 on December 31, 2009. This growth occurred because 
the number of prison admissions exceeded the number of 
releases from state prisons each year. However, in 2009, 
prison releases exceeded admissions for the first time in 
more than 31 years, beginning the decline in the total 
yearend prison population. Admissions to state and federal 
prisons declined by 118,900 offenders (down 16.3%) between 
2009 and 2012. In 2012, the number of admissions (609,800) 
was the lowest since 1999, representing a 9.2% decline (down 
61,800 offenders) from 2011.

This report describes changes in the types of state prison 
admissions and releases between 1991 and 2011. Changes over 
time in the total yearend prison population are influenced by 
changes in the number of state prisoners who make up 87% of 
the total prison population. The report also discusses how 
these changes influence sex, race, Hispanic origin, offense, 
and sentence length distributions. The statistics in this 
report are based on the Bureau of Justice Statistics’ (BJS) 
National Prisoner Statistics (NPS) Program, National 
Corrections Reporting Program, and the 1991 and 2004 surveys 
of state prison inmates.

*************************************************

***********
HIGHLIGHTS
***********

* In 2012, the number of admissions to state and federal 
prison in the United States was 609,800 offenders, the lowest 
number since 1999.

* The number of releases from U.S. prisons in 2012 (637,400) 
exceeded that of admissions for the fourth consecutive year, 
contributing to the decline in the total U.S. prison 
population.

* In 2011, the majority of state prisoners in 2011 (53%) were 
serving time for violent offenses.

* New court commitments made up 82% of state admissions in 
1978, 57% in 2000, and 71% in 2012.

* New court commitments to state prisons for drug offenders 
decreased 22% between 2006 and 2011, while parole violation 
admissions decreased 31%. 

* Between 1991 and 2011, new court commitments of females to 
state prison for violent offenses increased 83%, from 4,800 
in 1991 to 8,700 in 2011.

* Drug offenses accounted for 24% of new court admissions of 
black inmates in 2011, a decrease from a range of 35% to 38% 
from 1991 to 2006. 

* Since 1991, the proportion of newly admitted violent 
offenders receiving prison sentences of less than 5 years has 
increased.

* California’s Public Safety Realignment policy drove the 
decrease in the total number of admissions to California 
state prisons, as well as a decline in the proportion of 
admissions to California state prisons for parole violation 
(from 65% in 2010 to 23% in 2012).

* Prisoners age 44 and younger accounted for 80% of prison 
admissions, 77% of releases, and 72% of the yearend 
population in 2012.
 
* The number of prisoners sentenced to more than 1 year under 
state or federal correctional authorities in 2012 was 
1,511,500, down from 1,538,800 at yearend 2011.

*************************************************

*************************************
The drop in state prison admissions 
drove the overall decline in U.S. 
prison admissions in 2012
*************************************

Admissions to U.S. prisons in 2012 declined by 61,800 
offenders (9.2%) from 2011, the sixth year in which the 
number of admissions has decreased. Admissions declined  from 
a high of 747,000 in 2006 to 609,800 in 2012 (table 1). Both 
state departments of corrections and the Federal Bureau of 
Prisons admitted fewer inmates in 2012 than in 2011, although 
the decline in admissions to state prisons (down 57,100) 
accounted for 92% of the total decrease. The number of 
admissions to state prisons in 2012 (553,800) is the lowest 
since 1997. The highest number of admissions to federal 
prisons occurred in 2011 (60,600 admissions). In 2012, 
federal prison admissions decreased by 4,700 admissions or 
7.7%. 

Admissions or entries to prison for violating conditional 
release from prison, typically referred to as parole 
violation admissions (which also include new crimes committed 
while serving a term of parole), represented 16% of all state 
prison admissions and 10% of federal prison admissions in 
1978. However, this type of admission increased over the 
following years.

Admissions for new crimes (82% of all state admissions in 
1978) reached a low of 57% in 2000 before rebounding to 65% 
in 2011. New court commitments accounted for 71% of all state 
and 92% of federal prison entries in 2012. While the overall 
number of new court commitments to state prisons declined by 
1.3% between 2011 and 2012, the proportion of this type of 
admissions increased due to a 26% decrease in the number of 
parole violation admissions.

About 8% (4,700 prisoners) of federal prison admissions in 
2012 were prisoners returned for violating their conditional 
release. There were 52,400 fewer admissions due to parole 
violation to state prisons in 2012 than in 2011 (down 26%). 
Parole violation admissions accounted for 27% of the total 
state prison entries, down from 33% in 2011. This decrease 
can be attributed to the large decline in parole violation 
admissions in California, from 60,300 in 2011 to 8,000 in 
2012. Overall, admissions to California prisons declined by 
65% between 2011 and 2012, while entries on parole violations 
decreased by 87% (appendix table 1).

*************************************
Releases from state prison in 2012 
exceeded admissions for the fourth 
consecutive year, contributing to 
the decline in the total prison 
population
*************************************

Although the number of releases or exits from U.S. prisons 
declined 7.7% between 2011 and 2012, releases exceeded the 
number of prison admissions (table 2). Total U.S. and state 
prison releases have outpaced admissions since 2009. The 
decline in releases from state prison offset the increase in 
exits from federal prison. State prisons released 54,500 
fewer inmates in 2012 than in 2011. However, 27 states had an 
increase in the number of releases from 2011 to 2012, led by 
Colorado (up 17%), Hawaii and Massachusetts (up 16% each), 
Idaho (up 13%), and Nebraska (up 12% ) (appendix table 1). 

The number of releases from California state prisons declined 
by 62,000 offenders (down 57%), from 109,500 in 2011 to 
47,500 in 2012. Twenty-three other states released fewer 
inmates from prison in 2012 compared to 2011, including New 
Hampshire (down 17%), Arkansas (down 13%), Oklahoma (down 
10%), Nevada (down 9%), and Georgia and Michigan (down 8% 
each).

Releases from federal prisons increased by more than 1% in 
2012, continuing a trend that started in 2009. The BOP 
released 56,000 inmates in 2012, which exceeded admissions by 
100 inmates. This was the first year in more than a decade in 
which the federal system released more inmates than it 
admitted.

Conditional releases, including supervised mandatory 
releases, discretionary parole, and shock probation, 
continued a decline that started in 2009, decreasing 14% 
between 2011 and 2012. Federal prisons released 9% fewer 
inmates on conditional status in 2012 than in 2011 due to the 
decline in federal prison inmates sentenced before the 
Sentencing Reform Act of 1984, which abolished parole for 
federal prisoners. Conditional releases accounted for 1% of 
exits from federal prisons in 2012, compared to 70% of state 
prison releases. Since 1978, conditional releases accounted 
for 70% to 84% of state prison releases.

In comparison, the number of unconditional releases increased 
in both state and federal prison systems. State prisons had 
6.5% (or 9,700) more unconditional releases in 2012 than in 
2011, while these exits increased by 1.7% (or 900 inmates) in 
the federal system. In 2011, California released 13,700 
inmates without conditions, which increased to about 29,500 
offenders in 2012. Nationally, unconditional prison releases 
accounted for 33% of all exits, up from 29% in 2011.

*************************************
Violent offenders accounted for a 
larger proportion of the state prison 
population between 1991 and 2011
*************************************

In 1991, 45% of all state prisoners—or an estimated 327,000 
offenders—were sentenced to more than 1 year for violent 
offenses (table 3). On December 31, 2006 (the year in which 
admissions to state prisons reached their peak), 50% of all 
sentenced prisoners in custody of state correctional 
authorities were violent offenders. In 2011 (the most recent 
year for which state prison offense data are available), more 
than 53% (or an estimated 718,000 offenders) of the yearend 
population was serving a sentence for a violent crime. While 
robbery was the most common offense across the 20-year 
period, the proportion of violent offenders convicted for 
murder or any sexual assault increased over time. Property 
offenders (250,000 prisoners or 19% of all state prisoners) 
exceeded the number of drug offenders in custody in 2011 
(223,000 inmates, or 17% of the inmate population). 

An increase in the number of admissions to state prisons for 
violent offenses contributed to the growth of these sentenced 
inmates in the yearend prison population. Fewer violent 
offenders than property and drug offenders were admitted in 
1991, 2001, and 2006 (table 4), but by 2011, the estimated 
proportion of admissions for violent and property offenses 
was roughly equal. There were 78,600 fewer total admissions 
in 2011 than in 2006, and 65% of this decline (or an 
estimated 51,000 persons) was due to fewer admissions for 
drug crimes. A drop in the number of persons sentenced for 
drug crimes other than possession accounted for the majority 
(66%, or an estimated 33,600 persons) of the decrease in 
admissions for drug crimes between 2006 and 2011.

*************************************
Between 1991 and 2011, changes in 
state prison admission types were 
associated with changes in the offense 
distributions 
*************************************

As the distribution of types of admissions to state prison 
changed over time, so did the demographic and offense 
compositions of admitted prisoners. In 1991, new court 
commitments were almost equally distributed between violent, 
property, and drug offenses, while parole violation 
admissions of property offenders were almost twice the number 
of admissions for violent crimes or drug offenses (table 5). 
By 2001, the distribution between the three offense 
categories for parole violation admissions was more balanced, 
and drug offenders represented the largest proportion of both 
new court commitments and parole violation admissions. The 
number of new admissions and readmissions for violent 
offenses increased between 1991 and 2006, but only due to the 
overall growth in state prison admissions. The proportion of 
violent offenders among new court commitment and parole 
violation admissions was stable until each increased by about 
3% in 2011.

New court commitments of individuals committing drug offenses 
other than possession, a category that includes drug 
trafficking, decreased by 19% (or 16,300 inmates) between 
2006 and 2011. The number of persons newly admitted to prison 
on drug possession sentences experienced a 27% decline during 
the same period, with an estimated 11,300 fewer new 
admissions. Parole violation admissions for drug offenders 
decreased 31% or 23,300 fewer readmissions.
 
*************************************
The number of females admitted on 
new court commitments for violent 
offenses in 2011 increased by 2% 
from 2006 and by 83% from 1991
*************************************

Between 1991 and 2006, the number of new court commitments to 
state prison for violent offenses increased by 30% for males 
and 79% for females, although the proportion of violent crime 
new court commitments remained roughly the same (table 6). In 
2011, the proportion of violent offenders among all new court 
commitments increased for both males and females. However, 
because of the decrease in overall admissions between 2006 
and 2011, about 1,500 fewer males were admitted to state 
prison for violent crimes, while the number of females 
increased by 180 violent offenders. Over the 20-year period, 
the number of females admitted for violent offenses on new 
court commitments increased 83%, from 4,800 in 1991 to 8,700 
in 2011. 

While the proportion of property crime offenders among new 
court commitments decreased among males between 1991 and 
2006, the number of male offenders sentenced for these crimes 
increased due to the overall growth in state prison 
admissions. In 2006, 19,600 females entered prison for 
property crimes compared to 10,300 in 1991, and 17,100 in 
2011. New admissions for public order offenses—including 
weapons and drunk driving offenses, habitual offender 
sanctions, and vice crimes—increased by about 39,100 for male 
inmates between 1991 and 2006, the largest absolute change in 
the number of admissions. Among the most common public order 
offenses resulting in a new court commitment to prison, 
weapons offenses increased 157% between 1991 and 2011, 
driving while under the influence grew 61%, and court 
offenses (including perjury, failure to appear, bond jumping, 
and tampering) increased 751% (detailed breakdown of offense 
categories not shown). Obstruction of law enforcement grew 
226% over the same period, and admissions of habitual 
offenders increased 311%.

In 2001, 34% of male readmissions to state prison and 47% of 
female readmissions were sentenced drug offenders returning 
on parole violations (table 7). These proportions declined to 
26% of males and 33% of females in 2011. For both males and 
females, the proportion of readmissions to state prison for 
drug possession offenders increased in 2006 and then 
decreased in 2011 to levels comparable to those in 2001.
 
*************************************
Among new court commitments to state 
prison, more than a third each of
black and Hispanic offenders, and a 
quarter of white offenders were 
convicted of a violent offense
*************************************

In 2011, 34% of non-Hispanic black offenders (54,000 
admissions) and 36% of Hispanic offenders (25,000 admissions) 
entering state prison on new court commitments had committed 
violent offenses (table 8). For black offenders, this 
represented an increase over 1991, 2001, and 2006, when less 
than 30% of new admissions were for violent crimes. New court 
commitments for non-Hispanic white offenders convicted of 
violent crimes represented 25% (37,000 offenders) of all new 
admissions of white offenders in 2011.

A third of whites imprisoned for new offenses in 2011 were 
convicted for property offenses (49,000), compared to 25% of 
blacks (38,600) and 21% of Hispanics (15,000). In 1991, 38% 
of all blacks admitted to state prison were serving time for 
new drug offenses.  In 2011, only 24% of all blacks were 
admitted for drug crimes.

Blacks accounted for 47% of new court commitments for violent 
offenses in 2011, compared to 44% in 2006 and 41% in 2001. 
Less than a third of inmates newly committed to state prison 
for violent offenses in 2011 were white (32%), down from 37% 
in 2001. The racial and Hispanic origin of new admissions for 
murder and nonnegligent manslaughter between 2001 and 2011 
showed a decrease among whites (from 29% in 2001 to 24% in 
2011), and increases among blacks (from 46% in 2001 to 51% in 
2011) and Hispanics (from 24% in 2001 to 26% in 2011). Among 
newly sentenced drug offenders, blacks showed a large 
decline, from 49% of all new court commitment admissions for 
drug crimes in 2001 to 42% in 2011. In comparison, whites 
increased from 29% of newly admitted drug offenders in 2001 
to 38% in 2011.

The number and proportion of parole violation admissions for 
drug offenders of all racial groups or Hispanic origin 
decreased between 2001 and 2011 (table 9), with an estimated 
11,400 fewer readmissions of blacks (down 30%), 5,400 fewer 
whites (down 25%), and 5,200 fewer Hispanics (down 36%) in 
2011. The number of parole violations by drug offenders other 
than possession among blacks decreased 92% (down 10,500).

*************************************
Since 1991, the proportion of newly 
admitted violent offenders receiving 
prison sentences of less than 5 
years has increased
*************************************

The proportion of all new court commitments with sentences of 
less than 20 years was relatively stable across the 20-year 
period from 1991 to 2011—93% in 1991 and 2001, 92% in 2006, 
and 94% in 2011 (table 10). In 1991, 10% of all persons 
admitted on new convictions were sentenced to more than 1 
year but less than 2 years in state prison. This increased to 
14% in 2001, 2006, and 2011. The percentage of persons newly 
convicted for violent crimes and sentenced for less than 5 
years increased from 37% in 1991 to 42% in 2001 and 44% in 
2011. In 1991, 64% of offenders sentenced for drug offenses 
received less than 5 years, compared to 60% in 2001. In 2011, 
69% of newly convicted violent offenders, 85% of drug 
offenders, and 88% of property offenders were sentenced to 
less than 10 years in prison. 

In general, sentences for violent offenses were longer than 
for other types of crime. From 1991 to 2011, between 14% and 
16% of prisoners admitted to state prison on new court 
commitments for violent offenses were sentenced to 20 years 
or more (including life or death sentences). A smaller 
proportion of violent offenders  received sentences of life 
or death in 2011 (4.5%) than in 1991 (5.7%) or 2001 (4.9%), 
but the increased number of new court commitments for violent 
crimes in 2011 resulted in a greater number of convicted 
violent offenders with life or death sentences. Both the 
number (down 1,030) and percentage (down 84%) of inmates 
sentenced to life or death for drug offenses decreased 
between 1991 and 2011.

*************************************
Violent offenders’ longer sentences 
contribute to their increased 
proportion in the yearend prison 
population
*************************************

The proportion of new court commitment and parole violation 
admissions for violent offenses is consistently smaller than 
the proportion of violent offenders in the prison population 
on December 31 of each year (table 11). This indicates that 
violent offenders are sentenced to, and are likely serving, 
relatively longer time in prison than inmates convicted of 
other types of crime.

From 1991 to 2011, violent offenses accounted for 27% to 30% 
of new court commitments with sentences of more than 1 year 
(figures 2 to 5). However, within the yearend populations for 
these years, inmates who were newly admitted for violent 
offenses represented 47% to 56% of the total state prison 
population. In contrast, property offenses made up 31% of new 
court commitments with sentences of more than 1 year in 1991, 
27% in 2001 and 2006, and 28% in 2011, compared to between 
17% and 24% of inmates originally admitted for property 
crimes in the prison population on December 31 of each year. 
Although these property offenders were sentenced to more than 
1 year in prison, not all of them were serving a full year.

Time served on parole violation admissions tends to be less 
than time served on new court commitments. This is reflected 
in the comparison of these admissions to the proportion of 
parole violators serving time on December 31 of the 4 years 
examined. The differences in the proportions of admissions 
and the yearend prison population were smaller than those 
observed for new court commitments across all offense 
categories, suggesting that inmates move through their 
confinement more quickly than offenders serving time on new 
court commitments for similar crimes. The only exception to 
this pattern occurred between 1991 and 2001 for admissions of 
public order and drug offense admissions of parole violators. 
In both cases, the proportion of parole violation admissions 
was less than that of parole violators in the yearend state 
prison population.

New admissions for violent offenses showed slight growth 
between 1991 and 2011, while the total share of violent 
offenders in the yearend prison population and among inmates 
readmitted on parole violations increased between 2001 and 
2011.

*************************************
State prisons released almost 24,900 
more inmates than they admitted in 2011
*************************************

State prisons admitted more offenders than they released in 
1991, 2001, and 2006 (table 12). In 2011, there were about 
24,900 more releases than admissions, and 59% of this 
difference was due to 14,600 more releases than admissions of 
drug offenders. Murder was the only offense for which 
admissions always outnumbered releases, while larceny had 
higher counts of releases except in 1991.

In 2011, conditional releases of violent offenders increased 
for inmates of all races and Hispanic origin, representing a 
quarter of whites and a third each of blacks and Hispanics 
released during 2011 (table 13). Black and Hispanic inmates 
convicted of violent crimes had the highest proportion of 
conditional releases across all offenses in 2011, in contrast 
to 2001 and 2006, when drug offenders were the most commonly 
released inmates among blacks and Hispanics. White inmates 
serving prison terms for property crimes had the highest 
number of conditional releases from 1991 to 2011, although 
this proportion declined over time concurrent with an 
increase in the number of releases of white violent and 
public order offenders.
********************************************************

***************************************
Admissions to California state prisons 
declined 65% from 2011 to 2012, while 
releases decreased 57%
***************************************

During 2012, the first full year in which the California 
Public Safety Realignment (PSR) policy was implemented, both 
admissions to and releases from California state prisons 
decreased significantly. Between 2011 and 2012, total 
admissions to prisons in California declined 65%, from 96,700 
admissions in 2011 to 34,300 in 2012 (table 14). The number 
of admissions in 2012 represented a 76% decrease from 2008, 
the year in which California admitted the most people to 
prison (140,800 admissions). (See Prisoners in 2011, NCJ 
239808, BJS web, December 2012).

PSR was written to divert new admissions of nonviolent, 
nonserious, and nonsex offenders to local jail facilities 
starting on October 1, 2011. ***Footnote 1 Offenses as 
specified in the Public Safety Realignment Act.*** 
Individuals convicted of serious, violent, or sex offenses 
continued to be admitted to state prison. In 2012, 48% of all 
admissions were for violent offenses (an increase from 31% in 
2010 and 32% in 2011), and 14% of all admissions in 2012 were 
for drug offenses (a decrease from 25% in 2010). The 
proportion of admissions for property crimes declined by 10% 
over the period from 2010 to 2012, although admissions for 
public order offenses, which include weapons and habitual 
offender violations, increased in 2012.

Between 2011 and 2012, the proportions of all admissions that 
were parole violations and new court commitments were 
reversed. In 2011, 62% of all admissions to California state 
prisons were parole violations, compared to 23% in 2012. New 
court commitments increased from 38% of all admissions in 
2011 to 77% in 2012. In 2012, 33% of parole violation 
admissions to prisons and 53% of prisoners newly committed 
were violent offenders.

The number of inmates released from California prisons also 
declined in 2012, but at a slower rate than the decrease in 
admissions. In 2012, there were 47,500 releases from 
California prisons, 57% fewer than in 2011 when there were 
109,500 releases (table 15). In 2012, 37% of all releases 
were of violent offenders, compared to 29% in 2010. Prisoners 
convicted of aggravated assault and robbery accounted for the 
majority of the increase in released prisoners. While violent 
offenders accounted for 29% of conditional releases in 2010, 
this proportion had increased to 67% in 2012.

Similar to the pattern of admission types, unconditional 
releases accounted for less than 2% of total releases in 2010 
and 12% in 2011, compared to 62% in 2012. In 2012, 37% of 
prisoners were released with post custody conditions, down 
from 98% in 2010. Drug and property offenses accounted for 
33% each of all unconditional releases in 2012. While the 
percentage of violent offenders unconditionally released from 
California state prisons decreased from 40% in 2010 to 18% in 
2012, the increase in the total number of unconditional 
releases in 2012 resulted in a net increase of violent 
offenders with this type of prison release, from 670 
offenders in 2010 to 5,400 offenders in 2012.

Released prisoners in California are returned to the county 
in which they were originally sentenced. While this does not 
guarantee that a former prisoner will continue to live in the 
same county, it provides a proxy measure to identify the 
counties most immediately influenced by state prison 
releases. In 2012, 30% of all inmates released from 
California state prisons (14,800 persons) were returned to 
Los Angeles County, followed by San Bernardino (4,400 inmates 
or 9.1% of all releases) and San Diego counties (3,500 or 
7.3% of all releases) (table 16). Almost two-thirds of 
inmates released from prison to these three counties had no 
conditions placed on their release. Only four counties 
(Alameda, Colusa, Inyo, and Trinity) received more 
conditional releases from state prison than inmates released 
unconditionally.

While Los Angeles County received the largest number of 
inmates released from state prisons in 2012, when compared to 
the general population of each county, Los Angeles had a 
prison release rate of 14.9 per 10,000 county residents. 
Eighteen counties with smaller general populations had higher 
rates of prison release in their communities. Kings County 
(population 150,800) received 507 prison releases, but had a 
rate of 33.6 releases per 10,000 residents. After Kings 
County, Yuba (29.0 releases per 10,000 residents), Tehama 
(28.8 releases per 10,000 residents), and Shasta (24.4 
releases per 10,000 residents) counties had the highest rates 
of released prisoners.

***************************************
The 2012 yearend U.S. sentenced prison 
population declined 1.8%, driven by a 
decrease in the number of state prisoners
***************************************

A total of 27,400 fewer prisoners were sentenced to more than 
1 year in state and federal prisons at yearend 2012, than at 
yearend 2011, a decrease of almost 2% (table 17). The federal 
prison system had the largest sentenced prison population 
(196,600 prisoners) of any jurisdiction in 2012, followed by 
Texas (157,900 inmates), California (134,200 inmates), 
Florida (101,900 inmates), and New York (54,100 inmates). 
With the federal population, these five jurisdictions 
accounted for 43% of the sentenced U.S. prison population in 
2012. Texas, California, and Florida accounted for 30% of the 
sentenced state prison population in 2012.

California (down 10%) had the largest percentage decrease in 
prison population, followed by Arkansas (down 9%), Wisconsin 
and Colorado (down 7% each). The prison populations in New 
Hampshire (up 7%) and North Dakota (up 6%) led the 24 
jurisdictions with sentenced population increases in 2012. 
Females comprised almost 7% of the state prison population 
and 6% of the federal system in 2012.

***************************************
Imprisonment rates continued to 
decline for most race, ethnicity, sex, 
and age groups
***************************************

Compared to age-, sex-, and race-specific imprisonment rates 
in 2011, rates in 2012 remained the same or decreased for all 
but Hispanic males ages 60 to 64, which increased from 685 
per 100,000 U.S. residents to 687 per 100,000 residents 
(table 18) (see Prisoners in 2011, NCJ 239808, BJS web, 
December 2012). 

Male and female white prisoners of all age groups had lower 
imprisonment rates than male and female black and Hispanic 
prisoners. Overall, black males were 6 times and Hispanic 
males 2.5 times more likely to be imprisoned than white males 
in 2012. Hispanic males ages 18 to 19 were more than 3 times 
as likely as white males of the same age to be imprisoned, 
while all other age groups were at least twice as likely as 
white males to be serving a prison sentence. Black males had 
imprisonment rates at least 4 times those of white males in 
all age groups. The rates for black males age 39 or younger 
were more than 6 times greater than white males of the same 
age. Male inmates ages 18 to 19 had the largest imprisonment 
rate disparity between whites and blacks. Black males in this 
age group were almost 9.5 times more likely than white males 
to be in prison.

Almost 1% of all male residents in the United States were 
imprisoned at yearend 2012. A total of 2.8% of black, 0.5% of 
white, and 1.2% of Hispanic males were in state or federal 
prison on December 31, 2012. Among black males, this 
represents a decline from the rate in 2011 (3%). Between 4% 
and 7% of black males ages 20 to 49 were prison inmates. 
Black males ages 30 to 34 had the highest incarceration rate 
(6,932 prisoners per 100,000 black male U.S. residents ages 
30 to 34). This age group also had the highest imprisonment 
rates among white and Hispanic males in 2012.

Among female prisoners in 2012, black females ages 18 to 19 
were 3 times more likely to be imprisoned than white females. 
Hispanic females in this age group had imprisonment rates 
nearly twice those of white females. White and Hispanic 
females approached parity imprisonment rates among prisoners 
ages 35 to 44. Hispanic females age 65 or older were more 
than twice as likely as white females of this age to be 
serving time in prison, the age group of greatest disparity.  
Black and white female imprisonment rates were closest among 
prisoners ages 25 to 39, when black females were less than 
twice as likely as white females to be imprisoned.

**********************
Other select findings
**********************

* In 2012, the number of prisoners released increased in 27 
states (appendix table 1).

* Blacks accounted for 40% of all unconditional releases from 
state prison in 2001, 2006, and 2011 (appendix table 2).

* Inmates under age 45 accounted for 80% of federal and state 
prison admissions in 2012, compared to 72% of the yearend 
prison population in 2012, and 77% of released prisoners 
(appendix tables 3–5). 

* The total U.S. prison population declined for the third 
consecutive year in 2012, to 1,570,400 prisoners on December 
31, 2012 (appendix table 6).

* The proportion of the U.S. prison population housed in 
private prisons increased from 8.2% in 2011 to 8.7% in 2012 
(appendix table 7).

* A total of 137,200 inmates were in the custody of private 
prisons at yearend 2012, a 5% increase over the 131,000 
inmates in 2011.

* The number of prison inmates housed in local jail 
facilities on December 31, 2012 (83,600 inmates) was 2% 
higher than at yearend 2011.

* In 2012, the number of inmates held in local jails 
increased in 16 states.

* Four states housed more than 25% of their prison 
populations in local jails on December 31, 2012: Louisiana 
(52%), Kentucky (38%), Tennessee (30%), and Mississippi 
(29%).

* U.S. prisons held 9,900 fewer persons identified as 
noncitizens in 2012, compared to 102,800 noncitizen inmates 
in 2011 (appendix table 8). Because state and federal 
departments of corrections have varying definitions of 
noncitizen, readers should exercise caution when interpreting 
these results.

* State prisons held 1,300 inmates under age 18 in custody on 
December 31, 2012.

* Based on their reported custody counts, 18 states and the 
BOP were operating prison systems above 100% of their maximum 
reported facility capacity (appendix table 9).

* The number of prisoners serving a sentence for violent 
offenses in federal prison in 2012 (11,700 inmates) decreased 
4% from 2011 (21,200 inmates) (appendix table 10).

* Drug offenders accounted for 50% of the male federal prison 
population and 58% of the female federal prison population in 
2012 (appendix table 11).

* On December 31, 2012, 12% of prisoners in the federal 
prison system were serving time for immigration offenses and 
15% had been convicted of weapons offenses.

***************************************
National Prisoner Statistics Program 
jurisdiction notes
***************************************

Alabama--Prisons have not recently been rated for official 
capacity, but the majority of Alabama prisons are operating 
in a state of overcrowding. Currently, there are 26,339 beds 
in operation; this represents the physical capacity for 
inmates but is not based on staffing, programs, and services. 
Operational capacity differs from the BJS definition.

Alaska--Prisons and jails form one integrated system. All NPS 
data include jail and prison populations housed in state and 
out of state. Jurisdictional totals include individuals in 
electronic and special monitoring programs who are under the 
jurisdiction of the state of Alaska. All capacity measures 
are the same as in 2011. The count of Asian inmates includes 
Pacific Islanders. Alaska does not report type of admission 
or release. Total admissions and releases include Alaskan 
reported values, but state and national totals by type of 
admission and release do not.

Arizona--Jurisdiction counts are based on custody data and 
inmates in contracted beds. The “other admissions” category 
includes four males and one female who were mistakenly 
released and readmitted during 2012.

Arkansas--Jurisdiction counts of prisoners held in local 
jails include county jail back-up and inmates participating 
in the Act 309 Program, which provides additional space for 
the care and custody of state inmates on a temporary basis in 
state-certified adult detention facilities operated by 
counties and cities.

California--Population counts for inmates with maximum 
sentences of more than 1 year include felons who are 
temporarily absent, such as in court, in jail, or in a 
hospital. The majority of temporarily absent inmates are 
absent for fewer than 30 days. Population counts for 
unsentenced inmates include civil addicts who are enrolled 
for treatment and are not serving a criminal conviction 
sentence, but are under the jurisdiction of the California 
Department of Corrections and Rehabilitation. In addition, 
the counts of unsentenced inmates include persons housed in 
out-of-state contract facilities. California is unable to 
differentiate between inmates held in federal facilities and 
those held in other states’ facilities. Changes in design 
capacity are based on information from an annual facilities 
planning and management report.

Colorado--Population counts include a small, undetermined 
number of inmates with a maximum sentence of 1 year or less. 
Admission and release data for inmates who are absent without 
leave (AWOL) or who have escaped are estimated. Design and 
operational capacities do not include the privately run 
facilities in Colorado.

Connecticut--Prisons and jails form one integrated system. 
All NPS data include jail and prison populations. New court 
commitment admissions include inmates admitted in 2012 on 
accused status, but who received a sentence later in 2012. 
Legislation in July 1995 abolished the capacity law. A 
facility’s capacity is a fluid number based on the needs of 
the department. The needs are dictated by security issues, 
populations, court decrees, legal mandates, staffing, and 
physical plant areas of facilities that are serving other 
purposes or have been decommissioned. The actual capacity of 
a facility is subject to change. 

Delaware--Prisons and jails form one integrated system. All 
NPS data include jail and prison populations. Capacity counts 
include the halfway houses under the Department of 
Corrections.

Federal Bureau of Prisons (BOP)--Data reflect inmates under 
BOP jurisdiction on December 30, 2012. Jurisdiction counts 
include inmates housed in secure private facilities where the 
BOP had a direct contract with a private operator, as well as 
inmates housed in secure facilities where there was a 
subcontract with a private provider at a local government 
facility. Jurisdiction counts also include inmates housed in 
jail or short-term detention and others held in state-
operated or other nonfederal secure facilities. Counts 
include 8,932 inmates (7,798 males and 1,134 females) held in 
nonsecure, privately operated community corrections 
centers/halfway houses and 2,659 offenders on home 
confinement (2,278 males and 381 females). A total of 99 male 
and 6 female juveniles were held in contract facilities; 
these inmates were included in the jurisdiction totals but 
excluded from the counts of private, locally operated, or 
federally operated facilities. Due to information system 
configuration, Asians and Native Hawaiians or other Pacific 
Islanders are combined, and inmates of Hispanic origin are 
included in the race categories. On December 30, 2012, BOP 
held 71,714 male and 4,378 female inmates of Hispanic origin. 
Other admissions include hospitalization and treatment. 
Parole violation counts combine those with and without a new 
sentence. Expirations of sentence include good-conduct 
releases that usually have a separate and distinct term of 
supervision, as well as releases from the residential drug 
abuse treatment program. Other releases include vacated 
sentences, completion of hospitalization or treatment, and 
court-ordered terminations. The BOP population on December 
30, 2012, was 176,658 inmates (excluding contracted and 
private facilities), and the rated capacity on that date was 
128,615. The crowding rate was 37%. 

Florida--Other conditional releases include provisional 
release supervision, conditional medical release, program 
supervision, and parole reinstatement.

Georgia--Females are not housed in privately operated 
correctional facilities in Georgia. Subtotals of race, sex, 
and sentence length for jurisdiction and custody counts were 
adjusted by the Georgia Department of Corrections using 
interpolation to match the overall totals.

Hawaii--Prisons and jails form one integrated system. All NPS 
data include jail and prison populations. In custody and 
jurisdiction counts, sentenced felon probationers and 
probation violators are included with the counts of prisoners 
with a total maximum sentence of 1 year or less. Jurisdiction 
counts include dual-jurisdiction (state of Hawaii or federal) 
inmates currently housed in federal facilities and in 
contracted beds. Hawaii does not have a rated capacity for 
the integrated prisons and jail system. Information on 
foreign nationals held in correctional facilities was based 
on self-reports by inmates.

Idaho--Idaho defines rated capacity as 100% of maximum 
capacity and operational capacity as 95% of maximum capacity. 
Design capacity is based on original facility-designed 
occupancy.

Illinois--Illinois did not submit NPS data in 2012. See 
Methodology for a description of the data imputation 
procedure.

Iowa--In 2009, the Iowa Department of Corrections began 
including offenders on work release, the Operating While 
Intoxicated population, and Iowa inmates housed in out-of-
state prisons and in jurisdiction counts. Iowa data included 
in BJS reports prior to 2009 were custody counts only. 
Jurisdiction counts include Iowa offenders housed in prisons 
in other jurisdictions who are under Iowa’s jurisdiction. The 
data quality and collection methodology were updated in 2012; 
therefore, changes from previous years’ counts may reflect 
these updates. Absent without leave (AWOL) admissions and 
releases are for the work release and the Operating While 
Intoxicated population. Escape admissions and releases are 
for the prison population only; this differs from the 2011 
counts, which included escapes from work release.

Kansas--Jurisdiction counts of inmates with sentences of less 
than 1 year are available for 2012, but not for 2011. 
Admissions and releases reflect movements of the custody 
population with the exception of transfers, which include all 
Kansas prisoners regardless of custody status.

Kentucky--The decrease in the number of unconditional 
releases between 2011 and 2012 is due to the implementation 
of a mandatory reentry supervision law, which became 
effective on January 1, 2012.

Louisiana--Jurisdiction and capacity counts are correct as of 
December 27, 2012.

Maine--Fewer male state prisoners are housed in county 
facilities due to overcrowding at the local level. The state 
has been adding capacity and double-bunking at prisons.

Maryland--The number of inmates with maximum sentences of 
more than 1 year is estimated by taking the percentages for 
these prisoners from the automated totals and applying them 
to the manual totals submitted for NPS. The number of male 
inmates included in the jurisdiction count of prisoners held 
in other state facilities may include a small number of 
female inmates. Maryland’s system does not capture Hispanic 
origin. An undetermined number of Native Hawaiians and other 
Pacific Islanders may be included in the count of American 
Indian/Alaska Natives. Maryland’s system does not distinguish 
between AWOL and escape releases, nor does it record the sex 
of inmates housed in out-of-state private prisons. The count 
of admissions by new court commitments may include a small 
but undetermined number of returns from appeal or bond. The 
count of unconditional releases includes court-ordered 
releases and a small but undetermined number of releases to 
appeal or bond. Other release types include interstate 
compact releases and releases of new admissions that were 
counted twice. 

Massachusetts--By law, offenders in Massachusetts may be 
sentenced to terms of up to 2.5 years in locally operated 
jails and correctional institutions. This population is 
excluded from the state count, but is included in published 
population counts and rates for local jails and correctional 
institutions. Jurisdiction counts exclude approximately 3,271 
inmates in the county system (local jails and houses of 
correction) who are serving a sentence of more than 1 year, 
but these inmates are included in imprisonment rate 
calculations at the request of the Massachusetts Department 
of Corrections. Jurisdiction and custody counts may include a 
small but undetermined number of inmates who were remanded to 
court; transferred to the custody of another state, federal, 
or locally operated system; or subsequently released. Due to 
the opening of a new correctional facility for females, the 
admissions, releases, and custody population of county-
sentenced females serving under the jurisdiction of the 
Department of Corrections has decreased. After legislative 
changes to reduce discretionary parole releases in 2011 that 
caused fluctuations in the number and rate of persons 
released on parole, these measures remained stable during 
2012. This has resulted in an apparently higher parole rate 
in 2012 than in 2011 for both males and females. In 2012, 261 
inmates received unconditional court releases due to 
falsification of drug tests by one of the chemists in the 
state drug lab.

Michigan--Operational capacity includes institution and camp 
net operating capacities, as well as the population of 
community programs on December 31, 2012. Michigan’s new 
database system treats Hispanic as an ethnicity rather than a 
race. Because this is currently an optional field, the 
numbers for Hispanics are significantly underreported, and 
the state included them in the white race category. Escape 
releases and admissions consist predominantly of zero-
tolerance escapes from community residential programs.

Minnesota--Jurisdiction counts include inmates temporarily 
housed in local jails, on work release, or on community work 
crew programs. Minnesota only measures operational capacity. 
Admissions and releases due to AWOL or escape, returns from 
or releases to appeal or bond, and releases due to transfer 
are not included in Minnesota’s database file.

Mississippi--Custody counts exclude county regional 
facilities, while jurisdiction counts include these 
facilities. Local jails and county regional facilities are 
included in the jurisdiction count of inmates housed at local 
facilities. Parole and conditional release violators are not 
distinguished by their sentence status in the Mississippi 
file.

Missouri--The Missouri Department of Corrections does not 
have the design capacity of its older prisons, nor does it 
update design capacity for prison extension or improvements. 
Missouri does not use a rated capacity. The state defines 
operational capacity as the number of available beds, 
including those temporarily offline. Noncitizen data are 
based on self-reported place of birth.

Nebraska--By statute, inmates are housed where they are 
sentenced by the judge and are never housed in local jails or 
by another state to ease prison crowding. Nebraska defines 
operational capacity as its stress capacity, which is 125% of 
design capacity for designated facilities. The total design 
and operational capacity for institutions that house females 
includes only one multicustody facility. The department 
operates two co-ed facilities that represent a design 
capacity of 290, and that are counted in the male design and 
operational capacities.

Nevada--Nevada did not submit NPS data in 2012. See 
Methodology for a description of the data imputation 
procedure.

New Hampshire--The new offender database management system 
reports the number of inmates who are under New Hampshire’s 
jurisdiction but housed in other state facilities in a 
different manner from NPS submissions prior to 2010. New 
Hampshire’s operating capacity is defined as the inmate 
population on any given day.

New Jersey--Population counts for inmates with a maximum 
sentence of more than 1 year include inmates with sentences 
of 1 year. The New Jersey Department of Corrections has no 
jurisdiction over inmates with sentences of less than 1 year 
or over unsentenced inmates. Reporting of other conditional 
release admissions has changed from 2011 to better reflect 
the sentence status of inmates. Other releases include 
inmates brought too soon from the county jails into the state 
prison system, then released back to the county jails. New 
Jersey has recently undertaken a review of its prison system 
capacity, resulting in updated counts in 2012.

New Mexico--New Mexico does not include its inmates housed in 
other states under the interstate compact agreement in its 
total jurisdiction count. According to BJS definitions, these 
inmates should be included in the total state jurisdiction, 
and were in this report.

North Carolina--As of December 1, 2011, North Carolina 
prisons no longer house misdemeanor offenders with sentences 
of less than 180 days. Rated capacity is not available. 
Captured escapees are not considered a prison admission type 
in North Carolina, and escape is not considered a type of 
prison release. Supervised mandatory releases are postrelease 
offenders. Postrelease supervision is defined as a 
reintegration program for serious offenders who have served 
extensive prison terms. This form of supervision was created 
by the Structured Sentencing Act of 1993.

North Dakota--Capacities include a new facility that opened 
in 1998 and account for double bunking in the state 
penitentiary.

Ohio--Population counts for inmates with a maximum sentence 
of more than 1 year include an undetermined number of inmates 
with a sentence of 1 year or less. Counts of inmates who are 
under Ohio’s jurisdiction but housed in federal or other 
state facilities are estimates. Counts of admission and 
release types reflect revised reporting methods. Admissions 
of parole violators without a new sentence include only 
formally revoked violators. Returns and conditional releases 
involving transitional control inmates are reported only 
after movement from confinement to a terminal release status 
occurs.

Oklahoma--Jurisdiction counts exclude inmates from other 
states who were serving time in Oklahoma prisons under the 
interstate compact and inmates sentenced to the Department of 
Corrections but not yet in custody. Jurisdiction counts 
include offenders in a Department of Corrections jail 
program, those in court, and escapees in the custody of local 
jails. Most inmates with sentences of less than 1 year were 
part of the Oklahoma Delayed Sentencing Program for Young 
Adults. Offenders in the custody of other states and the BOP 
are mostly escapees. Capacity counts have changed in 
Oklahoma, as only Department of Corrections facilities have 
an approved capacity determined by the Board of Corrections 
according to the standards of the American Correctional 
Association. Noncitizen status is determined by country of 
birth.

Oregon--Most offenders with a maximum sentence of less than 1 
year remain under the custody of local counties rather than 
the Oregon Department of Corrections. Oregon does not 
recognize rated capacity.

Pennsylvania--All Pennsylvania inmates housed in Virginia 
were brought back to serve time in Pennsylvania in March 
2012.

Rhode Island--Prisons and jails form one integrated system. 
All NPS data include jail and prison populations. 
Jurisdiction counts include inmates who have dual 
jurisdiction, or those serving Rhode Island sentences out of 
state while serving that state’s sentence as well. The Rhode 
Island data system records Hispanic as a race rather than an 
ethnicity and does not capture Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific 
Islanders or persons identifying as two or more races. Prison 
admissions classified as escape returns include admissions 
under home confinement, serving out of state, and minimum-
security facilities.

South Carolina--The December 31, 2012, custody count of 
unsentenced individuals includes Interstate Compact 
Commission inmates. As of July 1, 2003, the South Carolina 
Department of Corrections (SCDC) began releasing inmates due 
for release and housed in SCDC institutions on the first day 
of each month. Since January 1, 2013, was a holiday, inmates 
eligible for release on January 1 were released on December 
31, 2012. Therefore, the inmate count was at its lowest point 
for the month on December 31, 2012. All inmates in private 
facilities in South Carolina were housed in private medical 
facilities. Conditional release counts include inmates 
released under community supervision after serving 85% of 
their sentence under truth in sentencing. The SCDC has 
implemented new intensive supervision services, which are 
designed to promote community safety and ensure the 
successful reentry of young offenders back into the 
community. South Carolina uses the operational capacity 
concept in its management reports and other requested 
surveys.

South Dakota--Custody and jurisdiction counts of inmates 
serving a maximum sentence of 1 year or less included those 
under the sentence of probation who, as a condition of 
probation, must serve up to 180 days in state prison. The 
custody count of unsentenced inmates included all holds for 
the U.S. Marshals Service (sentenced and unsentenced). 
Commutations are not tracked separately in the South Dakota 
reporting system; however, they are included in expiration of 
sentence, supervised mandatory release, or other conditional 
releases. South Dakota does not separate discretionary and 
presumptive parole releases. The operational capacity 
reported is planned capacity. South Dakota does not have 
rated or design capacities.

Tennessee--The sex of six inmates could not be identified and 
were counted as males in the jurisdiction counts. Eleven 
inmates could not be assigned to a race category, including 
five females and the six assigned male inmates.

Texas--Offenders in custody were all offenders serving time 
in a facility owned and operated by the Texas Department of 
Criminal Justice at the time of data collection. Jurisdiction 
counts include offenders in custody and those held in 
privately operated prisons, intermediate-sanction facilities, 
substance abuse felony punishment facilities, pre-parole 
transfer facilities, and halfway houses; offenders 
temporarily released to a county for less than 30 days; and 
offenders awaiting paperwork for transfer to state-funded 
custody. Capacities exclude county jail beds because they do 
not have a minimum or maximum number of beds available for 
paper-ready and bench-warrant inmates. Admissions and 
releases include offenders received into an intermediate-
sanction facility, which is a sanction in lieu of revocation. 
These offenders were counted in the parole violator category.

Vermont--Prisons and jails form one integrated system. All 
NPS data include jail and prison populations. Hispanic origin 
and persons identifying as two or more races are not 
collected or recorded in Vermont.

Virginia--Jurisdiction counts were for December 31, 2012. As 
of September 1, 1998, the state is responsible for inmates 
with a sentence of 1 year or more, or a sentence of 12 months 
plus 1 day. The state was responsible for a 1-year sentence, 
while local authorities were responsible for a 12-month 
sentence. Inmates with a sentence of 12 months or less were 
not the responsibility of the state. New court commitments 
are based on fiscal year 2012, while parole violation 
admissions and all releases are based on calendar year 2012. 
The Virginia Department of Corrections maintains a count of 
beds (called authorized capacity) that is provided as the 
measure of rated capacity in this survey. The number of beds 
assigned by rating officials (Virginia Department of 
Corrections) to institutions takes into account the number of 
inmates who can be accommodated based on staff, programs, 
services, and design. Native Hawaiians and Pacific Islanders 
are included in the Asian race category.

Washington--Offenders sentenced to 1 year or less and 
unsentenced offenders generally reside in county jails, but 
revisions to law allow certain inmates with sentences of less 
than 1 year to be housed in prison. These inmates are 
included in the total jurisdiction counts. Native Hawaiians 
and Pacific Islanders are included in the Asian race 
category.

Wisconsin--Custody and jurisdiction counts include 722 
temporary probation and parole placements. The jurisdiction 
count excludes 27 male and 2 female prisoners because they 
were not serving a Wisconsin sentence. In 2012, both the 
female custody and jurisdiction populations increased, 
probably due to more new court commitments and parole 
violation admissions. Wisconsin does not code escapes as 
releases and returns from the escape as admissions. In 2012, 
19 males and 1 female were on escape status. Design 
capacities for local jails and for federal, other state, and 
private facilities are excluded from the total design 
capacity measure. The reported design capacity includes the 
following facilities currently housing Wisconsin adult 
inmates: a state juvenile facility with a design capacity of 
400, a non-Department of Corrections facility with a design 
capacity of 362, and 29 beds contracted in 20 Wisconsin 
county jails to temporarily house Department of Corrections 
inmates. The number of contracted beds has declined 
substantially from the 97 beds reported in 2011.

**********************
Terms and definitions
**********************

Adult imprisonment rate--The number of prisoners under state 
or federal jurisdiction sentenced to more than 1 year per 
100,000 U.S. residents age 18 or older.

Average annual change--Average (mean) annual change across a 
specific period.

Capacity, design--The number of inmates that planners or 
architects intended for a facility.

Capacity, highest--The maximum number of beds reported across 
the three capacity measures: design capacity, operational 
capacity, and rated capacity.

Capacity, lowest--The minimum number of beds across the three 
capacity measures: design capacity, operational capacity, and 
rated capacity.

Capacity, operational--The number of inmates that can be 
accommodated based on a facility’s staff, existing programs, 
and services.

Capacity, rated--The number of beds or inmates assigned by a 
rating official to institutions within a jurisdiction.

Conditional releases--Includes discretionary parole, 
mandatory parole, postcustody probation, and other 
unspecified conditional releases.

Conditional release violators--Readmission to prison of 
persons released to discretionary parole, mandatory parole, 
postcustody probation, and other unspecified conditional 
releases.

Custody--Prisoners held in the physical custody of state or 
federal prisons or local jails, regardless of sentence length 
or authority having jurisdiction.

Imprisonment rate--The number of prisoners under state or 
federal jurisdiction sentenced to more than 1 year per 
100,000 U.S. residents of all ages.

Inmate--A person incarcerated in a local jail, state prison, 
federal prison, or a private facility under contract to 
federal, state, or local authorities. 

Jail--A confinement facility usually administered by a local 
law enforcement agency that is intended for adults, but 
sometimes holds juveniles, for confinement before and after 
adjudication. Such facilities include jails and city or 
county correctional centers; special jail facilities, such as 
medical treatment or release centers; halfway houses; work 
farms; and temporary holding or lockup facilities that are 
part of the jail’s combined function. Inmates sentenced to 
jail facilities usually have a sentence of 1 year or less. 
Alaska, Connecticut, Delaware, Hawaii, Rhode Island, and 
Vermont operate integrated systems, which combine prisons and 
jails.

Jurisdiction--The legal authority of state or federal 
correctional officials over a prisoner, regardless of where 
the prisoner is held. 

New court commitments--Admissions into prison of offenders 
convicted and sentenced by a court, usually to a term of more 
than 1 year, including probation violators and persons with a 
split sentence to incarceration followed by court-ordered 
probation or parole.
 
Parole violators--All conditional release violators returned 
to prison for either violating conditions of release or for 
new crimes.

Prison--A long-term confinement facility, run by a state or 
the federal government, that typically holds felons and 
offenders with sentences of more than 1 year. However, 
sentence length may vary by state. Alaska, Connecticut, 
Delaware, Hawaii, Rhode Island, and Vermont operate 
integrated systems, which combine prisons and jails.

Prisoner--An individual confined in a correctional facility 
under the legal authority (jurisdiction) of state or federal 
correctional officials.
 
Sentenced prisoner--A prisoner sentenced to more than 1 year.

Supervised mandatory releases--Conditional release with 
postcustody supervision generally occurring in jurisdictions 
using determinate sentencing statutes. 

Unconditional releases--Expirations of sentences, 
commutations, and other unspecified unconditional releases.

*************
Methodology
*************

Started in 1926 under a mandate from Congress, the National 
Prisoner Statistics (NPS) Program collects annual data on 
prisoners at yearend. The Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS) 
sponsors the survey, and the U.S. Census Bureau serves as the 
data collection agent. BJS depends entirely on voluntary 
participation by state departments of corrections and the 
Federal Bureau of Prisons (BOP) for NPS data.

The NPS distinguishes between inmates in custody and 
prisoners under jurisdiction. To have custody of a prisoner, 
a state or the BOP must hold that inmate in one of its 
facilities. To have jurisdiction over a prisoner, the state 
or BOP must have legal authority over that prisoner, 
regardless of where the prisoner is incarcerated or 
supervised. Some states were unable to provide counts that 
distinguish between custody and jurisdiction. (See National 
Prisoner Statistics Program jurisdiction notes to determine 
which states did not distinguish between custody and 
jurisdiction counts.)

The NPS jurisdiction counts include persons held in prisons, 
penitentiaries, correctional facilities, halfway houses, boot 
camps, farms, training or treatment centers, and hospitals. 
Counts also include prisoners who were temporarily absent 
(less than 30 days), in court, or on work release; housed in 
privately operated facilities, local jails, or other state or 
federal facilities; and serving concurrent sentences for more 
than one correctional authority.

The NPS custody counts include all inmates held within a 
respondent’s facilities, including inmates housed for other 
correctional facilities. The custody counts exclude inmates 
held in local jails and in other jurisdictions. With a few 
exceptions, the NPS custody counts include inmates held in 
privately operated facilities.

Respondents to NPS surveys are permitted to update prior 
counts of prisoners held in custody and under jurisdiction. 
Some statistics on jurisdiction and sentenced prison 
populations for prior years have been updated in this report. 
All tables showing data based on jurisdiction counts, 
including tables of imprisonment rates, were based on the 
updated and most recently available data that respondents 
provided. 

Admissions include new court commitments, parole violator 
returns, and other conditional release violator returns; 
transfers from other jurisdictions; returns of prisoners who 
were absent without leave (AWOL), with or without a new 
sentence; escape returns, with or without a new sentence; 
returns from appeal or bond, and other admissions. For 
reporting purposes, BJS admission counts exclude transfers 
from other jurisdictions, AWOL returns, and escape returns.

Releases include unconditional releases (e.g., expirations of 
sentence or commutations), conditional releases (e.g., 
probations, supervised mandatory releases, or discretionary 
paroles), deaths, AWOLs, escapes from confinement, transfers 
to other jurisdictions, releases to appeal or bond, and other 
releases. For reporting purposes, BJS release counts exclude 
AWOLs, escapes, and transfers to other jurisdictions.

The NPS has historically included counts of inmates in the 
combined jail/prison systems in Alaska, Connecticut, 
Delaware, Hawaii, Rhode Island, and Vermont. The District of 
Columbia has not operated a prison system since yearend 2001. 
Felons sentenced under the District of Columbia criminal code 
are housed in federal facilities. Jail inmates in the 
District of Columbia are included in the Annual Survey of 
Jails. Some previously published prisoner counts and the 
percentage change in population include jail inmates in the 
District of Columbia for 2001, the last year of collection.
 
Additional information about the NPS, including the data 
collection instrument, is available on the BJS website at 
www.bjs.gov.

Nonreporting states
********************

As of September 13, 2013, Illinois and Nevada had not 
reported any 2012 custody, jurisdiction, admission, release, 
or capacity data to the NPS. For both states, BJS compared 
past NPS submissions with analogous counts reported on their 
departments of corrections websites. If the ratio of past NPS 
data to the website data from the same year was stable over 6 
years, BJS assumed that the website data could be used in 
this report. To generate estimates for Nevada, BJS used 
statistical data published on the Nevada Department of 
Corrections website 
(http://www.doc.nv.gov/sites/doc/files/pdf/stats/2012/12/Stat
Facts122012.pdf) for total and sex-specific custody, 
jurisdiction, admission and release counts, and a race and 
Hispanic origin distribution of the custody population as of 
December 31, 2012. BJS applied the 2011 proportion of 
unsentenced prisoners and prisoners with sentences of 1 year 
or less or more than 1 year to the 2012 custody and 
jurisdiction totals, which assumes that the distribution of 
sentence length did not change between 2011 and 2012. BJS 
also assumed that the proportion of the Nevada prison 
jurisdiction population housed in local jails in 2012 was the 
same as that reported in 2011. Similarly, BJS used the 2011 
distribution of admission and release types to generate 
estimates from the 2012 admission and release totals. BJS 
used an estimate of operating capacity from June 30, 2012 
(http://www.doc.nv.gov/sites/doc/files/pdf/stats/2012/12/SS_Q
RII_FY13.pdf). Estimates of the custody counts for Nevada 
were compared with the state’s submission of National 
Corrections Reporting Program (NCRP) data.

November 30, 2012, is the date closest to December 31, 2012, 
for which data were available on the Illinois Department of 
Corrections website 
(http://www2.illinois.gov/idoc/reportsandstatistics/Documents
/IDOC_Quarterly%20Report_Jan_%202013.pdf). Illinois has 
reported identical custody and jurisdiction data to the NPS 
for the past 10 years; therefore, BJS made the assumption 
that the 2012 custody and jurisdiction counts would again be 
the same. BJS applied the 2011 distribution of sentence 
length (unsentenced, sentenced to 1 year or less, sentenced 
to more than 1 year) to the 2012 counts. The 2011 race and 
Hispanic origin distribution from Illinois was applied to the 
custody and jurisdiction total count from November 30, 2012.
 
The 2011 distribution of admission and release types was used 
to estimate the types of admissions and releases in 2012. BJS 
obtained monthly counts of admissions and releases from two 
quarterly reports 
(http://www2.illinois.gov/idoc/reportsandstatistics/Documents
/IDOC_Quarterly%20Report_Apr_%202013.pdf and 
http://www2.illinois.gov/idoc/reportsandstatistics/Documents/
IDOC_Quarterly%20Report_Jul%202012.pdf). Since these were not 
sex-specific counts, after summing to obtain 2012 totals, BJS 
applied the 2011 sex ratios for admissions and releases to 
the 2012 data, assuming that the proportion of males and 
females entering or exiting prison had not changed during 
2012. Finally, BJS applied the 2011 sex-specific admission 
and release type distributions on the 2012 totals. Capacity 
counts were obtained from the April 2013 Illinois Department 
of Corrections quarterly report, and reflect state prison 
capacity as of February 28, 2013.

The imputed counts were used to calculate overall state and 
national totals of prisoners, and are footnoted in state-
specific tables.

***************************************
Estimating yearend counts of prison 
population, admissions, and releases 
by age, sex, and race or Hispanic origin
***************************************

National-level estimates of the number of persons by race 
admitted to, released from, or under the jurisdiction of 
state prisons on December 31, 2012, were based on an 
adjustment of NPS counts to comply with Office of Management 
and Budget (OMB) definitions of race and Hispanic origin. OMB 
defines persons of Hispanic or Latino origin as a separate 
category. Race categories are defined exclusive of Hispanic 
origin. OMB adopted guidelines for the collection of these 
data in 1997, requiring the collection of data on Hispanic 
origin in addition to data on race.

Not all NPS providers’ information systems categorize race 
and Hispanic origin in this way; in 1991, the earliest time 
point in the analysis, only a few states were able to report 
information on Hispanics separately from race. BJS adjusts 
the NPS data on race and Hispanic origin by the ratio of the 
relative distribution of prisoners by race and Hispanic 
origin in self-report inmate surveys that use OMB categories 
for race to the relative distribution of prisoners by race 
and Hispanic origin in the NPS data. This ratio was 
calculated for the year(s) in which BJS had an inmate survey 
and NPS data. For this report, the 1991 Survey of Inmates in 
State Correctional Facilities was used to calculate the ratio 
used for statistics on racial distributions in 1991; however, 
because so few states reported Hispanic origin in the 1991 
NPS, BJS did not estimate statistics for Hispanics in 1991. 
The 2004 Survey of Inmates in State Correctional Facilities 
was used for the 2001, 2006, 2011, and 2012 time points. The 
ratio obtained by comparing the within-year relative 
distributions by race and Hispanic origin was then multiplied 
by the NPS distribution in a year to generate the estimate of 
persons by race and Hispanic origin.
 
Estimates of the total number of sentenced prisoners, 
admissions, and releases by age, sex, race, and Hispanic 
origin on December 31, 2012, were generated by creating 
separate totals for federal and state prisons. For the 
federal estimates, each sex-race count that BOP reported to 
the NPS was multiplied by the ratio of the age category count 
within the sex-race combination in the Federal Justice 
Statistics Program (FJSP) to the FJSP total count within the 
sex-race combination (e.g., FJSP white males ages 18 to 19 
divided by FJSP white males). The resulting product yielded 
the FJSP-adjusted NPS counts for each sex-race combination by 
age group (e.g., white male prisoners ages 18 to 19 in the 
federal prison system). State prison age distributions for 
the NPS use a similar sex-race ratio adjustment based on 
individual-level data from the NCRP. State and federal 
estimates were added together to obtain national estimates 
for prison admissions, prison releases, and yearend prison 
populations.

***************************************
Estimating imprisonment rates by age, 
sex, and race or Hispanic origin
***************************************
 
Age-specific imprisonment rates for each age-sex-race group 
were calculated by dividing the estimated number of sentenced 
prisoners within each age group under jurisdiction on 
December 31, 2012, by the estimated number of U.S. residents 
in each age group on January 1, 2013. The result was 
multiplied by 100,000 and rounded to the nearest whole 
number. Totals by sex include all prisoners and U.S. 
residents, regardless of race or Hispanic origin.

***************************************
Estimating offense distribution in the 
state prison population, admissions, and 
releases by age, sex, and race or 
Hispanic origin
***************************************

Total counts of admissions and releases excluded transfers, 
escapees, and those absent without leave (AWOL). Parole 
violation admissions included all conditional release 
violators returned to prison for either violations of 
conditions or for new crimes. BJS employed a ratio adjustment 
method to weight the individual-level race and Hispanic 
origin or sex-specific offense data from the NCRP to the 
state prison control totals for sex and the estimated race or 
Hispanic origin from the NPS, thereby yielding a national 
offense distribution for state prisoners. Inmates missing 
offense data were excluded from the analysis prior to the 
weighting. Because data submission for the NCRP typically 
lags behind that of the NPS, offense distribution estimates 
are published for the previous calendar year.

Prison capacities
******************

State and federal correctional authorities provide three 
measures of their facilities’ capacity: design capacity, 
operational capacity, and rated capacity. Estimates of the 
prison populations as a percentage of capacity are based on a 
state or federal custody population. In general, state 
capacity and custody counts exclude inmates held in private 
facilities, although five states include prisoners held in 
private facilities as part of the capacity of their prison 
systems: Florida, Georgia, Idaho, Louisiana, and Mississippi. 
For these states, prison population as a percentage of 
capacity includes private facilities.

********************************************************
The Bureau of Justice Statistics, located in the Office of 
Justice Programs, U.S. Department of Justice, collects, 
analyses, and disseminates statistical information on crime, 
criminal offenders, victims of crime, and the operation of 
justice systems at all levels of government. William J. Sabol 
is acting director.

This report was written by E. Ann Carson and Daniela 
Golinelli. Erinn Herberman, Sheri Simmons, and Josephine 
Palma verified the report.

Jill Thomas and Lynne McConnell (Lockheed Martin) edited the 
report, and Barbara Quinn, Tina Dorsey, and Morgan Young 
produced the report.

December 2013, NCJ 243920
********************************************************

**************************************************
Office of Justice Programs
Innovation * Partnerships * Safer Neighborhoods
www.ojp.usdoj.gov
**************************************************

**********************
12/5/2013/JER/2:55pm
**********************

