U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Programs
Bureau of Justice Statistics

-------------------------------------------------------
This file is text only without graphics and many of the
tables. A Zip archive of the tables in this report in
spreadsheet format (.csv) and the full report including
tables and graphics in .pdf format are available on BJS
website at: 
http://www.bjs.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbdetail&iid=5109

This report is one in a series. More recent editions 
may be available. To view a list of all in the series 
go to http://bjs.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbse&sid=40
-------------------------------------------------------

Bulletin	

Prisoners in 2013

E. Ann Carson, BJS Statistician

On December 31, 2013, the United States held an estimated 1,574,700 
persons in state and federal prisons, an increase of approximately 
4,300 prisoners (0.3%) from 2012. This was the first increase reported 
since the peak of 1,615,500 prisoners in 2009. Although state prisons 
had jurisdiction over an estimated 6,300 more prisoners at yearend 
2013 than at yearend 2012, the increase in prisoners was partially 
offset by the first decrease (down 1,900 or 0.9%) in inmates under the 
jurisdiction of the Federal Bureau of Prisons (BOP) since 1980 (figure 
1).

Prisoners sentenced to more than a year under the jurisdiction of 
state or federal correctional authorities increased by 5,400 inmates 
from 2012 to 2013. However, the imprisonment rate for all prisoners 
sentenced to more than a year in state or federal facilities decreased 
by less than 1% between 2012 and 2013, from 480 prisoners per 100,000 
U.S. residents in 2012 to 478 per 100,000 in 2013. 

Female prisoners sentenced to more than a year in state or federal 
prison grew by almost 3% (2,800 inmates) between 2012 and 2013, while 
male prisoners increased 0.2% (2,500). Similar to 2012, non-Hispanic 
blacks (37%) comprised the largest portion of male inmates under state 
or federal jurisdiction in 2013, compared to non-Hispanic whites (32%) 
and Hispanics (22%). White females comprised 49% of the prison 
population compared to 22% black females. However, the imprisonment 
rate for black females (113 per 100,000) was twice the rate of white 
females (51 per 100,000).

The statistics in this report are based on the Bureau of Justice 
Statistics’ (BJS) National Prisoner Statistics (NPS) Program, which 
collects annual data from state departments of corrections (DOC) and 
the BOP on prisoner counts, prisoners characteristics, admissions, 
releases, and prison capacity. The 2013 NPS collection is number 89 in 
a series that began in 1926. Forty-nine states and the BOP reported 
NPS data for 2013, while data for Nevada were obtained from other 
sources (see Methodology).

**************************************************

*************
HIGHLIGHTS
*************

* State and federal correctional facilities held an estimated 
1,574,700 prisoners on December 31, 2013, an increase of 4,300 
prisoners over yearend 2012.

* The 3-year decline in the prison population stopped in 2013 due to 
an increase of 6,300 inmates (0.5%) in the state prison population.

* The federal prison population decreased in size for the first time 
since 1980 with 1,900 fewer prisoners in 2013 than in 2012.

* The number of prisoners sentenced to more than a year in state or 
federal prison increased by 5,400 persons from yearend 2012 to yearend 
2013.

* The number of persons admitted to state or federal prison during 
2013 rose by 4%, from 608,400 in 2012 to 631,200 in 2013.

* The total imprisonment rate for prisoners sentenced to more than a 
year in state or federal prison decreased by less than 1%, from 480 
per 100,000 U.S. residents in 2012 to 478 in 2013.

* Private prisons held 8% of the total U.S. prison population at 
yearend 2013, and local jails housed an additional 5% of prisoners.

* Prisoners under the jurisdiction of the Federal Bureau of Prisons 
(BOP) accounted for 31% (41,200) of all inmates housed in private 
facilities in 2013.

* Almost 3% of black male U.S. residents of all ages were imprisoned 
on December 31, 2013, compared to 0.5% of white males.

* Inmates sentenced for violent offenses comprised 54% of the state 
prison population in 2012, the most recent year for which data were 
available.
**************************************************

****************************************
Prison population growth in 28 states 
offset the decline in federal prisoners
****************************************

The total number of prisoners under the jurisdiction of state and 
federal authorities at yearend 2013 (1,574,700 prisoners) increased 
about 4,300 prisoners over the 2012 total, the first increase since 
2009 (table 1). For the first time since 1980, the BOP imprisoned 
fewer inmates at the end of the year (215,900 prisoners in 2013) than 
it did the previous year (217,800 prisoners in 2012). After 9 years of 
average annual growth of more than 2%, the BOP population decreased 
almost 1% in 2013. The prison population in 28 states increased from 
yearend 2012 to 2013.

Male prisoners increased from 1,461,600 in 2012 to 1,463,500 in 2013 
(up 1,800). Female prisoners increased from 108,800 in 2012 to 111,300 
in 2013 (up 2,500). Although females in the BOP increased by 1% in 
2013, this was offset by a decrease in male prisoners (table 2). The 
female prison population increased in 36 states, including Texas, 
California, Florida, and New York (the states with the largest number 
of prisoners). Some states with smaller prison populations saw 
increases greater than 10% in female prisoners: Arkansas (up 26%), 
Vermont (up 21%), and New Hampshire (up 15%). In comparison, male 
prisoners increased in 28 states from yearend 2012 to 2013. Arkansas 
observed a double-digit growth in male prisoners (up 17%).

****************************************
States added 6,900 sentenced inmates 
in 2013
****************************************

Persons under state or federal jurisdiction sentenced to more than a 
year in prison represented 96% of the total prison population at 
yearend 2013. There were 5,400 more sentenced prisoners at yearend 
2013 (1,516,900 prisoners) than at yearend 2012 (1,511,500 prisoners) 
(table 3). Sentenced federal prisoners, which represent 90% of the 
total BOP population, decreased by 1,500 inmates in 2013. As in the 
total prison population, the decrease in BOP was offset by an increase 
in sentenced state prisoners, from 1,314,900 at yearend 2012 to 
1,321,800 at yearend 2013. Females sentenced to more than a year in 
state or federal prison grew by 2,800 inmates, or almost 3% from 
yearend 2012 to yearend 2013. The 104,100 sentenced female prisoners 
in 2013 represented 7% of the total sentenced prison population.

The BOP and the 20 states that observed decreases in their sentenced 
prison populations in 2013 had 10,000 fewer sentenced inmates in 
prison at yearend 2013 than in 2012 (table 4). The number of sentenced 
prisoners grew in 27 states, including three of the four states with 
the largest prison populations: Texas (up 2%), California (up 1%), and 
Florida (up 1%). Sentenced prisoners in Georgia, the state with the 
fourth largest prison population, decreased by 1% at yearend in 2013, 
reporting 500 fewer prison inmates than in 2012.

****************************************
While the number sentenced inmates 
Increased, the imprisonment rate 
declined in 2013
****************************************

The U.S. population grew at a faster rate in 2013 than the prison 
population, causing a decline in the imprisonment rates despite an 
increase in the number of sentenced prisoners. On December 31, 2013, 
the imprisonment rate for U.S. residents of all ages was 478 sentenced 
prisoners per 100,000, and for U.S. residents age 18 or older it was 
623 per 100,000 (table 5). These rates decreased from yearend 2012 
rates for both residents of all ages (480 per 100,000) and adult 
residents (626 per 100,000). The state imprisonment rates—the lowest 
of the past decade—remained unchanged between 2012 and 2013 at 417 per 
100,000 U.S. residents of all ages.

On December 31, 2013, 1.2% of adult males, and 0.9% of males of all 
ages, were serving sentences in state or federal prison. The 
imprisonment rate for adult males decreased from 1,201 per 100,000 in 
2012 to 1,191 per 100,000 in 2013. The adult female imprisonment rate 
increased by 2% from 2012 to 2013, from 82 to 83 per 100,000. The 
imprisonment rates for both male and female prisoners declined from 
their peak rates in 2007.

Five states imprisoned at least 600 persons per 100,000 state 
residents of all ages on December 31, 2013: Louisiana (847 per 100,000 
residents of Louisiana), Mississippi (692 per 100,000), Oklahoma (659 
per 100,000), Alabama (647 per 100,000), and Texas (602 per 100,000) 
(table 6). The imprisonment rates declined from yearend 2012 to 2013 
for Mississippi (down 24 prisoners per 100,000), Louisiana (down 23 
per 100,000), and Alabama (down 3 per 100,000), while the rate for 
Texas (up 1 per 100,000) increased at yearend 2013. Oklahoma’s rate 
also increased in 2013, but this was likely due to a change in 
reporting methods (see Jurisdiction notes).

On December 31, 2013, more than 1% of male residents in Louisiana, 
Mississippi, Oklahoma, Texas, Alabama, Arkansas, Arizona, and Georgia 
were in prison. The highest imprisonment rates for females at yearend 
2013 were in Oklahoma (136 per 100,000 state female residents), Idaho 
(127 per 100,000), South Dakota (104 per 100,000), Alabama (103 per 
100,000), and Arizona (101 per 100,000).

****************************************
The majority of inmates in state or 
federal prison were age 39 or younger
****************************************

 At yearend 2013, 17% of all inmates (253,800) were ages 30 to 34, 
while an estimated 2% (31,900) were age 65 or older (table 7). An 
estimated 58% of male inmates and 61% of female inmates in state or 
federal prison were age 39 or younger. Among males, white prisoners 
were generally older than black or Hispanic prisoners. An estimated 
17,300 inmates age 65 or older (54%) were white males.

BJS uses race and Hispanic origin distributions from its 2004 Survey 
of Inmates in State and Federal Correctional Facilities to adjust the 
administrative data from NPS to reflect self-identification of race 
and Hispanic origin by prisoners (see Methodology). On December 31, 
2013, about 37% of imprisoned males were black, 32% were white, and 
22% were Hispanic. Among females in state or federal prison at yearend 
2013, 49% were white, compared to 22% who were black and 17% who were 
Hispanic.

Almost 3% of black male U.S. residents of all ages were imprisoned on 
December 31, 2013 (2,805 inmates per 100,000 black male U.S. 
residents), compared to 1% of Hispanic males (1,134 per 100,000) and 
0.5% of white males (466 per 100,000) (table 8). While there were 
fewer black females in state or federal prison at yearend 2013 than in 
2012, black females were imprisoned at more than twice the rate of 
white females.

Black males had higher imprisonment rates across all age groups than 
all other races and Hispanic males. In the age range with the highest 
imprisonment rates for males (ages 25 to 39), black males were 
imprisoned at rates at least 2.5 times greater than Hispanic males and 
6 times greater than white males. For males ages 18 to 19—the age 
range with the greatest difference in imprisonment rates between 
whites and blacks—black males (1,092 inmates per 100,000 black males) 
were more than 9 times more likely to be imprisoned than white males 
(115 inmates per 100,000 white males). The difference between black 
and white female inmates of the same age was smaller, but still 
substantial. Black females ages 18 to 19 (33 inmates per 100,000) were 
almost 5 times more likely to be imprisoned than white females (7 
inmates per 100,000).

****************************************
States admitted 9,000 more sentenced 
prisoners in 2013 than they released
****************************************

Prison admissions of sentenced offenders have lagged behind releases 
since 2009, contributing to the decline in the overall prison 
population. (See Prisoners in 2012: Trends in Admissions and Releases, 
1991–2012, NCJ 243920, BJS web, December 2013.) The total number of 
admissions to prisons exceeded releases for the first time since 2009 
(table 9).While federal prison releases outnumbered admissions in 2013 
by 1,100 inmates, states admitted an additional 25,000 inmates 
sentenced to more than 1 year (up 4% from 2012) and released 12,100 
fewer prisoners sentenced to more than 1 year (down 2% from 2012). 
States that observed the largest difference between numbers of 
admissions and releases in 2013 were Tennessee (2,500 more prison 
releases than admissions), Texas and Arkansas (2,400 more admissions 
than releases each), and California (1,900 more admissions than 
releases).

Thirty-one states showed an increase in the estimated number of 
persons admitted to prison during 2013 compared to 2012, including 
Arkansas (up 55%), Georgia (up 24%), and Wisconsin (up 18%). Among the 
five states with the largest sentenced prison populations at yearend 
2013, four had an increase in admissions and one experienced a decline 
between 2012 and 2013: California (up 4,000), Georgia (up 3,700), 
Florida (up 1,300), Texas (up 1,000), and New York (down 300 entries). 
Idaho (down 19%), Hawaii (down 9%), and South Dakota (down 7%). 
experienced the largest percentage declines in prison admissions from 
2012 to 2013.

Compared to admissions, fewer states (24) had increases in the number 
of inmates released from 2012 to 2013. Georgia released 4,200 more 
inmates in 2013 than 2012 (up 30%), while Washington had 2,700 more 
releases (up 15%) and North Carolina had an additional 1,500 releases 
(up 12%). However, 25 states and the BOP experienced declines in 
releases from prison between 2012 and 2013. California released 11,100 
fewer prisoners (down 23%) after its large increase in releases in 
2011 and 2012 as a result of the state’s Public Safety Realignment, 
and Texas released 8,000 fewer prisoners (down 10%).
***********************************************

****************************************
California prison population was stable 
after 2 years of declines
****************************************

The 2013 California state prison custody population was stable (down 
0.2% or 290 inmates) after decreasing by 29,500 between 2010 and 2012 
due to the Public Safety Realignment (PSR) policy, (table 10). PSR was 
designed to alleviate crowding in the state prison system by 
sentencing new nonviolent, nonserious, and nonsex offenders to local 
jail facilities starting on October 1, 2011.***Footnote 1 Offenses as 
specified in the Public Safety Realignment Act.***

The state increased the reported design capacity of its prisons by 
1,900 inmates (up 2%), which measures the number of inmates that can 
be accommodated based on facility designs that assume one inmate in 
each cell or single-level bunks in dormitory settings. The total 
inmate capacity of 86,100 beds was the state’s highest since 2005.

California significantly reduced the crowding in its state prisons, 
from a high of 199% of design capacity in 2007 to 143% of design 
capacity in 2013.***Footnote 2 The three-judge court ruling mandates 
that California reduce overcrowding in the 34 state prison facilities, 
and does not include private facilities or work camps in either the 
capacity or population counts used to determine compliance with the 
ruling (see 
http://www.cdcr.ca.gov/News/3_judge_panel_decision.html).*** Both the 
prison custody population and design capacity reported by California 
to the National Prisoner Statistics (NPS) program include inmates held 
in state prison and camp facilities. The custody count reported to NPS 
was approximately 4,100 inmates higher than the count that met the 
court’s mandate, while the design capacity count in NPS was 
approximately 4,500 inmates higher. Therefore, percent capacity 
calculated using NPS values will differ from those used by the three-
judge court. (Refer to the California Department of Corrections and 
Rehabilitation website (www.cdcr.ca.gov) for weekly updates on 
California’s targets for meeting the court’s mandate.) In February 
2014, the three-judge court panel extended the state’s original 
deadline to meet the 137.5% design capacity requirement by 2 years, 
from May 2013 to February 2016. At the same time, the court limited 
the number of persons that could be housed in out-of-state prison 
facilities to a total of 8,900.

In November 2012, voters in California approved changes to the three 
strikes law, including the requirement that the third strike be a 
serious or violent felony, instead of any type of felony.***Footnote 3 
In California, any individual convicted of a new felony after having 
had at least one prior serious felony conviction is required to 
receive a sentence twice the length of the new felony’s base sentence 
(two strikes). Individuals committing a third felony offense are 
mandated to serve sentences of 25 years to life.*** In addition, a 
prisoner serving a third-strike sentence could petition the court to 
reduce the sentence to the equivalent of a second-strike sentence in 
some instances. These changes contributed to the reduction of three-
strike offenders in California state prisons by 10% between December 
2012 (8,900 three-strike inmates) and June 2013 (8,000) (table 11). By 
June 2013, 26% of all inmates in California state prisons had their 
sentences doubled in length under the two-strike provision of the 
three-strikes law, and an additional 6% were serving three-strike 
sentences. Inmates serving the doubled sentence lengths of two strikes 
increased 4%, from 33,300 inmates in December 2012 to 34,700 in June 
2013.Footnote 4 Data are from the June 2013 Statewide Prison Census, 
the December 2012 Statewide Prison Census, and the June 2007 Statewide 
Prison Census accessed on the CDCR website 
(http://www.cdcr.ca.gov/Reports_Research/Offender_Information_Services
_Branch/Annual/CensusArchive.html), accessed May 29, 2014.*** This 
growth was mainly due to increased admissions of two-strike offenders, 
since many of the resentenced three-strike offenders had little time 
left to serve on their newly reduced sentences. The number and 
proportion of California state prisoners serving life sentences with 
and without parole increased from 25,100 inmates (14% of the total 
prison population) in June 2007 to 30,800 inmates (23%) in June 2013. 
In total, 55% of California inmates (74,200 prisoners) in June 2013 
were serving sentences enhanced by either two strikes, three strikes, 
or life or death sentences, compared to 40% in June 2007 (69,900 
prisoners).
***********************************************

****************************************
In 2013, the number of prisoners held 
in private facilities decreased, while 
those in local jail facilities increased
****************************************

The total number of state and federal prisoners housed in private 
facilities decreased 3%, from 137,200 at yearend 2012 to 133,000 at 
yearend 2013. Private prisons held 7% of the total state prison 
population and 19% of the federal prison population on December 31, 
2013. After using private prisons in 2012, Kentucky and Wisconsin 
reported having no prisoners housed in private prison facilities at 
yearend 2013 (table 12). Alaska reduced the number of prisoners held 
in an out-of-state private facility by moving inmates to a new state 
prison in 2013. While California increased the number of private 
prisoners by 1,400 inmates in 2013, Texas imprisoned 4,100 fewer 
inmates in private facilities at yearend 2013. New Mexico had the 
highest proportion of prisoners housed in private facilities (44%), 
followed by Montana (40%), Idaho (36%), and Oklahoma (26%).

In comparison to the declining number of inmates in private prisons, 
prisoners held in local jail facilities increased 2%, from 83,600 at 
yearend 2012 to 85,600 at yearend 2013. State DOCs were responsible 
for the entire growth in prisoners held in local jails, with Arkansas 
housing an additional 2,300 prisoners and Texas an additional 1,700 
prisoners in local jail facilities. Louisiana housed more than half 
(52%) of its total yearend 2013 prison population in local jail 
facilities, which was a 5% decrease (1,100 prisoners) from yearend 
2012. Kentucky (39%) and Mississippi (29%) held large percentages of 
their prison population in local facilities, but both states also saw 
declines from 2012 to 2013.

****************************************
More than half of all state prison 
inmates were violent offenders,while 
more than half of federal prisoners 
were drug offenders
****************************************

In 2012 (the most recent year for which data were available), 54% of 
inmates in state prisons were serving sentences for violent offenses 
(707,500 prisoners), and 19% (247,100) were convicted of property 
offenses (table 13 and table 14). Robbery (179,500) was the most 
common violent offense among state prisoners in 2012, followed by 
murder and nonnegligent manslaughter (166,800) and rape or sexual 
assault (160,900). A higher percentage of males (55%) were imprisoned 
for violent offenses than females (37%).

As with the imprisonment rates presented in table 7, the race and 
Hispanic origin estimates have been adjusted using the 2004 Survey of 
Inmates in State Correctional Facilities to account for differences 
between the NPS administrative data and self-reported race and 
Hispanic origin (see Methodology).Equivalent proportions of black 
(58%) and Hispanic (60%) prisoners were convicted of violent offenses, 
while the percentage of white inmates (49%) serving time for violent 
crimes was smaller. The percentage of white prisoners convicted of any 
sexual assault (17%) was greater than black (8%) and Hispanic (13%) 
prisoners.

Drug offenders comprised 16% (210,200 inmates) of the total state 
prison population in 2012. Twenty-five percent of female prisoners 
were serving time for drug offenses, compared to 15% of male 
prisoners. Similar proportions of white, black, and Hispanic offenders 
were convicted of drug and public-order crimes.

Between 2001 and 2013, more than half of prisoners serving sentences 
of more than a year in federal facilities were convicted of drug 
offenses (table 15 and table 16). On September 30, 2013 (the end of 
the most recent fiscal year for which federal offense data were 
available), 98,200 inmates (51% of the federal prison population) were 
imprisoned for possession, trafficking, or other drug crimes. Since 
2001, the percentage of federal prisoners convicted of violent, 
property, and drug offenses has decreased. Federal prisoners serving 
time for public-order crimes—including weapons offenses, racketeering, 
extortion, and regulatory offenses—has increased, from 26% in 2001 to 
36% in 2013. The percentage of inmates in federal facilities serving 
time for immigration offenses remained stable over the past 13 years. 
There were fewer (down 1,500) felony immigration offenders in 2013 
than in 2012.

****************************************
Time served by state prisoners convicted 
of murder and sexual assault increased 
between 2002 and 2012
****************************************

Across the major offense categories, the median time served was 
largely unchanged for state prisoners released in 2012 who were 
initially admitted on new court commitments (i.e., non-parole 
violations), compared to those released a decade earlier (table 17). 
State prisoners released after serving time for a violent offense were 
incarcerated for a median of 28 months in both 2002 and 2012, compared 
to 12 months for property offenders and 13 to 14 months for drug 
offenders. Prisoners released in 2012 who had been admitted on new 
convictions for murder or nonnegligent manslaughter had a median time 
served of 153 months, compared to 102 months for those released in 
2002. The median time served for prisoners convicted of sexual assault 
was 10 months longer for prisoners released in 2012 than for those 
released in 2002.

In general, the median time served for prisoners released in 2002 and 
2012 was lower for females than for males, although the variance of 
the estimates was high. The median time served by females newly 
convicted of sexual offenses did not change for prisoners released in 
2002 and 2012. For male sexual offenders, the median time served 
increased during this period. Both males and females imprisoned for 
murder or nonnegligent manslaughter and released in 2012 spent more 
time in prison than those released in 2002.

****************************************
Fewer youth held in the custody 
of adult prisons in 2013
****************************************

States held 1,200 youth (inmates age 17 or younger) in adult prison 
facilities at yearend 2013, a 69% decrease from 2000, when NPS began 
asking states for data on these inmates (figure 2). Prisoners age 17 
or younger comprised less than a tenth of a percent of inmates held in 
state prison facilities in 2013 (0.09%). The majority of these inmates 
(96%) were males, and 23% (275 inmates) were held in Florida and New 
York (table 18). Other states with large counts of prisoners age 17 or 
younger held in adult facilities include Georgia (92 inmates), 
Connecticut (88), Michigan (73), Texas (69), and Illinois and North 
Carolina (68 inmates each).

The BOP does not house inmates age 17 or younger in its general prison 
population. Instead, these prisoners are held in separate contract 
facilities, and some are under the jurisdiction of U.S. probation but 
in the custody of the BOP. The number of youth in BOP contract 
facilities has only been captured from 2005 forward but has decreased 
58% over this period. Similar to the youngest inmates in the state 
prison population, federal prisoners age 17 or younger comprise a 
small fraction of the total BOP population (0.04%).

At yearend 2013, the BOP had custody of 25,800 inmates it identified 
as noncitizens, 35% of the total number of reported noncitizens held 
in prisons. Because some states define noncitizens as those born 
outside the U.S. regardless of current citizenship status, caution 
should be used in making comparisons across jurisdictions. Texas, 
Florida, Arizona, and New York reported the largest populations of 
noncitizen inmates in custody on December 31, 2013. Of those prisoners 
identified by the states and BOP as noncitizens, 4% (3,400 inmates) 
were females.

****************************************
Sentenced prisoners under military 
jurisdiction increased in 2013
****************************************

On December 31, 2013, 1,421 service personnel were held under military 
jurisdiction (table 19). A larger percentage of military personnel 
(26%) were sentenced to 1 year or less of confinement compared to the 
state (4%) and federal (10%) prison populations. Almost half (48% of 
685 inmates) of all service personnel under military jurisdiction had 
served in the Army, and this branch of service had custody over the 
majority (57%) of all prisoners under military confinement.

While the total number of military service personnel held under 
military jurisdiction decreased by 1% from yearend 2012 to yearend 
2013, the count of prisoners sentenced to more than 1 year increased 
by 4%, from 1,014 inmates in 2012 to 1,056 inmates in 2013. Army 
personnel comprised 52% of the sentenced prisoners under military 
jurisdiction on December 31, 2013, followed by service members in the 
Air Force (20%), Navy (14%), and Marines (13%). Between 2012 and 2013, 
the number of Air Force personnel sentenced to at least 1 year 
increased 18%, from 182 inmates in 2012 to 215 in 2013. During the 
same time period, Navy personnel under military jurisdiction decreased 
by 16%.

At yearend 2013, 65% (690 inmates) of all military service personnel 
sentenced to more than 1 year in confinement were in the custody of 
the Army. The Navy held an additional 360 inmates (34% of all military 
personnel), a 12% increase from yearend 2012.

****************************************
National Prisoner Statistics (NPS) 
Program jurisdiction notes
****************************************

Alabama--Prisons have not recently been rated for official capacity, 
but the majority of Alabama prisons are operating in a state of 
overcrowding. Currently, 26,145 beds are in operation; this represents 
the physical capacity for inmates but is not based on staffing, 
programs, and services. Operational capacity differs from the Bureau 
of Justice Statistics (BJS) definition.

Alaska--Alaska submitted total custody and jurisdiction counts for 
2013, as well as total admissions and releases. None of the counts 
were broken down by sex, so the sex distribution from the 2012 NPS 
data submitted by Alaska was used in 2013. The numbers of admissions 
and releases were inconsistent with prior years’ estimates. BJS used 
the counts from 2012 to represent admissions and releases in 2013. 
Alaska built and populated a new state prison during 2013, returning 
most of its inmates held in an out-of-state private facility to 
Alaska. See Methodology for a description of the data imputation 
procedure.

Arizona--Jurisdiction counts are based on custody data and inmates in 
contracted beds, but do not include inmates held in other 
jurisdictions as Arizona receives an equal number of inmates from 
other jurisdictions to house. Other admissions include persons 
returned from deportation. In 2013, the Arizona Department of 
Corrections (DOC) entered into an agreement with the county probation 
department to avoid dual supervision of inmates. Under this agreement, 
the Arizona DOC waived supervision for many more inmates than it did 
in 2012, leading to an increase in the number of conditional releases 
to probation programs. Other conditional releases include releases 
onto other community supervision programs. Other releases include 
persons deported halfway through serving their prison terms.

Arkansas--Jurisdiction counts grew to the highest level ever in the 
state during 2013 due in part to changes made in the summer of 2013 to 
the state’s parole system, which increased the county jail backlog and 
led to growth in the number of inmates under the jurisdiction of the 
Arkansas prison system. The adjustments in the parole system also led 
to a large increase in the number of parole revocations for technical 
violations between 2012 and 2013. Other conditional releases include 
those made to boot camps.

California--Due to a high-level data conversion project by the 
California Department of Corrections and Rehabilitation, the movement 
data used to report detailed counts of admissions and releases was not 
available in time for publication of this report. Population counts 
for inmates with maximum sentences of more than 1 year include felons 
who are temporarily absent, such as in court, in jail, or in a 
hospital. The majority of temporarily absent inmates are absent for 
fewer than 30 days. Jurisdiction counts for unsentenced inmates 
include civil addicts who are enrolled for treatment and are not 
serving a criminal conviction sentence, but are under the jurisdiction 
of the California Department of Corrections and Rehabilitation. 
California is unable to differentiate between inmates held in federal 
facilities and those held in other states’ facilities. Changes in 
design capacity are based on information from an annual facilities 
planning and management report.

Colorado--Jurisdiction and custody counts include a small, 
undetermined number of inmates with a maximum sentence of 1 year or 
less. Admission and release data for inmates who are absent without 
leave (AWOL) or who have escaped are estimated. Other admissions 
include returns from the Colorado State Hospital and those due to an 
audit of admissions. Other releases include court orders and youthful 
offender system discharges. Design and operational capacities do not 
include the privately run facilities in Colorado.

Connecticut--Prisons and jails form one integrated system. All NPS 
data include jail and prison populations. New court commitment 
admissions include inmates admitted in 2013 on accused status, but who 
received a sentence later in 2013. Counts of other types of admissions 
and releases include persons with legitimate types of prison entries 
and exits that do not match BJS categories. Legislation in July 1995 
abolished the capacity law. A facility’s capacity is a fluid number 
based on the needs of the department. The needs are dictated by 
security issues, populations, court decrees, legal mandates, staffing, 
and physical plant areas of facilities that serve other purposes or 
have been decommissioned. The actual capacity of a facility is subject 
to change.

Delaware--Prisons and jails form one integrated system. All NPS data 
include jail and prison populations. Capacity counts include the 
halfway houses under the DOC.

Federal Bureau of Prisons (BOP)--Data reflect inmates under BOP 
jurisdiction on December 28, 2013. Jurisdiction counts include inmates 
housed in secure private facilities where the BOP had a direct 
contract with a private operator, as well as inmates housed in secure 
facilities where there was a subcontract with a private provider at a 
local government facility. Jurisdiction counts also include inmates 
housed in jail or short-term detention and others held in state-
operated or other nonfederal secure facilities.

Counts include 9,255 inmates (8,010 males and 1,245 females) held in 
nonsecure, privately operated community corrections centers or halfway 
houses and 3,076 offenders on home confinement (2,623 males and 453 
females). A total of 86 male and 3 female juveniles were held in 
contract facilities; these inmates were included in the jurisdiction 
totals but excluded from the counts of private, locally operated, or 
federally operated facilities. Some of these juveniles are under the 
jurisdiction of U.S. probation but are being housed in the custody of 
the BOP in contract facilities. Due to information system 
configuration, Asians and Native Hawaiians or other Pacific Islanders 
are combined, and inmates of Hispanic origin are included in the race 
categories. On December 28, 2013, the BOP held 70,943 male and 4,500 
female inmates of Hispanic origin.

Other admissions include program supervision violators, 
hospitalization, and treatment. Parole violation counts combine those 
with and without a new sentence. Expirations of sentence include good-
conduct releases that usually have a separate and distinct term of 
supervision, as well as releases from the residential drug abuse 
treatment program. Other types of conditional releases include 
conditional medical release, provisional release supervision, program 
supervision, mandatory conditional release, and reinstatement of 
parole. Other releases include court-ordered terminations, 
compassionate release, and releases based on the amount of time 
served. The BOP population on December 28, 2013, was 174,242 inmates 
(excluding contracted and private facilities), and the rated capacity 
on that date was 130,907. The crowding rate was 33%.

Florida--—Other types of admissions include those who violated program 
supervision. In 2013, five inmates received other unconditional 
releases through vacated sentences and full pardons. Other conditional 
releases include provisional release supervision, conditional medical 
release, program supervision, and parole reinstatement. Since count of 
noncitizen inmates is based on citizenship status, as opposed
to previous years’ determination based on country of birth, 2013 
statistics are not comparable to earlier years.

Georgia--Females are not housed in privately operated correctional 
facilities in Georgia. Subtotals of race, sex, and sentence length for 
jurisdiction and custody counts were adjusted by the Georgia DOC using 
interpolation to match the overall totals. Counts of admissions and 
releases were adjusted using interpolation to balance the 
jurisdictional populations on January 1, 2013, and December 31, 2013.

Hawaii--Prisons and jails form one integrated system. All NPS data 
include jail and prison populations. In custody and jurisdiction 
counts, sentenced felon probationers and probation violators are 
included with the counts of prisoners with a total maximum sentence of 
1 year or less. Jurisdiction counts include dual-jurisdiction (state 
of Hawaii or federal) inmates currently housed in federal facilities 
and in contracted federal detention center beds. Other release types 
include inmates released to state hospitals, other programs, or on own 
recognizance. Hawaii does not have a rated capacity for the integrated 
prisons and jail system. Information on foreign nationals held in 
correctional facilities was based on self-reports by inmates.

Idaho--Idaho defines rated capacity as 100% of maximum capacity and 
operational capacity as 95% of maximum capacity. Design capacity is 
based on original facility-designed occupancy.

Illinois--All population counts are based on jurisdiction. Population 
counts for inmates with over 1 year maximum sentence include an 
undetermined number of inmates with a 1-year sentence. Counts of 
escape admissions and releases include one escape from a minimum 
security facility and one while at court, while the remaining escapes 
occurred at adult transition centers. Other admission and release 
types include an undetermined number of transfers to other 
jurisdictions. They account for the net difference between long-term 
admissions and release movements not reported in other categories 
required to balance yearend populations. Illinois did not submit NPS 
data in 2012, so BJS imputed data for this jurisdiction. Refer to the 
Methodology section in Prisoners in 2012: Trends in Admissions and 
Releases 1991-2012 (NCJ 243920, BJS website, December 2013) for a 
description of the 2012 data imputation procedure.

Indiana--Indiana now includes contracted work release beds in custody 
and jurisdiction counts; therefore, the 2013 counts are not comparable 
to previous years’ data. Other types of admissions include inmates on 
active supervision or who were admitted for prior charges.

Iowa--In 2009, the Iowa DOC began including offenders on work release, 
the Operating While Intoxicated population, and Iowa inmates housed in 
out-of-state prisons in its jurisdiction counts. Iowa data included in 
BJS reports prior to 2009 were custody counts only. The admission and 
release data quality and methodology were updated in 2013; therefore, 
changes from previous years’ counts may reflect these updates. Counts 
of AWOL admissions and releases are of the work release and Operating 
While Intoxicated populations. Escape admissions and releases are of 
the prison population only. Transfer admissions include those entering 
from other jurisdictions with an Iowa prison sentence. Other 
conditional releases include inmates released to special sentences.

Kansas--Admissions and releases reflect movements of the custody 
population with the exception of transfers, which include all Kansas 
prisoners regardless of custody status. Other types of unconditional 
releases include inmates released for court appearances, those 
released on appeal or bond, and other final releases. Other types of 
conditional releases include unsupervised and supervised releases and 
inmates released back onto parole.

Kentucky--Other types of admissions include entries to residential 
programs and other special admissions. Other types of conditional 
prison releases include exits to home incarceration and returns to 
community service. Kentucky no longer houses prisoners in private 
facilities; its private prison contract expired on June 30, 2013.

Louisiana--Jurisdiction and capacity counts are correct as of December 
26, 2013.

Maine--Fewer male state prisoners are housed in county facilities due 
to overcrowding at the local level. The state has been adding capacity 
and double-bunking at prisons. Counts of inmates age 17 or younger 
reflect only those held in adult correctional facilities.

Maryland--The number of inmates with maximum sentences of more than 1 
year is estimated by taking the percentages for these prisoners from 
the automated totals and applying them to the manual totals submitted 
for NPS. The number of male inmates included in the jurisdiction count 
of prisoners held in other state facilities may include a small number 
of female inmates. Maryland’s system does not capture Hispanic origin. 
An undetermined number of Native Hawaiians and other Pacific Islanders 
may be included in the count of American Indian/Alaska Natives. 
Maryland’s system does not distinguish between AWOL and escape 
releases, nor does it record the sex of inmates housed in out-of-state 
private prisons. The count of admissions by new court commitments may 
include a small but undetermined number of returns from appeal or 
bond. Other admissions include errors made in returns from release. 
The count of unconditional releases includes court-ordered releases 
and a small but undetermined number of releases to appeal or bond. 
Other release types include interstate compact releases and releases 
of new admissions that were counted twice.

Massachusetts--By law, offenders in Massachusetts may be sentenced to 
terms of up to 2.5 years in locally operated jails and correctional 
institutions. This population is excluded from the state count, but is 
included in published population counts and rates for local jails and 
correctional institutions. Jurisdiction counts exclude approximately 
2,630 inmates (2,511 males and 119 females) in the county system 
(local jails and houses of correction) who are serving a sentence of 
more than 1 year, but these inmates are included in imprisonment rate 
calculations at the request of the Massachusetts DOC. Jurisdiction and 
custody counts may include a small but undetermined number of inmates 
who were remanded to court; transferred to the custody of another 
state, federal, or locally operated system; or subsequently released. 
In 2013, there was an increase in inmates transferred to local jails 
prior to their release from prison as part of a step-down initiative 
for reentry; this accounts for the increase in the number of persons 
under Massachusetts’ jurisdiction held in local jail facilities. Other 
types of admissions include returns from court release, mostly of 
inmates released unconditionally as a result of the 2012 state drug 
lab incident involving drug test falsifications by one of the 
chemists. The number of unconditional releases ordered by the courts 
in 2013 decreased in the aftermath of the 2012 state drug lab 
incident. The number of inmates released on discretionary parole 
continued to increase in 2013, after legislative changes enacted in 
2011 to reduce these releases caused fluctuations in the number and 
rate of persons released on parole in 2011 and 2012.

Michigan--Michigan’s new database system treats Hispanic as an 
ethnicity rather than a race. Because this is currently an optional 
field, the numbers for Hispanics are significantly underreported, and 
the state included them in the white race category. Releases and 
admissions of escaped inmates consist predominantly of zero-tolerance 
escapes from community residential programs. Releases to appeal or 
bond and admissions of inmates returning from appeal or bond are not 
disaggregated by length of time out to court; these counts represent 
the net difference between all movements to and from court. 
Operational capacity includes institution and camp net operating 
capacities, as well as the population of community programs on 
December 31, 2013, since community programs do not have a fixed 
capacity.

Minnesota--Jurisdiction counts include inmates temporarily housed in 
local jails, on work release, or on community work crew programs. The 
number of inmates housed in local jails increased during 2013 due to 
higher-than-anticipated prison commitments and the achievement of the 
prison bed capacity figure. Admissions and releases due to AWOL or 
escape, returns from or releases to appeal or bond, and releases due 
to transfer are not included in Minnesota’s database file. Minnesota 
only measures operational capacity.

Mississippi--Custody counts exclude county regional facilities, while 
jurisdiction counts include these facilities. Local jails and county 
regional facilities are included in the jurisdiction count of inmates 
housed at local facilities. Parole and conditional release violators 
are not distinguished by their sentence status in the Mississippi 
file. Total operational capacity on December 31, 2013 was 25,691.

Missouri--Other types of unconditional releases include court-ordered 
discharges and compensation. Other types of conditional releases 
include parole board holdover returns. The Missouri DOC does not have 
the design capacity of its older prisons, nor does it update design 
capacity for prison extension or improvements. Missouri does not use a 
rated capacity. The state defines operational capacity as the number 
of available beds, including those temporarily offline. Noncitizen 
data are based on self-reported place of birth.

Nebraska--By statute, inmates are housed where they are sentenced by 
the judge and are never housed in local jails or by another state to 
ease prison crowding. One person was released unconditionally in 2013 
by having his sentenced vacated. Other admissions and other 
conditional releases reflect movements in the reentry furlough program 
population. Nebraska defines operational capacity as its stress 
capacity, which is 125% of design capacity for designated facilities. 
The total design and operational capacities for institutions that 
house females include one female multicustody facility. The department 
operates two co-ed facilities that represent a design capacity of 290 
and are counted in the male design and operational capacities.

Nevada--Nevada did not submit NPS data in 2012 or 2013.
See Methodology for a description of the data imputation procedure.

New Hampshire--The new offender database management system reports the 
number of inmates who are under New Hampshire’s jurisdiction but 
housed in other state facilities in a different manner from NPS 
submissions prior to 2010. New Hampshire’s operating capacity is 
defined as the inmate population on any given day.

New Jersey--Population counts for inmates with a maximum sentence of 
more than 1 year include inmates with sentences of a year. The New 
Jersey DOC has no jurisdiction over inmates with sentences of less 
than 1 year or over unsentenced inmates. One person was returned to 
prison after having been released by the court in 2013. Reporting of 
other conditional releases include those to an intensive supervision 
program, while other types of unconditional releases include vacated, 
suspended, modified, or remanded sentences ordered by the courts. 
Other releases include inmates brought too soon from the county jails 
into the state prison system, then released back to the county jails, 
other transfers, and errors.

New Mexico--New Mexico does not include its inmates housed in other 
states under the interstate compact agreement in its total 
jurisdiction count. According to BJS definitions, these inmates should 
be included in the total state jurisdiction, and were in this report.

North Carolina--As of December 1, 2011, North Carolina prisons no 
longer house misdemeanor offenders with sentences of less than 180 
days. Captured escapees are not considered a prison admission type in 
North Carolina, and escape is not considered a type of prison release. 
Other types of unconditional releases include court-ordered and 
interstate compact releases. Supervised mandatory releases are post-
release offenders. Post-release supervision is defined as a 
reintegration program for serious offenders who have served extensive 
prison terms. This form of supervision was created by the Structured 
Sentencing Act of 1993. Rated capacity is not available.
North Dakota—Capacity counts account for double-bunking in the state 
penitentiary.

Ohio--Population counts for inmates with a maximum sentence of more 
than 1 year include an undetermined number of inmates with a sentence 
of 1 year or less. Counts of inmates who are under Ohio’s jurisdiction 
but housed in federal or other state facilities are estimates. Counts 
of admission and release types reflect revised reporting methods. 
Admissions of parole violators without a new sentence include only 
formally revoked violators. Returns and conditional releases involving 
transitional control inmates are reported only after movement from 
confinement to a terminal release status occurs.

Oklahoma--Jurisdiction counts include offenders in a DOC jail program, 
those in court, and escapees in the custody of local jails, as well as 
those sentenced to the DOC but not yet in custody. Prior to 2013, 
those not yet in custody were not included in the counts. Most inmates 
with sentences of less than 1 year were part of the Oklahoma Delayed 
Sentencing Program for Young Adults. Offenders in the custody of other 
states and the BOP are mostly escapees. Only DOC facilities have an 
approved capacity determined by the Board of Corrections according to 
the standards of the American Correctional Association. Noncitizen 
status is determined by country of birth.

Oregon--Most offenders with a maximum sentence of less than 1 year 
remain under the custody of local counties rather than the Oregon DOC. 
Oregon does not recognize rated capacity.
Pennsylvania—Pennsylvania no longer houses prerelease inmates in 
privately operated correctional facilities, which accounts for the 
decrease from 2012 counts of prisoners in private facilities. The 
number of persons housed in local facilities increased at yearend 
2013, and the number of inmates released in 2013 through transfers 
represent the decision to house technical parole violators in county 
facilities as opposed to state prisons. Four females were released to 
state hospitals in 2013. Other types of unconditional releases include 
vacated sentences and convictions.

Rhode Island--Prisons and jails form one integrated system. All NPS 
data include jail and prison populations. Jurisdiction counts include 
inmates who have dual jurisdiction, or those serving Rhode Island 
sentences out of state while also serving that state’s sentence. The 
Rhode Island data system records Hispanic as a race rather than an 
ethnicity and does not capture Native Hawaiian and Other Pacific 
Islanders or persons identifying as two or more races, including those 
who may identify themselves as Hispanic second to another race. Prison 
admissions classified as escape returns include admissions under home 
confinement, serving out of state, and minimum- security facilities. 
Other types of unconditional releases consist of court or court order 
discharges, while other types of conditional releases include 
discharge to the Institute for Mental Health.

South Carolina--The December 31, 2013, custody count of unsentenced 
individuals includes Interstate Compact Commission inmates. As of July 
1, 2003, the South Carolina Department of Corrections (SCDC) began 
releasing inmates due for release and housed in SCDC institutions on 
the first day of each month. Since January 1, 2014, was a holiday, 
inmates eligible for release on January 1 were released on December 
31, 2013. Therefore, the inmate count was at its lowest point for the 
month on December 31, 2013. All inmates in private facilities in South 
Carolina were housed in private medical facilities. The local 
facilities holding inmates on December 31, 2013, include designated 
facilities, a juvenile justice facility (1 male), and persons AWOL 
from county or local facilities.

South Carolina does not have a specific race code to designate persons 
identifying two or more races. These individuals are included in other 
specific race groups or labeled as “other race.” Other types of 
unconditional releases consist of remands. Conditional release counts 
include inmates released under community supervision after serving 85% 
of their sentence under truth in sentencing. There are two paroling 
authorities within the adult correctional system in South Carolina. 
The Intensive Supervision Administrative Release Authority of SCDC 
assumed Youthful Offender Act (YOA) Parole Board duties on February 1, 
2013; prior to that, the Youthful Offender Branch of SCDC handled YOA 
paroles. SCDC paroled 828 offenders sentenced under the YOA, and the 
South Carolina Department of Probation, Parole, and Pardon Services 
paroled 417 non-YOA sentenced offenders. The SCDC has implemented new 
intensive supervision services, which are designed to promote 
community safety and ensure the successful reentry of young offenders 
back into the community. These individuals were counted as other 
conditional releases in 2012, but in 2013 were classified as parolees. 
South Carolina uses the operational capacity concept in its management 
reports and other requested surveys.

South Dakota--Custody and jurisdiction counts of inmates serving a 
maximum sentence of 1 year or less included those under the sentence 
of probation who, as a condition of probation, must serve up to 180 
days in state prison. South Dakota does not separate discretionary and 
presumptive parole releases. The operational capacity reported is 
planned capacity. South Dakota does not have rated or design 
capacities. The reporting system for the South Dakota DOC does not 
have a category for inmates of two or more races. These inmates are 
included in the counts of “other” race prisoners.

Tennessee--The sex of five inmates could not be identified and were 
counted as males in the jurisdiction counts.

Texas-Offenders in custody were all offenders serving time in a 
facility owned and operated by the Texas Department of Criminal 
Justice at the time of data collection. Jurisdiction counts include 
offenders in custody and those held in privately operated prisons, 
intermediate-sanction facilities, substance abuse felony punishment 
facilities, pre-parole transfer facilities, and halfway houses; 
offenders temporarily released to a county for less than 30 days; and 
offenders awaiting paperwork for transfer to state-funded custody. 
Capacities exclude county jail beds because they do not have a minimum 
or maximum number of beds available for paper-ready and bench-warrant 
inmates. Admissions and releases include offenders received into an 
intermediate-sanction facility, which is a sanction in lieu of 
revocation. These offenders were counted in the parole violator 
category, although these were not revocations. Other admissions 
include transfers between divisions and adjustments. Other releases 
include executions and transfers between divisions.

Utah--Other types of unconditional release include discharges of cases 
or inmate holds.

Vermont--Prisons and jails form one integrated system. All NPS data 
include jail and prison populations. In 2013, Vermont added the option 
to capture Hispanic origin. Not all inmates’ records may have been 
updated by December 31, 2013, and race distributions from 2013 are not 
comparable to previous years’ data. Vermont does not have the ability 
to record on persons identifying as two or more races. Other types of 
conditional releases include furlough reintegrations.

Virginia--Jurisdiction counts were for December 31, 2013. As of 
September 1, 1998, the state is responsible for inmates with a 
sentence of 1 year or more, or a sentence of 12 months plus 1 day. The 
state was responsible for a 1-year sentence, while local authorities 
were responsible for sentences of 12 months or less sentence. In 2012, 
the number of inmates housed in local facilities was taken from 
Compensation Board reports which were not available for 2013. Instead, 
the number of inmates housed in local facilities in 2013 was obtained 
from DOC data. Native Hawaiians and Pacific Islanders are included in 
the Asian race category. Admissions and releases are preliminary 
fiscal year 2013 figures. Other types of conditional releases include 
geriatric releases, pardons, and clemencies. Other releases include 
unauthorized and court-ordered releases. The Virginia DOC maintains a 
count of beds (called authorized capacity) that is provided as the 
measure of rated capacity in this survey. The number of beds assigned 
by rating officials (Virginia DOC) to institutions takes into account 
the number of inmates who can be accommodated based on staff, 
programs, services, and design.

	Washington--Offenders sentenced to 1 year or less and 
unsentenced offenders generally reside in county jails, but revisions 
to law allow certain inmates with sentences of less than 1 year to be 
housed in prison. These inmates are included in the total jurisdiction 
counts. Native Hawaiians and Pacific Islanders are included in the 
Asian race category. In 2013, nineteen inmates were released 
unconditionally when their sentences were vacated.

West Virginia--Other types of admissions and releases included those 
to and from the Anthony Center for Young Adults and Diagnostics. Other 
types of unconditional releases included court-ordered releases.

Wisconsin--Counts for 2013 were calculated using a different 
methodology than in previous years and therefore are not comparable to 
previous years’ data. Custody measures include inmates without 
Wisconsin sentences who were physically housed in a Wisconsin prison. 
Jurisdiction measures include inmates with Wisconsin sentences, 
regardless of where they were physically located. Sentence length for 
custody and jurisdiction counts was determined by calculating the time 
between an inmate’s admission date and their maximum discharge date. 
If the maximum discharge date was not recorded then the inmate’s 
mandatory release date was used. This may not accurately reflect 
whether the inmate was initially sentenced to 1 year or less or more 
than 1 year. Unsentenced inmates were those who had not yet had data 
entered reflecting their mandatory release date and maximum discharge 
date; some of these inmates may have been sentenced, but the DOC was 
unable to determine the sentence length at the time they responded to 
NPS. This mainly affected probation offenders in the Milwaukee 
facility on temporary hold. Sentence length for admissions was 
calculated as the time between an inmate’s admission date and their 
maximum discharge date, or mandatory release date if the maximum 
discharge date was not available. Admissions for parole violators 
without a new sentence include offenders on parole who were admitted 
for alternatives to revocation. Sentence length for prison releases 
was calculated as the time between an inmate’s admission date and 
their actual release date, so this may not accurately reflect whether 
they were sentenced to more than 1 year. Native Hawaiian and Pacific 
Islander inmates are included in the Asian category.

*************************
Terms and definitions
*************************

Adult imprisonment rate--The number of prisoners under state or 
federal jurisdiction sentenced to more than 1 year per 100,000 U.S. 
residents age 18 or older.

Average annual change--Average (mean) annual change across a specific 
period.

Capacity, design--The number of inmates that planners or architects 
intended for a facility.

Capacity, highest--The maximum number of beds reported across the 
three capacity measures: design capacity, operational capacity, and 
rated capacity.

Capacity, lowest--The minimum number of beds across the three capacity 
measures: design capacity, operational capacity, and rated capacity.

Capacity, operational--The number of inmates that can be accommodated 
based on a facility’s staff, existing programs, and services.

Capacity, rated--The number of beds or inmates assigned by a rating 
official to institutions within a jurisdiction.

Conditional releases--Includes discretionary parole, mandatory parole, 
post-custody probation, and other unspecified conditional releases.

Conditional release violators--Readmission to prison of persons 
released to discretionary parole, mandatory parole, post-custody 
probation, and other unspecified conditional releases. 

Custody--Prisoners held in the physical custody of state or federal 
prisons or local jails, regardless of sentence length or authority 
having jurisdiction.

Imprisonment rate--The number of prisoners under state or federal 
jurisdiction sentenced to more than 1 year per 100,000 U.S. residents 
of all ages.

Inmate--A person incarcerated in a local jail, state prison, federal 
prison, or a private facility under contract to federal, state, or 
local authorities.

Jail--A confinement facility usually administered by a local law 
enforcement agency that is intended for adults, but sometimes holds 
juveniles, for confinement before and after adjudication. Such 
facilities include jails and city or county correctional centers; 
special jail facilities, such as medical treatment or release centers; 
halfway houses; work farms; and temporary holding or lockup facilities 
that are part of the jail’s combined function. Inmates sentenced to 
jail facilities usually have a sentence of 1 year or less. Alaska, 
Connecticut, Delaware, Hawaii, Rhode Island, and Vermont operate 
integrated systems, which combine prisons and jails.

Jurisdiction--The legal authority of state or federal correctional 
officials over a prisoner, regardless of where the prisoner is held.

New court commitments--Admissions into prison of offenders convicted 
and sentenced by a court, usually to a term of more than 1 year, 
including probation violators and persons with a split sentence to 
incarceration followed by court-ordered probation or parole.

Parole violators--All conditional release violators returned to prison 
for either violating conditions of release or for new crimes.

Prison--A long-term confinement facility, run by a state or the 
federal government, that typically holds felons and offenders with 
sentences of more than 1 year. However, sentence length may vary by 
state. Alaska, Connecticut, Delaware, Hawaii, Rhode Island, and 
Vermont operate integrated systems, which combine prisons and jails.



Prisoner--An individual confined in a correctional facility under the 
legal authority (jurisdiction) of state or federal correctional 
officials.

Sentenced prisoner--A prisoner sentenced to more than 1 year.

Supervised mandatory releases--Conditional release with postcustody 
supervision generally occurring in jurisdictions using determinate 
sentencing statutes.

Unconditional releases--Expirations of sentences, commutations, and 
other unspecified unconditional releases.

***************
Methodology
***************

Started in 1926 under a mandate from Congress, the National Prisoner 
Statistics (NPS) Program collects annual data on prisoners at yearend. 
The Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS) sponsors the survey, and the 
U.S. Census Bureau serves as the data collection agent. BJS depends 
entirely on voluntary participation by state departments of 
corrections and the Federal Bureau of Prisons (BOP) for NPS data.

The NPS distinguishes between inmates in custody and prisoners under 
jurisdiction. To have custody of a prisoner, a state or the BOP must 
hold that inmate in one of its facilities. To have jurisdiction over a 
prisoner, the state or BOP must have legal authority over that 
prisoner, regardless of where the prisoner is incarcerated or 
supervised. Some states were unable to provide counts that distinguish 
between custody and jurisdiction. (See Jurisdiction notes to determine 
which states did not distinguish between custody and jurisdiction 
counts.)

The NPS jurisdiction counts include persons held in prisons, 
penitentiaries, correctional facilities, halfway houses, boot camps, 
farms, training or treatment centers, and hospitals. Counts also 
include prisoners who were temporarily absent (less than 30 days), in 
court, or on work release; housed in privately operated facilities, 
local jails, or other state or federal facilities; and serving 
concurrent sentences for more than one correctional authority.

The NPS custody counts include all inmates held within a respondent’s 
facilities, including inmates housed for other correctional 
facilities. The custody counts exclude inmates held in local jails and 
in other jurisdictions. With a few exceptions, the NPS custody counts 
include inmates held in privately operated facilities.

Respondents to NPS surveys are permitted to update prior counts of 
prisoners held in custody and under jurisdiction. Some statistics on 
jurisdiction and sentenced prison populations for prior years have 
been updated in this report. All tables showing data based on 
jurisdiction counts, including tables of imprisonment rates, were 
based on the updated and most recently available data that respondents 
provided.

Admissions include new court commitments, parole violator returns, and 
other conditional release violator returns; transfers from other 
jurisdictions; returns of prisoners who were absent without leave 
(AWOL), with or without a new sentence; escape returns, with or 
without a new sentence; returns from appeal or bond, and other 
admissions. For reporting purposes, BJS admission counts exclude 
transfers from other jurisdictions, AWOL returns, and escape returns.

Releases include unconditional releases (e.g., expirations of sentence 
or commutations), conditional releases (e.g., probations, supervised 
mandatory releases, or discretionary paroles), deaths, AWOLs, escapes 
from confinement, transfers to other jurisdictions, releases to appeal 
or bond, and other releases. For reporting purposes, BJS release 
counts exclude AWOLs, escapes, and transfers to other jurisdictions.

The NPS has historically included counts of inmates in the combined 
jail and prison systems in Alaska, Connecticut, Delaware, Hawaii, 
Rhode Island, and Vermont. The District of Columbia has not operated a 
prison system since yearend 2001. Felons sentenced under the District 
of Columbia criminal code are housed in federal facilities. Jail 
inmates in the District of Columbia are included in the Annual Survey 
of Jails. Some previously published prisoner counts and the percentage 
change in population include jail inmates in the District of Columbia 
for 2001, the last year of collection. Additional information about 
the NPS, including the data collection instrument, is available on the 
BJS website.

*********************
Nonreporting states
*********************

As of June 26, 2014, Nevada had not reported any 2012 or 2013 custody, 
jurisdiction, admission, release, or capacity data to the NPS. Using 
the same method as in Prisoners in 2012: Trends in Admissions and 
Releases, 1991-2012 (NCJ 243920, BJS web, December 2013), BJS compared 
past NPS submissions from Nevada with analogous counts reported on the 
state’s departments of corrections (DOC) websites. To generate 
admission and release estimates for Nevada, BJS used the monthly 
statistical abstracts published on the Nevada DOC website 
(http://www.doc.nv.gov/?q=node/270). BJS calculated the distributions 
of admission and release types by applying the average distribution 
for these measures from the most recent 5 years of submitted Nevada 
NPS data, and compared these with the state’s 2013 submission of 
National Corrections Reporting Program (NCRP) data. For counts of 
total and sex-specific custody, jurisdiction, and racial and Hispanic 
origin distribution of the custody population, BJS used the weekly 
fact sheet dated December 26, 2013 
(http://www.doc.nv.gov/sites/doc/files/pdf/stats/fact_sheets/2013/12/F
act_Sheet_Weekly_12262013.pdf). BJS compared these counts with NCRP 
data. Using the average of the past 5 years of submitted NPS data from 
Nevada, BJS applied the proportion of unsentenced prisoners and 
prisoners with sentences of 1 year or less or more than 1 year for 
these measures to the 2013 custody and jurisdiction totals, which 
assumes that the distribution of sentence length has been stable since 
2006. BJS also assumed that the proportion of the Nevada prison 
jurisdiction population housed in local jails in 2013 was the same as 
that reported in 2011. BJS did not estimate a prison capacity count 
for Nevada for 2012 or 2013.

The Alaska DOC had not released its annual offender profile for 2013 
(http://www.correct.state.ak.us/administrative-services/research-
records) as of June 26, 2014, nor could BJS find any data concerning 
the size of the 2013 Alaska prison population on the Alaska DOC 
website. The DOC provided total sentenced and unsentenced custody 
counts and estimates for total jurisdictional population and total 
admissions and releases in mid-June, 2014. Alaska did not submit sex-
specific estimates, so BJS used the distribution of males and females 
from Alaska’s 2012 NPS data to obtain population counts in 2013. BJS 
applied the 2012 distribution of jurisdictional sentence length to the 
total jurisdiction count for 2013. The submitted estimates for annual 
admissions and releases were inconsistent with data submitted in the 
past, so BJS decided to substitute 2012 admission and release data for 
Alaska in 2013. Without external 2013 data that BJS could use to make 
an estimate based on past years’ comparisons of DOC published data and 
NPS submissions, BJS decided to reuse the data submitted by Alaska in 
2012 in 2013.

*****************************
Military correctional data
*****************************

BJS obtains an annual count of service personnel under military 
jurisdiction from the Office of the Under Secretary of Defense for 
Personnel and Readiness. BJS disaggregates these data by the branch in 
which inmates served, the branch having physical custody of the 
inmate, and whether the inmate was an officer or enlisted.

****************************************
Estimating yearend counts of prison 
population by age, sex, and race 
or Hispanic origin
****************************************

National-level estimates of the number of persons by race under the 
jurisdiction of state prisons on December 31, 2013, were based on an 
adjustment of NPS counts to comply with Office of Management and 
Budget (OMB) definitions of race and Hispanic origin. OMB defines 
persons of Hispanic or Latino origin as a separate category. Race 
categories are defined exclusive of Hispanic origin. OMB adopted 
guidelines for the collection of these data in 1997, requiring the 
collection of data on Hispanic origin in addition to data on race.

Not all NPS providers’ information systems categorize race and 
Hispanic origin in this way. In 1991, the earliest time point in the 
analysis, only a few states were able to report information on 
Hispanic origin separately from race. BJS adjusts the NPS data on race 
and Hispanic origin by the ratio of the relative distribution of 
prisoners by race and Hispanic origin in self-report inmate surveys 
that use OMB categories for race to the relative distribution of 
prisoners by race and Hispanic origin in the NPS data. For this 
report, the 2004 Survey of Inmates in State Correctional Facilities 
was used to calculate the ratio used for statistics on racial 
distributions in 2013. The ratio obtained by comparing the within-year 
relative distributions by race and Hispanic origin was then multiplied 
by the NPS distribution in a year to generate the estimate of persons 
by race and Hispanic origin.

Estimates of the total number of sentenced prisoners by age, sex, 
race, and Hispanic origin on December 31, 2013, were generated by 
creating separate totals for federal and state prisons. For the 
federal estimates, each sex-race count that BOP reported to the NPS 
was multiplied by the ratio of the age category count within the sex-
race combination in the Federal Justice Statistics Program (FJSP) to 
the FJSP total count within the sex-race combination (e.g., FJSP white 
males ages 18 to 19 divided by FJSP white males). The resulting 
product yielded the FJSP-adjusted NPS counts for each sex-race 
combination by age group (e.g., white male prisoners ages 18 to 19 in 
the federal prison system). State prison age distributions for the NPS 
use a similar sex-race ratio adjustment based on individual-level data 
from the NCRP. State and federal estimates were added together to 
obtain national estimates for yearend prison populations.

****************************************
Estimating imprisonment rates by age, 
sex, and race or Hispanic origin
****************************************

BJS calculated age-specific imprisonment rates for each age-sex-race 
group by dividing the estimated number of sentenced prisoners within 
each age group under jurisdiction on December 31, 2013, by the 
estimated number of U.S. residents in each age group on January 1, 
2014. BJS multiplied the result by 100,000 and rounded to the nearest 
whole number. Totals by sex include all prisoners and U.S. residents, 
regardless of race or Hispanic origin.

****************************************
Estimating offense distribution in the 
state and federal prison populations by 
age, sex, and race or Hispanic origin
****************************************

BJS employed a ratio adjustment method to weight the individual-level 
race and Hispanic origin or sex-specific offense data from the NCRP to 
the state prison control totals for sex and the estimated race or 
Hispanic origin from the NPS, which yielded a national offense 
distribution for state prisoners. Inmates missing offense data were 
excluded from the analysis prior to the weighting. Because data 
submission for the NCRP typically lags behind that of the NPS, state 
offense distribution estimates are published for the previous calendar 
year.

In past Prisoners bulletins, BJS did not include data on felons 
sentenced by the superior court in the District of Columbia in its 
federal offense distributions. However, the federal prison offense 
distribution in Prisoners in 2012 has been updated. (See Prisoners in 
2012: Trends in Admissions and Releases, 1991–2012, NCJ 243920, BJS 
web, December 2013.) In 2007 BJS began limiting the distributions to 
prisoners sentenced to more than 1 year in federal facilities. To 
standardize the time series of federal data and to permit comparison 
between the state and federal offense data, BJS has reissued the 
federal data starting in 2001, when felons sentenced in the District 
of Columbia became the responsibility of the BOP. Data presented in 
table 15 and table 16 are drawn from FJSP and are limited to inmates 
sentenced to more than 1 year in federal custody. The data are further 
limited to inmates sentenced on U.S. district court commitments, 
District of Columbia superior court commitments, and those returned to 
federal custody following violations of probation (both federal and 
District of Columbia), parole, supervised release, or mandatory 
release. Due to these methodological differences, the estimates in 
table 15 and table 16 will differ from previously published federal 
offense distributions presented in past Prisoners bulletins, as well 
as from those presented in the FJSP web tool 
(http://www.bjs.gov/fjsrc/) or Federal Justice Statistics bulletins 
and statistical tables (http://www.bjs.gov/index.cfm?ty=tp&tid=6). 
Since FJSP is a custody collection, the total count of prisoners in 
table 15 and table 16 will differ from the jurisdiction count of 
prisoners reported to NPS.

********************
Prison capacities
********************

State and federal correctional authorities provide three measures of 
their facilities’ capacity: design capacity, operational capacity, and 
rated capacity. Estimates of the prison populations as a percentage of 
capacity are based on a state or federal custody population. In 
general, state capacity and custody counts exclude inmates held in 
private facilities, although five states include prisoners held in 
private facilities as part of the capacity of their prison systems: 
Florida, Georgia, Idaho, Louisiana, and Mississippi. For these states, 
prison population as a percentage of capacity includes inmates held in 
the states’ private facilities.

******************************
California sentencing data
******************************

Data presented in table 11 on the number of inmates in California 
state prisons who received sentences of life, death, or enhanced 
sentences under the state’s two- and three-strikes laws were 
downloaded from the California Department of Rehabilitation and 
Corrections’ website on May 29, 2014. The counts come from the table 
10 of the Prison Census Data reports, published quarterly: 
http://www.cdcr.ca.gov/Reports_Research/Offender_Information_Services_
Branch/Annual/CensusArchive.html.

****************************************
Calculating median time served 
for state prisoners
****************************************

The median time served by prisoners released in 2002 and 2012 was 
calculated using state prison release data from NCRP. The analysis was 
limited to the 35 states that provided inmate-level data on released 
prisoners in both years. Only those prisoners identified as having 
been admitted for a new offense were included in the calculation, 
because the inclusion of those admitted on parole violations after 
having already served a portion of their original sentence would 
artificially depress the median time served. Only inmates released 
through escapes, transfers, and AWOLs were excluded from the analysis; 
all other types of release were retained. Individuals with missing 
dates or type of admission were excluded. To obtain the estimated 
total number of releases for all inmates, males, and females, the NCRP 
distribution of persons admitted on new court commitments and released 
in 2002 or 2012 was applied to the NPS total release count for these 
years. Estimated counts of releases per offense applied the NCRP 
distribution of these releases to the aforementioned total. This 
assumes that states not participating in NCRP in 2002 and 2012 had 
similar offense distributions to states that did submit data.

**************************************************
The Bureau of Justice Statistics of the U.S. Department of Justice is 
the principal federal agency responsible for measuring crime, criminal 
victimization, criminal offenders, victims of crime, correlates of 
crime, and the operation of criminal and civil justice systems at the 
federal, state, tribal, and local levels. BJS collects, analyzes, and 
disseminates reliable and valid statistics on crime and justice 
systems in the United States, supports improvements to state and local 
criminal justice information systems, and participates with national 
and international organizations to develop and recommend national 
standards for justice statistics. William J. Sabol is acting director.

This report was written by E. Ann Carson. Todd Minton, Laura 
Maruschak, Sheri Simmons, and Josephine Palma verified the report.

Vanessa Curto, Morgan Young, and Jill Thomas edited the report. 
Barbara Quinn and Tina Dorsey produced the report.

September 2014, NCJ 247282
**************************************************

*************************************************
Office of Justice Programs
Innovation * Partnerships * Safer Neighborhoods
www.ojp.usdoj.gov
*************************************************

**********************
8/27/2014/JER/10:50
**********************



