U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Programs
Bureau of Justice Statistics

********************************************************
This file is text only without graphics and many of the
tables. A Zip archive of the tables in this report in
spreadsheet format (.csv) and the full report including
tables and graphics in .pdf format are available on BJS
website at: http://www.bjs.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbdetail&iid=5387

This report is one in a series. More recent editions 
may be available. To view a list of all in the series 
go to http://www.bjs.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbse&sid=40
*********************************************************
Bulletin

Prisoners in 2014
 
E. Ann Carson, Ph.D., BJS Statistician

At yearend 2014, the United States held an estimated 1,561,500 
prisoners in state and federal correctional facilities, a 
decrease of approximately 15,400 prisoners (down 1%) from 
December 31, 2013. A third (34%) of the decrease was due to fewer 
prisoners under the jurisdiction of the Federal Bureau of Prisons 
(BOP), which declined for the second consecutive year (figure 1). 
Prisoners sentenced to more than 1 year in state or federal 
prison declined by almost 1% (down 11,800 prison inmates) from 
yearend 2013 (1,520,400) to yearend 2014 (1,508,600). The number 
of prisoners housed in private facilities in the United States 
decreased by almost 2% in 2014 to 131,300 prison inmates.

The statistics in this report are based on the Bureau of Justice 
Statistics’ (BJS) National Prisoner Statistics (NPS) program, 
which collects annual data from state DOCs and the BOP on 
prisoner counts, prisoner characteristics, admissions, releases, 
and prison capacity. The 2014 NPS collection is number 90 in a 
series that began in 1926. Forty-nine states and the BOP reported 
NPS data for 2014, while data for Alaska were obtained from other 
sources or imputed. (See Methodology.)

*********************************************************

*****************
HIGHLIGHTS
*****************

* The number of prisoners held by state and federal correctional 
authorities on December 31, 2014 (1,561,500) decreased by 15,400 
(down 1%) from yearend 2013.

* The federal prison population decreased by 5,300 inmates (down 
2.5%) from 2013 to 2014, the second consecutive year of decline.

* On December 31, 2014, state and federal correctional 
authorities held 1,508,600 individuals sentenced to more than 1 
year in prison, 11,800 fewer inmates than at yearend 2013.

* The number of women in prison who were sentenced to more than 1 
year increased by 1,900 offenders (up 2%) in 2014 from 104,300 in 
2013 to 106,200 in 2014.

* The decline in the BOP population in 2014 was explained by 5% 
fewer admissions (down 2,800) than in 2013.

* The imprisonment rate declined from 621 prisoners per 100,000 
U.S. residents age 18 or older in 2013 to 612 per 100,000 in 
2014.

* In 2014, 6% of all black males ages 30 to 39 were in prison, 
compared to 2% of Hispanic and 1% of white males in the same age 
group.

* Violent offenders made up 54% of the state male prison 
population at yearend 2013, the most recent year for which data 
were available.

* The BOP housed 40,000 prisoners in private secure and nonsecure 
facilities at yearend 2014, which represents 19% of the total 
federal prison population.

* Half of males (50%) and more than half of females (59%) in 
federal prison were serving time for drug offenses on September 
30, 2014.
*********************************************************

**************************************
The U.S. prison population decreased 
by 1% in 2014**
**************************************

The total number of persons held under the jurisdiction of state 
and federal correctional authorities on December 31, 2014, 
decreased 1% (15,400 prisoners) from the count at yearend 2013 
(table 1). The estimated 1,561,500 prisoners at yearend 2014 
represent the smallest total prison population since 2005, and 
reverse the 0.4% increase that occurred from 2012 to 2013. 
Several states updated their 2013 counts, which resulted in an 
even larger increase than originally reported. The total prison 
population on December 31, 2013, was 1,577,000, an increase of 
6,600 prisoners from 2012 (1,570,400).

The decrease observed in 2014 was the second largest decline in 
the number of prisoners in more than 35 years. The decline of 
28,600 prisoners from 2011 to 2012 coincided with the enactment 
of California’s Public Safety Realignment policy, which diverted 
newly sentenced nonviolent, nonserious, nonsex offenders from 
state prison to serve time in local jails and under community 
supervision.

More than a third of the total decline in the number of prison 
inmates (34% or 5,300 prisoners) occurred in the federal prison 
population. This was the second straight year of decline in the 
federal system, which is the nation’s largest prison jurisdiction 
followed by Texas and California (table 2, figure 2). The federal 
system held 13% of all prison inmates at yearend 2014. States 
held 10,100 fewer prisoners at yearend 2014 than in 2013.

Twenty-four states and the federal BOP showed decreases in total 
prison populations between yearend 2013 and 2014 (figure 3). 
Mississippi held 3,200 fewer prison inmates at yearend 2014 (down 
15% from 2013), which resulted from new policies that encourage 
supervision of nonviolent offenders in the community instead of 
in prison. The Texas prison population, the second largest in the 
United States with 166,000 inmates at yearend 2014, declined by 
2,200 prisoners (down 1%) from yearend 2013 (168,300). Louisiana, 
Georgia, and New York also had modest declines that amounted to 
between 1,000 and 1,300 fewer prisoners for each jurisdiction in 
2014 than in 2013. 

Most states that observed growth in their prison populations had 
smaller prison systems, including North Dakota, which increased 
its yearend 2013 population by 140 (up 9%) to 1,700 on December 
31, 2014. Nebraska experienced an 8% increase in its prison 
population, from 5,000 prisoners in 2013 to 5,400 in 2014.

While females have represented approximately 7% of the total 
prison population over the past decade, the number of females 
under state or federal correctional jurisdiction increased by 
1,600 inmates (up more than 1%) to 113,000 in 2014, the largest 
number of female prisoners since 2009. Sixteen states and the BOP 
observed decreases among their female prison populations, 
compared to 23 states and the BOP for males. Much of the growth 
took place in states with smaller prison systems so that modest 
increases in the number of imprisoned females caused large state-
specific percent changes between 2013 and 2014. Missouri held 300 
more women at yearend 2014 than in 2013 (up 12%), and Kentucky 
had an additional 260 female prisoners (up 11%). In comparison, 
from yearend 2013 to 2014, Texas held 500 additional women, an 
increase of almost 4%.

****************************************
97% of prisoners under the jurisdiction 
of state and federal authorities were 
sentenced to more than 1 year in prison
****************************************

From yearend 2013 to 2014, the number of persons in state or 
federal prison who were sentenced to more than 1 year declined by 
11,800 (down slightly less than 1%) to 1,509,000 prisoners (table 
3). Prisoners sentenced to more than 1 year made up 97% of the 
total prison population, while unsentenced inmates and those with 
terms of 1 year or less accounted for the remaining 3% (53,000 
prisoners). The decreasing number of sentenced prisoners 
accounted for 76% of the change in the total jurisdictional 
population. State prisons housed 8,000 fewer sentenced inmates on 
December 31, 2014, for a total of 1,317,300 prisoners. The BOP 
had 191,400 sentenced prisoners at yearend 2014, 2% fewer than in 
2013 (195,100).

The number of females in state or federal prison who were 
sentenced to more than 1 year increased by 1,900 prisoners (up 
nearly 2%) from 2013 (104,300 female prisoners) to 2014 
(106,200). Sentenced female prisoners reached their highest count 
in 2014 since 2008, when states and the BOP imprisoned 106,400 
females sentenced to at least 1 year under correctional 
authority.

Twenty-two states and the BOP saw a decline in the number of 
prison inmates who had been sentenced to more than 1 year under 
correctional authority (table 4). The BOP (down 3,700 prisoners), 
Mississippi (down 2,900 prisoners), Texas (down 1,700), and 
Louisiana (down 1,300) had the largest decreases in the number of 
these prisoners in 2014. Among states with an increase in prison 
populations, Arizona imprisoned 40,200 sentenced inmates at 
yearend 2014, an increase of 1,100 prisoners from 2013. No other 
jurisdictions had increases of more than 1,000 sentenced 
prisoners during 2014.

As with the total jurisdiction population, 17 states and the BOP 
showed declines among sentenced female prisoners. Among states 
with an increase in sentenced female prisoners, Texas (up 700 
females), Missouri (up 300), and Kentucky and North Carolina (up 
200 each) made up 75% of the total change in the number of 
sentenced females from yearend 2013 to 2014.

****************************************
The imprisonment rate in the United 
States continued to decline in 2014
****************************************

At yearend 2014, the United States imprisoned 471 persons per 
100,000 residents of all ages and 612 persons per 100,000 
residents age 18 or older (table 5). Both statistics represent 
the lowest rate of imprisonment in more than a decade, and 
continue decreases that began in 2007 and 2008. More than 1% of 
adult U.S. males were in state or federal prison on December 31, 
2014. The male imprisonment rate in 2014 (1,169 per 100,000 adult 
males) was lower than in 2013 (1,189 per 100,000). While the 
imprisonment rate for females was lower (65 per 100,000 female 
residents of all ages and 84 per 100,000 adult females), the 
rates for women increased from 2013.

Louisiana had the highest imprisonment rate for persons of all 
ages (816 per 100,000 state residents) and adults (1,072 inmates 
per 100,000 state residents age 18 or older) (table 6). Oklahoma 
(928 per 100,000), Alabama (820 per 100,000), Texas (792 per 
100,000), and Mississippi (788 per 100,000) had the next highest 
rates of imprisonment among persons age 18 or older. Maine 
imprisoned the fewest state residents per capita at yearend 2014 
(153 per 100,000 residents of all ages or 189 per 100,000 
adults), followed by Massachusetts (188 per 100,000 residents of 
all ages or 237 per 100,000 adult residents).

Although Louisiana imprisoned males at a higher rate than any 
other state on December 31, 2014 (1,577 per 100,000 male state 
residents of all ages), its imprisonment rate for females (87 per 
100,000 female residents of all ages) was low compared to all 
other states. Oklahoma (142 per 100,000), Idaho (125 per 
100,000), and Kentucky (108 per 100,000) had the highest female 
imprisonment rates at yearend 2014.

****************************************
A decline in admissions during 2014 led 
to the smaller federal prison population
****************************************

The decrease in the federal prison population from yearend 2013 
to yearend 2014 was driven by declining admissions rather than an 
increase in releases. The BOP admitted 2,800 fewer prisoners in 
2014, a 5% decrease from admissions during 2013. During the same 
period, the number of releases from the BOP was nearly stable, 
with 300 fewer released prisoners in 2014 compared to 2013 (table 
7). In comparison, state prisons admitted 500 fewer persons in 
2014 than in 2013, but released 12,600 more prisoners (up 2%). In 
total, state and federal prisons admitted 626,600 persons during 
2014, including 449,000 entries for newly convicted offenders. 
They released 636,300 inmates overall (figure 4, figure 5).
 
Admissions increased in 18 states, including a 34% rise in 
Hawaii, 26% in Oklahoma, 16% in Kentucky, and 14% in North 
Carolina. With the exception of Hawaii, these states also saw 
smaller increases in the number of persons released during 2014. 
After the BOP, Indiana had the largest decline in admissions 
during 2014, admitting 1,800 fewer inmates than in 2013 (down 
10%). Mississippi admitted 19% fewer prisoners in 2014, a decline 
of 1,500 prison admissions from the previous year.

In 2014, new court commitments accounted for 91% of the BOP’s 
total admissions, compared to 70% for state prisons. Parole 
violation admissions, which include all conditional release 
violators, made up the majority of the remaining admissions. Of 
states with the largest prison populations, Texas admitted 66% 
(50,000) of its inmates in 2014 on new court commitments, 
compared to 86% (33,500) for California and 97% (31,000) in 
Florida. Vermont, Washington, Idaho, and Arkansas admitted more 
than 50% of prisoners during 2014 on violations of post-custody 
supervision programs.

Twenty-one states increased the number of prison releases from 
2013 to 2014, led by Texas (up 4%), Arkansas (up 35%), and 
California (up 6%). These three leading states accounted for 61% 
of the total increase in state prison releases. Seventy percent 
of all prison inmates released from state prisons in 2014 had 
post-custody community supervision conditions to fulfill. Maine, 
Massachusetts, Florida, Rhode Island, and New Jersey placed no 
post-custody supervision conditions on the majority of prisoners 
they released during 2014.***Footnote *The majority of releases 
from the federal prison population are reported as unconditional. 
Under the Sentencing Reform Act of 1984, the federal parole 
system was eliminated, but federal courts were allowed to impose 
a term of supervised release after imprisonment as part of an 
inmate's sentence. Because this supervised release term is not 
implemented under the jurisdiction of the federal prison system, 
the BOP reports prison releases as unconditional even though 
inmates may serve post-custody community supervision***.

****************************************
Nineteen jurisdictions were operating 
their prison facilities at more than 
100% maximum capacity in 2014
****************************************

The yearend 2014 custody populations of the BOP and 18 states 
exceeded the maximum measure of their prison facilities’ 
capacity. The BOP and 28 states had more prisoners in custody 
than their minimum number of beds (table 8). BJS reports three 
different measures of capacity: the operational capacity, which 
is based on the ability of the staff, programs, and services to 
accommodate a certain size population; the rated capacity, which 
measures the number of beds assigned by a rating official to each 
facility; and the design capacity, which is the number of beds 
that the facility was originally designed to hold. Although many 
jurisdictions cannot report all three types of capacity, most 
provide at least two types. Based on these data, BJS calculates 
the percent capacity of facilities based on the custody 
population for the largest (maximum) and smallest (minimum) 
capacity measures.

Prison facilities in Illinois held 48,300 inmates at yearend 
2014, 150% of the rated capacity of 32,100 (maximum), and 171% of 
the design capacity of 28,200 (minimum). BOP facilities were 
officially rated to house 132,700 inmates, but 170,000 prisoners 
were in custody at yearend 2014, which was 128% of the maximum 
capacity reported. Other jurisdictions with more inmates housed 
than the maximum number of beds for which their facilities were 
designed, rated, or intended include Ohio (132%), Massachusetts 
(130%), and Nebraska (128%).

****************************************
The number of prisoners held in private 
facilities declined in 2014
****************************************

Of states with prison facilities operating at more than 100% 
maximum capacity, both Ohio and the BOP decreased the number of 
inmates held in private facilities. Illinois, Nebraska, and 
Massachusetts do not house any prisoners in private facilities. 
In 2014, 131,300 inmates were held in private prison facilities 
under the jurisdiction of 30 states and the BOP, a decrease of 
2,100 prisoners from yearend 2013 (table 9). The federal prison 
system held 1,100 fewer prisoners in private prisons (down 3%), 
for a total of 40,000 or 19% of the BOP population. Idaho had the 
largest decline (down 77%) in private prisoners during 2014, as 
operations at a prison facility formerly run by a private entity 
were taken over by the state DOC.

Seven states housed at least 20% of their inmate population in 
private facilities at yearend 2014, including New Mexico (44% of 
the total state prison population), Montana (39%), Oklahoma 
(26%), and Hawaii (24%). Since 1999, when BJS began tracking the 
number of prisoners in private facilities at yearend on an annual 
basis through the National Prisoner Statistics (NPS), the size of 
this population has grown 90%, from 69,000 prisoners at yearend 
1999 to 131,300 in 2014. The use of private prisons was at a 
maximum in 2012, when 137,200 (almost 9%) of the total U.S. 
prison population were housed in private facilities (figure 6).

Between 5% and 7% of state prison inmates were held in private 
facilities each year, while the BOP increasingly relied on 
facilities not managed by a state, federal, or local government 
to house inmates in recent years, including both secure and 
nonsecure facilities, and home confinement. In 1999, almost 3% of 
federal prison inmates were held in secure private facilities. 
This grew to more than 13% in 2012 and 2013, before declining in 
2014 to slightly less than 13%. In 2014, 13,000 (32%) of the 
BOP’s 40,000 privately supervised inmates were in nonsecure 
community corrections facilities or on home confinement, up from 
6,100 in 2000, the first year the BOP reported this population to 
BJS (not shown).

****************************************
In 2014, states held 4,100 fewer 
prisoners in local jails than in 2013
****************************************

At yearend 2014, almost 82,000 prisoners were held in the custody 
of local jails for 35 states and the BOP. This represented a 5% 
decline (down 3,900) from the 85,700 prisoners held in jail 
facilities in 2013. Fourteen states and the BOP increased the 
number of prisoners housed in local jails during 2014, while 
Oklahoma, Louisiana, and Texas held at least 1,000 fewer prison 
inmates in jail facilities than in 2013. Louisiana housed the 
most prisoners in local facilities, with 19,300 (51%) of the 
state’s yearend 2014 prison population residing in jails.

*******************************************
2.7% of black males and 1.1% of Hispanic 
males were sentenced to more than 1 year 
in state or federal prison at yearend 2014
*******************************************

An estimated 516,900 black males were in state or federal prison 
at yearend 2014, accounting for 37% of the male prison population 
(table 10, appendix table 3). White males made up 32% of the male 
prison population (453,500 prison inmates), followed by Hispanics 
(308,700 inmates or 22%). White females (53,100 prisoners) in 
state or federal prison at yearend 2014 outnumbered both black 
(22,600) and Hispanic (17,800) females. 

As a percentage of residents of all ages at yearend 2014, 2.7% of 
black males (or 2,724 per 100,000 black male residents) and 1.1% 
of Hispanic males (1,090 per 100,000 Hispanic males) were serving 
sentences of at least 1 year in prison, compared to less than 
0.5% of white males (465 per 100,000 white male residents). On 
December 31, 2014, black males had higher imprisonment rates than 
prisoners of other races or Hispanic origin within every age 
group. Imprisonment rates for black males were 3.8 to 10.5 times 
greater at each age group than white males and 1.4 to 3.1 times 
greater than rates for Hispanic males. The largest disparity 
between white and black male prisoners occurred among inmates 
ages 18 to 19. Black males (1,072 prisoners per 100,000 black 
male residents ages 18 to 19) were more than 10 times more likely 
to be in state or federal prison than whites (102 per 100,000).

Imprisonment rates by race and Hispanic origin were highest for 
males ages 30 to 34 (6,412 per 100,000 black males, 2,457 per 
100,000 Hispanic males, and 1,111 per 100,000 white males). More 
than 1% of white male residents ages 30 to 39 were in state or 
federal prison at yearend 2014. Black males exceeded 6% of their 
total U.S. population in prison for persons ages 30 to 39.

Female prisoners ages 30 to 34 had the highest imprisonment rates 
among black (264 per 100,000 black females of the same age), 
white (163 per 100,000), and Hispanic inmates (174 per 100,000).
Black females were between 1.6 and 4.1 times more likely to be 
imprisoned than white females of any age group.

**********************************************
Compared to violent and property offenders, 
inmates serving time for drug offenses in 
state prisons showed little racial disparity
*********************************************

More than half of all state prisoners on December 31, 2013 (the 
most recent date for which offense data are available) were 
serving sentences of at least 1 year for violent offenses on 
their current term of imprisonment (704,800 prisoners or 53%), 
including 165,600 persons for murder or nonnegligent manslaughter 
and 166,200 for rape or sexual assault (table 11, appendix table 
4). A smaller percentage of females were sentenced for violent 
offenses (37%) than males (54%), although the proportion of those 
sentenced for murder was similar for males (13%) and females 
(11%) in state prisons. Almost 16% of state prisoners were 
convicted drug offenders (208,000 inmates), including 24% of all 
females in state prison (22,000 inmates) and 15% of all males in 
state prison (186,000 inmates).

The percentage of white (15%), black (16%), and Hispanic (15%) 
state prisoners sentenced for drug offenses were similar, but a 
smaller percentage of whites were in prison for violent offenses 
(48%) than blacks (57%) and Hispanics (59%). The number of whites 
(78,500 prisoners) serving time for rape or another sexual 
offense at yearend 2013 was more than the total of both blacks 
(39,700 prisoners) and Hispanics (37,300 prisoners) in state 
prison for these crimes. Twenty-five percent of all white 
prisoners under state jurisdiction were serving time for property 
offenses, compared to 16% of black prisoners and 14% of Hispanic 
prisoners. Almost half (48% or 24,400 prisoners) of blacks 
imprisoned in state facilities for public order offenses were 
sentenced for weapons crimes, which include carrying, exhibiting, 
firing, possessing, or selling a weapon. State prisons held an 
additional 13,900 Hispanic and 11,200 white prisoners sentenced 
for weapons crimes.

****************************************
59% of females in federal prison were 
serving time for drug crimes
****************************************

Fifty percent (95,800) of sentenced inmates in federal prison on 
September 30, 2014 (the most recent date for which federal 
offense data are available) were serving time for drug offenses 
(table 12, appendix table 5). In comparison to the 53% in state 
prisons, violent offenders represented 7% of the federal prison 
population (14,000 prisoners). Among female federal prisoners, 4% 
were convicted of violent crimes in 2014. Public order offenders 
made up 36% of the BOP population, and 9% of federal prisoners 
(17,000) were serving time for immigration offenses. Among 
Hispanics in federal prisons, 26% were sentenced for immigration 
offenses (16,100 inmates), and 57% were sentenced for drug crimes 
(36,000 inmates). Fifty-three percent of black federal prisoners 
were convicted drug offenders in 2014, and 25% served sentences 
for weapons offenses.

****************************************
More than 40% of personnel held under 
military jurisdiction had committed 
violent offenses
****************************************

The U.S. military held 1,100 persons sentenced to at least 1 year 
or 1,400 persons of all sentence lengths under the jurisdiction 
of military correctional authorities at yearend 2014 (table 13). 
The sentenced population increased by slightly more than 1% from 
2013. More than half (54% or 580) of the prisoners had served in 
the U.S. Army before imprisonment. U.S. Air Force personnel made 
up an additional 18% of the sentenced military confined 
population (200 persons). The Army had custody of 67% of all 
military personnel sentenced to more than 1 year on December 31, 
2014, with an additional 32% held in the custody of the U.S. 
Navy.

Of military personnel with known offense data sentenced to any 
term of imprisonment under military jurisdiction, 43% had 
committed violent offenses, including 24% for violent sexual 
offenses and 8% each for murder and assault (table 14). An 
additional 37% had committed nonviolent sexual offenses, 
including sexual misconduct. The Navy had the highest percentage 
of violent offenders (including violent sexual offenders), making 
up 47% of all its convicted and imprisoned personnel, compared to 
45% for the Army, 39% for the Air Force, and 31% for U.S. Marine 
personnel. More than 75% of convicted naval personnel were 
serving time for sexual offenses, including 34% for rape or 
sexual assault.

****************************************
National Prisoner Statistics (NPS) 
Program jurisdiction notes
****************************************

Alabama--Prisons have not been rated recently for official 
capacity, but the majority of Alabama prisons are operating in a 
state of overcrowding. Currently, 26,145 beds are in operation. 
This number represents the physical capacity for inmates but is 
not based on staffing, programs, and services. Operational 
capacity differs from the Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS) 
definition.

Alaska--Alaska did not submit 2014 NPS data. BJS based 2014 
jurisdiction and custody counts on a state report, 2015 
Recidivism Reduction Plan: Cost-Effective Solutions to Slow 
Prison Population Growth and Reduce Recidivism 
(http://www.legis.state.ak.us/basis/get_documents.asp?session=29&
docid=1372), which indicated that the prison population on 
January 23, 2015, was 5,216 prisoners, which was 2.65% higher 
than the reported 2013 NPS total jurisdiction population. 

Alaska submitted total custody and jurisdiction counts and total 
admissions and releases for 2013 NPS data. None of the 2013 
counts were broken down by sex, so the sex distribution from the 
2012 NPS data submitted by Alaska was used in 2013. BJS assumed 
that the distribution of inmates under custody and jurisdiction 
across sentence lengths (e.g., more than 1 year, 1 year or less, 
or unsentenced) was the same in 2014 as in 2013. BJS assumed that 
the percentage of inmates in privately operated facilities, local 
facilities, federal facilities, and out-of-state facilities was 
the same in 2014 as in 2013. BJS applied the racial distribution 
of offenders from the 2013 National Corrections Reporting Program 
(NCRP) custody records submitted by Alaska to 2014 counts to 
obtain the 2014 offender racial distribution. BJS assumed that 
the increase in the 2014 jurisdiction counts was due to an 
increase in admissions and that there was no change in the number 
of releases from 2013 to 2014. 

No information was available on the distribution by admission 
type, so BJS categorized all admissions as Other admissions. BJS 
assumed that the distribution by release type in 2014 was the 
same distribution that Alaska reported in the 2013 NCRP release 
records. BJS based 2014 operational capacity on the same 2015 
state report, which indicated that the Department of Corrections 
(DOC) has 5,352 beds. BJS assumed that the percentage of beds for 
males and females in 2014 was the same as previously reported in 
the 2012 NPS survey. BJS also assumed that the percentages of 
offenders age 17 or younger and those who were not U.S. citizens 
were the same in 2014 as in 2013.

Arizona--Jurisdiction counts are based on custody data and 
inmates in contracted beds, but do not include inmates held in 
other jurisdictions because Arizona receives an equal number of 
inmates to house from other jurisdictions. In 2014, Arizona 
classified persons returned to prison from deportation as 
transfer admissions. In 2013, these persons had been included in 
the Other admissions category. Other admissions include the 
return of an inmate erroneously released. Other unconditional 
releases include inmates released by the court. Other conditional 
releases include releases onto other community supervision 
programs. Other releases include persons released to deportation.

Arkansas--Other conditional releases include those made to boot 
camps.

California--Due to a high-level data conversion project by the 
California Department of Corrections and Rehabilitation (CDCR), 
the movement data used to report detailed counts of admissions 
and releases were not available for this report’s publication. 
CDCR was able to differentiate between new court commitment and 
parole violation admissions, but was not able to provide any 
other detailed breakdown of other admission types or any release 
types. Custody counts include California out-of-state 
correctional facility contracted beds (COCF), community 
correctional facility (CCF) private contract beds, and private 
work furlough inmates. Jurisdiction counts for inmates with 
maximum sentences of more than 1 year include felons who are 
temporarily absent, such as in court, in jail, or in a hospital. 
The majority of temporarily absent inmates are absent for fewer 
than 30 days. Jurisdiction counts for unsentenced inmates include 
civil addicts who are enrolled for treatment and are not serving 
a criminal conviction sentence, but are under the jurisdiction of 
CDCR. California is unable to differentiate between inmates held 
in federal facilities and those held in other states’ facilities. 
The sum of offenders by race reported by California in 2014 does 
not match the total jurisdiction count because of differences in 
the data systems from which the data were extracted. Changes in 
design capacity are based on information from an annual 
facilities planning and management report.

Colorado--Jurisdiction and custody counts include a small, 
undetermined number of inmates with a maximum sentence of 1 year 
or less, as well as 225 males and 8 females who are part of the 
Youthful Offender System. Admission and release data for inmates 
who are absent without leave (AWOL) or who have escaped are 
estimated. Other admissions include returns from the Colorado 
State Hospital. Other releases include discharges from both the 
probation and youthful offender systems. Design and operational 
capacities do not include the privately run facilities in 
Colorado.

Connecticut--Prisons and jails form one integrated system. All 
NPS data include jail and prison populations. Connecticut changed 
the way it reports inmates under jurisdiction in 2014, excluding 
parolees who were counted in previous NPS data and including 
Connecticut inmates in the custody of another state. 
Jurisdiction, admission, and release counts from earlier years 
are not comparable to 2014 data. New court commitment admissions 
include inmates admitted on accused status, but who received a 
sentence later in 2014. Counts of other types of admissions and 
releases include persons with legitimate types of prison entries 
and exits that do not match BJS categories. Legislation in July 
1995 abolished the capacity law, making a facility’s capacity a 
fluid number based on the needs of the department. The needs are 
dictated by security issues, populations, court decrees, legal 
mandates, staffing, and physical plant areas of facilities that 
serve other purposes or have been decommissioned. The actual 
capacity of a facility is subject to change.

Delaware--Prisons and jails form one integrated system. All NPS 
data include jail and prison populations. Capacity counts include 
the halfway houses under the DOC.

Federal Bureau of Prisons (BOP) --Data reflect inmates under BOP 
jurisdiction on December 27, 2014. Jurisdiction counts include 
inmates housed in secure private facilities where the BOP had a 
direct contract with a private operator, and inmates housed in 
secure facilities where there was a subcontract with a private 
provider at a local government facility. Jurisdiction counts also 
include inmates housed in jail or short-term detention and others 
held in state-operated or other nonfederal secure facilities. 

Counts include 9,480 inmates (8,181 males and 1,299 females) held 
in nonsecure privately operated community corrections centers or 
halfway houses and 3,473 offenders on home confinement (3,006 
males and 467 females). A total of 63 male and 4 female juveniles 
were held in contract facilities; these inmates were included in 
the jurisdiction totals but excluded from the counts of private, 
locally operated, or federally operated facilities. Some of these 
juveniles are under the jurisdiction of U.S. probation but are 
being housed in the custody of the BOP in contract facilities. 
Due to information system configuration, Asians and Native 
Hawaiians or other Pacific Islanders are combined, and inmates of 
Hispanic origin are included in the race categories. On December 
27, 2014, the BOP held 68,128 male and 4,363 female inmates of 
Hispanic origin. Other admissions include hospitalization and 
treatment. Parole violation counts combine those with and without 
a new sentence. Expirations of sentence include good-conduct 
releases that usually have a separate and distinct term of 
supervision, and releases from the residential drug abuse 
treatment program. Other releases include court-ordered 
terminations, compassionate release, and releases based on the 
amount of time served. The BOP population on December 31, 2014, 
was 169,840 inmates (excluding contracted and private 
facilities), and the rated capacity on that date was 132,731. The 
crowding rate was 28%.

Florida--In 2014, three inmates received other unconditional 
releases through vacated sentences. Other conditional releases 
include provisional release supervision, conditional medical 
release, program supervision, mandatory conditional, and parole 
reinstatement. Other releases include exits due to fraudulent 
court orders. Because the count of noncitizen inmates is based on 
citizenship status, as opposed to the method employed prior to 
2013 which made the determination based on country of birth, 2014 
statistics are comparable only to 2013.

Georgia--Females are not housed in privately operated 
correctional facilities in Georgia. Subtotals of race, sex, 
sentence length for jurisdiction, and custody counts were 
adjusted by the Georgia DOC using interpolation to match the 
overall totals. Counts of admissions and releases were adjusted 
using interpolation to balance the jurisdictional populations on 
January 1, 2014, and December 31, 2014.

Hawaii--Prisons and jails form one integrated system. All NPS 
data include jail and prison populations. In custody and 
jurisdiction counts, sentenced felon probationers and probation 
violators are included with the counts of prisoners with a total 
maximum sentence of 1 year or less. Jurisdiction counts include 
dual-jurisdiction (state of Hawaii or federal) inmates currently 
housed in federal facilities and in contracted federal detention 
center beds. Hawaii does not have a rated capacity for its 
integrated prison and jail system. Information on foreign 
nationals held in correctional facilities was based on self-
reports by inmates.

Idaho--Due to improvements in data extraction methods, Idaho 
shows substantial changes in the counts of new court commitment, 
parole violation, and other conditional release violation 
admissions from previous years. Idaho defines rated capacity as 
100% of maximum capacity. In 2014, the Idaho DOC took over 
operation of a prison that had previously been operated by a 
private corporation.

Illinois--All population counts are based on jurisdiction. 
Jurisdiction and custody population and admission and release 
counts for inmates with maximum sentences of more than 1 year 
include an undetermined number of inmates with a 1-year sentence. 
Counts of escape admissions and releases include one escape from 
a minimum security facility, with the remaining escapes occurring 
at adult transition centers. Other admission and release types 
include an undetermined number of transfers to other 
jurisdictions, and the net difference between long-term 
admissions and release movements not reported in other categories 
but required to balance yearend populations.

Indiana--Other types of admissions include inmates on active 
supervision or who were admitted for prior charges. Indiana 
reported changes to its 2013 admissions counts during 2014. See 
the CSAT-Prisoners web tool (http://www.bjs.gov/index.cfm?ty=nps) 
for updated information.

Iowa--In 2009, the Iowa DOC began including offenders on work 
release, the operating while intoxicated population, and Iowa 
inmates housed in out-of-state prisons in its jurisdiction 
counts. Iowa data included in BJS reports prior to 2009 were 
custody counts only. The admission and release data quality and 
methodology were updated in 2013; therefore, changes from 
previous years’ counts may reflect these updates. Counts of AWOL 
admissions and releases are of the work release and operating 
while intoxicated populations. Escape admissions and releases are 
of the prison population only. Transfer admissions include those 
entering from other jurisdictions with an Iowa prison sentence. 
Other conditional releases include sex offenders released to 
special sentences.

Kansas--Custody and jurisdiction counts reported for 2014 are not 
comparable to previous years’ counts. Prior to 2014, actual time 
of incarceration, instead of sentence length, was used to 
differentiate persons sentenced to 1 year or less from those 
sentenced to serve more than 1 year. The number of conditional 
releases will fluctuate from year to year. Kansas DOC considers 
releases to be any time an individual leaves a facility to return 
to the community, enter another program, or make a court 
appearance. 

Kentucky--Other types of admissions include special admissions. 
Other types of conditional prison releases include exits to home 
incarceration.

Louisiana--Jurisdiction and capacity counts are correct as of 
December 30, 2014. Other types of unconditional releases include 
court orders and releases for good time with no supervision. 
Other conditional release types include reinstatement to 
probation. Other types of release include supervised and 
compassionate releases.

Maine--Counts of inmates age 17 or younger reflect only those 
held in adult correctional facilities.

Maryland--Due to an information systems upgrade, Maryland was 
able to provide only custody, jurisdiction, private prison, and 
local facility counts to BJS in 2014. BJS assumed that the 
percentage of offenders in federal facilities and in other 
states' facilities was the same in 2014 as in 2013. Likewise, BJS 
assumed that the offender distribution by race, prison capacity, 
percentage of offenders age 17 or younger, and the percentage of 
non-U.S. citizens were the same in 2014 as in 2013. Because the 
system used to report Maryland data in 2013 did not capture 
Hispanic origin, BJS could not impute the number of Hispanics 
under state jurisdiction. Based on the decrease in the 
jurisdiction population from 2013 to 2014, BJS assumed that the 
total number of admissions was the same in 2014 as in 2013 and 
adjusted the number of releases for 2014 to balance the 
population size change. The distribution of admission and release 
types were assumed to be the same in 2014 as in 2013. Because the 
system used to report Maryland data in 2013 did not distinguish 
between AWOL and escape releases, BJS could only impute the total 
of AWOL and escape releases for 2014.

Massachusetts--By law, offenders in Massachusetts may be 
sentenced to terms of up to 2.5 years in locally operated jails 
and correctional institutions. This population is excluded from 
the state count but is included in published population counts 
and rates for local jails and correctional institutions. 
Jurisdiction counts exclude approximately 2,630 inmates (2,511 
males and 119 females) in the county system (local jails and 
houses of correction) who are serving a sentence of more than 1 
year, but these inmates are included in imprisonment rate 
calculations at the request of the Massachusetts DOC. 
Jurisdiction and custody counts may include a small but 
undetermined number of inmates who were remanded to court; 
transferred to the custody of another state, federal, or locally 
operated system; or subsequently released. In 2014, there was a 
continued increase in inmates transferred to local jails prior to 
their release from prison as part of a step-down initiative for 
reentry. Other types of admissions include returns from court 
release. Other unconditional releases include court releases. 

Michigan--Due to an information systems upgrade, the Michigan DOC 
had to modify its statistical techniques to obtain much of the 
data reported in this survey. The numbers reported are solidly in 
line with previous trends which have remained stable over several 
years, but some detailed measures, including type of admission 
and race, were estimated based on previous trends. Michigan’s 
database system treats Hispanic as an ethnicity rather than a 
race. Because this is currently an optional field, the numbers 
for Hispanics are significantly underreported, and the state 
included them in the white race category. Releases to appeal or 
bond, and admissions of inmates returning from appeal or bond, 
are not disaggregated by length of time out to court. These 
counts represent the net difference between all movements to and 
from court. Operational capacity is institutional net capacity.

Minnesota--Jurisdiction counts include inmates temporarily housed 
in local jails, on work release, or on community work crew 
programs. The count of inmates under the jurisdiction of the 
Minnesota DOC in the custody of federal and other states' 
facilities increased from 2013 to 2014 due to database upgrades. 
Admissions and releases due to AWOL or escape, returns from or 
releases to appeal or bond, and releases because of transfer are 
not included in Minnesota’s database file. Minnesota measures 
only operational capacity.

Mississippi--Mississippi’s prison population decreased in 2014 
because the state parole board released more nonviolent offenders 
and placed some on house arrest. These actions demonstrate that 
the Mississippi DOC is moving more toward community-based 
supervision rather than imprisonment. Jurisdiction counts of 
local facilities include both local county jails and county 
regional facilities. Violators of parole and conditional release 
are not distinguished by their sentence status in the Mississippi 
file. Other types of admission and release data include 
corrections to data because of a lag in processing. Total 
operational capacity on December 31, 2014, was 26,008.

Missouri--Offenders reported to have a total maximum sentence of 
1 year or less have a sentence of exactly 1 year. Other types of 
unconditional releases include resentenced completions, court-
ordered discharges, and compensation. Other types of conditional 
releases include parole board holdover returns. The Missouri DOC 
does not have the design capacity of its older prisons, nor does 
it update design capacity for prison extensions or improvements. 
Missouri does not use a rated capacity. The state defines 
operational capacity as the number of beds available, including 
those temporarily offline. Noncitizen data are based on self-
reported place of birth.

Nebraska--By statute, inmates are housed where they are sentenced 
by the judge and are not housed in local jails or by another 
state to ease prison crowding. Other admissions and other 
conditional releases reflect movements in the population of the 
reentry furlough program. Nebraska defines operational capacity 
as its stress capacity, which is 125% of design capacity for 
designated facilities. The total design and operational 
capacities for institutions that house females include one female 
multicustody facility. The department operates two coed 
facilities that represent a design capacity of 290 and are 
counted in the male design and operational capacities.

Nevada--Other admission types in 2014 included safekeepers and 
inmates located out of state serving concurrent sentences for 
Nevada and another state. Nevada did not submit NPS data in 2013. 
See Methodology in Prisoners in 2013 (BJS web, September 2014, 
NCJ 247282) for a description of the 2013 data imputation 
procedure.

New Hampshire--Other admission types include admissions from 
probation. Other conditional releases include releases to home 
confinement. New Hampshire’s operating capacity is defined as the 
inmate population on any given day.

New Jersey--Population counts for inmates with a maximum sentence 
of more than 1 year include inmates with sentences of a year. The 
New Jersey DOC has no jurisdiction over inmates with sentences of 
less than 1 year or over unsentenced inmates. Reporting of other 
conditional releases includes those to an intensive supervision 
program, while other types of unconditional releases include 
vacated and amended sentences ordered by the courts. New Jersey 
data for escapes do not differentiate between inmates disappeared 
from confined walls and those who disappear while out of 
institutions. Other releases include inmates brought too soon 
from the county jails into the state prison system then released 
back to the county jails, and other transfers. 

New Mexico--New Mexico does not include its inmates housed in 
other states under the interstate compact agreement in its total 
jurisdiction count. According to BJS definitions, these inmates 
should be included in the total state jurisdiction and were in 
this report. The count of noncitizens includes inmates in both 
state-run and private facilities.

New York--Other admissions include the return to prison of 
persons erroneously discharged.

North Carolina--As of December 1, 2011, North Carolina prisons no 
longer house misdemeanor offenders with sentences of less than 
180 days. Captured escapees are not considered a prison admission 
type in North Carolina, and escape is not considered a type of 
prison release. Supervised mandatory releases are post-release 
offenders. Post-release supervision is defined as a reintegration 
program for serious offenders who have served extensive prison 
terms. This form of supervision was created by the Structured 
Sentencing Act of 1993. Rated capacity is not available.

North Dakota--In 2013, North Dakota erroneously added females 
housed in private facilities into their custody count. Data 
presented in this report have been updated.

Ohio--Population counts for inmates with a maximum sentence of 
more than 1 year include an undetermined number of inmates with a 
sentence of 1 year or less. Admissions of parole violators 
without a new sentence include only formally revoked violators. 
Other unconditional releases include vacated sentences. Escapes 
include nonconfinement escapes. Returns and conditional releases 
involving transitional-control inmates are reported only after 
movement from confinement to a terminal release status occurs. 
The count of noncitizens excludes inmates housed in privately 
operated facilities.

Oklahoma--In March 2014, an initiative was made to relieve county 
jail backups and to house the offenders in DOC facilities, which 
has resulted in increases to the number of admissions and 
releases and to the prison population. Jurisdiction counts 
include offenders in a DOC jail program, those in court, escapees 
in the custody of local jails, and those sentenced to the DOC but 
not yet in custody. Prior to 2013, those not yet in custody were 
not included in the counts. Most inmates with sentences of less 
than 1 year were part of the Oklahoma Delayed Sentencing Program 
for Young Adults. Offenders in the custody of other states are 
mostly escapees. Only DOC facilities are included in the capacity 
counts. Noncitizen status is determined by country of birth.

Oregon--Most offenders with a maximum sentence of less than 1 
year remain under the custody of local counties rather than the 
Oregon DOC. Oregon does not recognize rated capacity.

Pennsylvania--Other types of unconditional releases include 
vacated sentences and convictions. Other releases include 
releases to the state hospital.

Rhode Island--Prisons and jails form one integrated system. All 
NPS data include jail and prison populations. Jurisdiction counts 
include inmates who have dual jurisdiction, or those serving 
Rhode Island sentences out of state while also serving that 
state’s sentence. The Rhode Island data system records Hispanic 
origin as a race rather than an ethnicity and does not capture 
Native Hawaiian and Other Pacific Islanders or persons 
identifying as two or more races, including those who may 
identify themselves as Hispanic second to another race. Prison 
admissions classified as escape returns include admissions under 
home confinement, serving out of state, and minimum-security 
facilities. Rhode Island DOC’s data system cannot differentiate 
between parole violation admissions with and without new 
sentences. Other types of unconditional releases consist of 
court-ordered discharges, while other types of conditional 
releases include discharge to the Institute for Mental Health.

South Carolina--The December 31, 2014, custody count of 
unsentenced individuals includes Interstate Compact Commission 
inmates. As of July 1, 2003, the South Carolina Department of 
Corrections (SCDC) began releasing inmates due for release and 
housed in SCDC institutions on the first day of each month. Since 
January 1, 2015, was a holiday, inmates eligible for release on 
January 1 were released on December 31, 2014. Therefore, the 
inmate count was at its lowest point for the month on December 
31, 2014. All inmates in private facilities in South Carolina 
were housed in private medical facilities. The local facilities 
holding inmates on December 31, 2014, included designated 
facilities and persons AWOL to county or local facilities. South 
Carolina does not have a specific race code to designate persons 
identifying as two or more races. These individuals are included 
in other specific race groups or labeled as other race. Other 
types of unconditional releases consist of remands. Conditional 
release counts include inmates released under community 
supervision after serving 85% of their sentence under truth in 
sentencing. Other release types include persons who are 
resentenced. There are two paroling authorities within the adult 
correctional system in South Carolina. The Intensive Supervision 
Administrative Release Authority of SCDC assumed Youthful 
Offender Act (YOA) Parole Board duties on February 1, 2013; prior 
to that, the Youthful Offender Branch of SCDC handled YOA 
paroles. SCDC paroled 1,098 offenders sentenced under the YOA, 
and the South Carolina Department of Probation, Parole, and 
Pardon Services paroled 628 non-YOA sentenced offenders. South 
Carolina uses the operational capacity concept in its management 
reports and other requested surveys.

South Dakota--Custody and jurisdiction counts of inmates serving 
a maximum sentence of 1 year or less include those under the 
sentence of probation who, as a condition of probation, must 
serve up to 180 days in state prison. In 2014, South Dakota 
updated its 2013 jurisdiction counts to include offenders serving 
concurrent sentences elsewhere. South Dakota does not separate 
discretionary and presumptive parole releases. Parole detainees 
are now included in the counts of other admission and other 
release types. Prior to 2014, these persons had not been 
included. The operational capacity reported is planned capacity. 
South Dakota does not have rated or design capacities. The 
reporting system for the South Dakota DOC does not have a 
category for inmates of two or more races. These inmates are 
included in the counts of other race prisoners.

Texas--Offenders in custody were all offenders serving time in a 
facility owned and operated by the Texas Department of Criminal 
Justice at the time of data collection. Jurisdiction counts 
include offenders in custody and those held in privately operated 
prisons, intermediate-sanction facilities, substance abuse felony 
punishment facilities, and halfway houses; offenders temporarily 
released to a county for less than 30 days; and offenders 
awaiting paperwork for transfer to state-funded custody. 
Capacities exclude county jail beds because they do not have a 
minimum or maximum number of beds available for paper-ready and 
bench-warrant inmates. Admissions and releases include offenders 
received into an intermediate-sanction facility, which is a 
sanction in lieu of revocation. These offenders were counted in 
the parole violator category, although these were not 
revocations. Other conditional releases include discretionary 
mandatory releases. Other admission and other release types 
include transfers between divisions and adjustments. Executions 
are included in other releases.

Utah--Other types of unconditional release include discharges of 
cases or inmate holds.

Vermont--Prisons and jails form one integrated system. All NPS 
data include jail and prison populations. Vermont does not have 
the ability to record persons identifying as two or more races. 
Other types of conditional releases include furlough 
reintegration. Other releases include vacated sentences.

Virginia--Jurisdiction counts were for December 31, 2014. As of 
September 1, 1998, the state is responsible for inmates with a 
sentence of 1 year or more, or a sentence of 12 months plus 1 
day. Prior to September 1, 1998, the state had been responsible 
for a 1-year sentence, while local authorities were responsible 
for sentences of 12 months or less. Prior to 2013, the count of 
inmates housed in local facilities was taken from Compensation 
Board reports. Starting in 2013, these counts were obtained from 
DOC data. Pacific Islanders are included in the Asian race 
category. Admissions and releases are preliminary fiscal year 
2014 figures. Other types of conditional releases include 
conditional pardons or clemency, conditional release of a 
sexually violent predator, and geriatric parole. Other releases 
include authorized temporary and court-ordered releases. In prior 
years, the Virginia DOC reported capacity under its definition of 
authorized capacity, which included aspects of both the BJS 
definition of rated capacity and took into account the number of 
inmates that could be accommodated based on staff, programs, 
services, and design. In 2014, the agency reviewed how it was 
reporting capacity and determined that for this survey, it would 
report capacity under the definitions of operational and design 
to be consistent with capacity figures reported in other 
documents. The figures do not include 35 beds assigned to 
institutional hospitals that cannot be designated as only male or 
only female  and does not include Detention and Diversion 
Centers.

Washington--The counting rule for offenders under Washington DOC 
custody changed in 2014 with the addition of several different 
facility codes that had previously been excluded, including those 
in violator facilities and work release programs. Jurisdiction 
counting methods did not change. Offenders sentenced to 1 year or 
less and unsentenced offenders generally reside in county jails, 
but revisions to law allow certain inmates with sentences of less 
than 1 year to be housed in prison. These inmates are included in 
the total jurisdiction counts. Native Hawaiians and Pacific 
Islanders are included in the Asian race category. Admissions and 
releases increased due to the implementation of swift and certain 
sanctions for violation behavior, where an offender is arrested 
on the spot for violations and is sanctioned to 1 to 3 days of 
confinement. Other unconditional releases include vacated 
sentences.

West Virginia--Other types of admissions and releases included 
those to and from the Anthony Center for Young Adults and 
Diagnostics. Other types of unconditional releases included 
court-ordered releases.

Wisconsin--Custody measures include inmates without Wisconsin 
sentences who were physically housed in a Wisconsin prison. 
Jurisdiction measures include inmates with Wisconsin sentences, 
regardless of where they are physically located. Counts for 2014 
were calculated using the same methodology as in 2013, but 
because the data were extracted in January 2015 (compared to 
April 2014 for the 2013 data), the values are not comparable 
because there were more inmates with unknown sentence lengths 
earlier in the year. Sentence length for custody and jurisdiction 
counts was determined by calculating the time between an inmate’s 
admission date and the inmate’s maximum discharge date. If the 
maximum discharge date was not recorded, the inmate’s mandatory 
release date was used. This may not accurately reflect whether 
the inmate was initially sentenced to 1 year or less or more than 
1 year. Unsentenced inmates were those who had not yet had data 
entered reflecting their mandatory release date and maximum 
discharge date. Some of these unsentenced inmates may have been 
sentenced, but the DOC was unable to determine the sentence 
length at the time they responded to NPS. This mainly affected 
probation offenders in the Milwaukee facility on temporary hold. 
Sentence length for admissions was calculated as the time between 
an inmate’s admission date and the inmate’s maximum discharge 
date, or mandatory release date if the maximum discharge date was 
not available. Other admissions include temporary holds, 
alternatives to revocation, persons admitted under the 
corrections compact, and erroneous releases. Sentence length for 
prison releases was calculated as the time between an inmate’s 
admission date and the actual release date, so this may not 
accurately reflect whether the inmate was sentenced to more than 
1 year. As with the custody and jurisdiction counts, the early 
extraction of the 2014 data compared to the 2013 data resulted in 
fewer inmates admitted and released with known sentence lengths; 
therefore, the numbers are not comparable between years. Other 
releases include temporary holds and release after erroneous 
admissions. Native Hawaiian and Pacific Islander inmates are 
included in the Asian category.

*************************
Terms and definitions
*************************

Adult imprisonment rate--The number of prisoners under state or 
federal jurisdiction sentenced to more than 1 year per 100,000 
U.S. residents age 18 or older.

Average annual change--Average (mean) annual change across a 
specific period.

Capacity, design--The number of inmates that planners or 
architects intended for a facility.

Capacity, highest--The maximum number of beds reported across the 
three capacity measures: design capacity, operational capacity, 
and rated capacity.

Capacity, lowest--The minimum number of beds across the three 
capacity measures: design capacity, operational capacity, and 
rated capacity.

Capacity, operational--The number of inmates that can be 
accommodated based on a facility’s staff, existing programs, and 
services.

Capacity, rated--The number of beds or inmates assigned by a 
rating official to institutions within a jurisdiction.

Conditional releases--Includes discretionary parole, mandatory 
parole, post-custody probation, and other unspecified conditional 
releases.

Conditional release violators--Re-admission to prison of persons 
released to discretionary parole, mandatory parole, post-custody 
probation, and other unspecified conditional releases. 

Custody--Prisoners held in the physical custody of state or 
federal prisons or local jails, regardless of sentence length or 
the authority having jurisdiction.

Imprisonment rate--The number of prisoners under state or federal 
jurisdiction sentenced to more than 1 year per 100,000 U.S. 
residents of all ages.

Inmate--A person incarcerated in a local jail, state prison, 
federal prison, or a private facility under contract to federal, 
state, or local authorities.

Jail--A confinement facility usually administered by a local law 
enforcement agency that is intended for adults, but sometimes 
holds juveniles, for confinement before and after adjudication. 
Such facilities include jails and city or county correctional 
centers; special jail facilities, such as medical treatment or 
release centers; halfway houses; work farms; and temporary 
holding or lockup facilities that are part of the jail’s combined 
function. Inmates sentenced to jail facilities usually have a 
sentence of 1 year or less. Alaska, Connecticut, Delaware, 
Hawaii, Rhode Island, and Vermont operate integrated systems, 
which combine prisons and jails.

Jurisdiction--The legal authority of state or federal 
correctional officials over a prisoner, regardless of where the 
prisoner is held.

New court commitments--Admissions into prison of offenders 
convicted and sentenced by a court, usually to a term of more 
than 1 year, including probation violators and persons with a 
split sentence to incarceration followed by court-ordered 
probation or parole.

Parole violators--All conditional release violators returned to 
prison for either violating conditions of release or for new 
crimes.

Prison--A long-term confinement facility, run by a state or the 
federal government, that typically holds felons and offenders 
with sentences of more than 1 year. However, sentence length may 
vary by state. Alaska, Connecticut, Delaware, Hawaii, Rhode 
Island, and Vermont operate integrated systems, which combine 
prisons and jails.

Prisoner--An individual confined in a correctional facility under 
the legal authority (jurisdiction) of state or federal 
correctional officials.

Sentenced prisoner--A prisoner sentenced to more than 1 year. 
This excludes persons sentenced to 1 year or less and unsentenced 
inmates.

Supervised mandatory releases--Conditional release with post-
custody supervision generally occurring in jurisdictions using 
determinate sentencing statutes.

Unconditional releases--Expirations of sentences, commutations, 
and other unspecified unconditional releases.

****************
Methodology
****************

Started in 1926 under a mandate from Congress, the National 
Prisoner Statistics (NPS) Program collects annual data on 
prisoners at yearend. The Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS) 
sponsors the survey, and the U.S. Census Bureau serves as the 
data collection agent. BJS depends entirely on voluntary 
participation by state departments of corrections (DOC) and the 
Federal Bureau of Prisons (BOP) for NPS data.

The NPS distinguishes between inmates in custody and prisoners 
under jurisdiction. To have custody of a prisoner, a state or the 
BOP must hold that inmate in one of its facilities. To have 
jurisdiction over a prisoner, the state or BOP must have legal 
authority over that prisoner, regardless of where the prisoner is 
incarcerated or supervised. Some states were unable to provide 
counts that distinguish between custody and jurisdiction. (See 
Jurisdiction notes to determine which states did not distinguish 
between custody and jurisdiction counts.)

The NPS jurisdiction counts include persons held in prisons, 
penitentiaries, correctional facilities, halfway houses, boot 
camps, farms, training or treatment centers, and hospitals. 
Counts also include prisoners who were temporarily absent (less 
than 30 days), in court, or on work release; housed in privately 
operated facilities, local jails, or other state or federal 
facilities; and serving concurrent sentences for more than one 
correctional authority.

The NPS custody counts include all inmates held within a 
respondent’s facilities, including inmates housed for other 
correctional facilities. The custody counts exclude inmates held 
in local jails and in other jurisdictions. With a few exceptions, 
the NPS custody counts exclude inmates held in privately operated 
facilities.

Respondents to NPS surveys are permitted to update prior counts 
of prisoners held in custody and under jurisdiction. Some 
statistics on jurisdiction and sentenced prison populations for 
prior years have been updated in this report. All tables showing 
data based on jurisdiction counts, including tables of 
imprisonment rates, were based on the updated and most recently 
available data that respondents provided.

Admissions include new court commitments, parole violator 
returns, and other conditional release violator returns; 
transfers from other jurisdictions; returns of prisoners who were 
absent without leave (AWOL), with or without a new sentence; 
escape returns, with or without a new sentence; returns from 
appeal or bond, and other admissions. For reporting purposes, BJS 
admission counts exclude transfers from other jurisdictions, AWOL 
returns, and escape returns.

Releases include unconditional releases (e.g., expirations of 
sentence or commutations), conditional releases (e.g., 
probations, supervised mandatory releases, or discretionary 
paroles), deaths, AWOLs, escapes from confinement, transfers to 
other jurisdictions, releases to appeal or bond, and other 
releases. For reporting purposes, BJS release counts exclude 
AWOLs, escapes, and transfers to other jurisdictions.

The NPS has historically included counts of inmates in the 
combined jail and prison systems in Alaska, Connecticut, 
Delaware, Hawaii, Rhode Island, and Vermont. The District of 
Columbia has not operated a prison system since yearend 2001. 
Felons sentenced under the District of Columbia criminal code are 
housed in federal facilities. Jail inmates in the District of 
Columbia are included in the Annual Survey of Jails. Some 
previously published prisoner counts and the percentage change in 
population include jail inmates in the District of Columbia for 
2001, the last year of collection. Additional information about 
the NPS, including the data collection instrument, is available 
on the BJS website.

Data on prisoners under the jurisdiction of U.S. territorial 
correctional authorities is collected separately from the state 
and federal NPS data, and U.S. totals in this report do not 
include territorial counts. Two territories, American Samoa and 
the U.S. Virgin Islands, did not provide 2014 data for NPS, so 
older years’ data are shown in appendix table 7.

Nonreporting states
************************

The Alaska state DOC did not respond to the 2014 NPS survey. BJS 
based 2014 jurisdiction and custody counts on a state report—2015 
Recidivism Reduction Plan: Cost-Effective Solutions to Slow 
Prison Population Growth and Reduce Recidivism 
(http://www.legis.state.ak.us/basis/get_documents.asp?session=29&
docid=1372)—that indicated that the January 23, 2015, prison 
population was 5,216 prisoners. BJS assumed that the increase in 
the 2014 jurisdiction counts was due to an increase in admissions 
and that there was no change in the number of releases from 2013 
to 2014. For more details, see Jurisdiction notes.

Military correctional data
******************************

BJS obtains an annual aggregate count of service personnel under 
military jurisdiction from the Office of the Under Secretary of 
Defense for Personnel and Readiness, along with limited 
demographic and offense data. The Department of Defense 
disaggregates these data by the branch in which inmates served, 
the branch having physical custody of the inmate, and whether the 
inmate was an officer or enlisted.

Estimating yearend counts of prison 
population by age, sex, and race 
or Hispanic origin
*******************************************

National-level estimates of the number of persons by race under 
the jurisdiction of state prisons on December 31, 2014, were 
based on an adjustment of NPS counts to comply with Office of 
Management and Budget (OMB) definitions of race and Hispanic 
origin. OMB defines persons of Hispanic or Latino origin as a 
separate category. Race categories are defined exclusive of 
Hispanic origin. OMB adopted guidelines for collecting these data 
in 1997, requiring the collection of data on Hispanic origin in 
addition to data on race.

Not all NPS providers’ information systems categorize race and 
Hispanic origin in this way. In 1991, the earliest time point in 
the analysis, only a few states were able to report information 
on Hispanic origin separately from race. BJS adjusted the NPS 
data on race and Hispanic origin by the ratio of the relative 
distribution of prisoners by race and Hispanic origin in self-
report inmate surveys that use OMB categories for race to the 
relative distribution of prisoners by race and Hispanic origin in 
the NPS data. For this report, the 2004 Survey of Inmates in 
State Correctional Facilities was used to calculate the ratio 
used for statistics on racial distributions in 2014. The ratio 
obtained by comparing the within-year relative distributions by 
race and Hispanic origin was then multiplied by the NPS 
distribution in a year to generate the estimate of persons by 
race and Hispanic origin.

Estimates of the total number of sentenced prisoners by age, sex, 
race, and Hispanic origin on December 31, 2014, were generated by 
creating separate totals for federal and state prisons. For the 
federal estimates, each sex and race count that BOP reported to 
the NPS was multiplied by the ratio of the age category count 
within the sex and race combination in the Federal Justice 
Statistics Program (FJSP) to the FJSP total count within the sex 
and race combination (e.g., FJSP white males ages 18 to 19 
divided by FJSP white males). The resulting product yielded the 
FJSP-adjusted NPS counts for each sex and race combination by age 
group (e.g., white male prisoners ages 18 to 19 in the federal 
prison system). State prison age distributions for the NPS use a 
similar sex and race ratio adjustment based on individual-level 
data from the National Corrections Reporting Program (NCRP). 
State and federal estimates were added together to obtain 
national estimates for yearend prison populations.

Estimating imprisonment rates by age, sex, 
and race or Hispanic origin
*******************************************

BJS calculated age-specific imprisonment rates for each age and 
sex and race group by dividing the estimated number of sentenced 
prisoners within each age group under jurisdiction on December 
31, 2014, by the estimated number of U.S. residents in each age 
group on January 1, 2015. BJS multiplied the result by 100,000 
and rounded to the nearest whole number. Totals by sex include 
all prisoners and U.S. residents, regardless of race or Hispanic 
origin.

Estimating offense distribution in the state 
and federal prison populations by age, sex, 
and race or Hispanic origin
**********************************************

BJS employed a ratio adjustment method to weight the individual-
level race and Hispanic origin or sex-specific offense data from 
the NCRP to the state prison control totals for sex and the 
estimated race or Hispanic origin from the NPS, which yielded a 
national offense distribution for state prisoners. Inmates 
missing offense data were excluded from the analysis prior to the 
weighting. Because data submission for the NCRP typically lags 
behind that of the NPS, state offense distribution estimates are 
published for the previous calendar year.

Data presented in table 12 and appendix table 5 are drawn from 
FJSP and are limited to inmates sentenced to more than 1 year in 
federal custody. The data are further limited to inmates 
sentenced on U.S. district court commitments, District of 
Columbia superior court commitments, and those returned to 
federal custody following violations of probation (both federal 
and District of Columbia), parole, supervised release, or 
mandatory release. Due to these methodological differences, the 
estimates in table 12 and appendix table 5 will differ from 
previously published federal offense distributions presented in 
the FJSP web tool (http://www.bjs.gov/fjsrc/) or Federal Justice 
Statistics bulletins and statistical tables 
(http://www.bjs.gov/index.cfm?ty=tp&tid=6). Since FJSP is a 
custody collection, the total count of prisoners in table 12 and 
appendix table 5 will differ from the jurisdiction count of 
prisoners reported to NPS.
 
Prison capacities
***********************

State and federal correctional authorities provide three measures 
of their facilities’ capacity: design capacity, operational 
capacity, and rated capacity. Estimates of the prison populations 
as a percentage of capacity are based on a state or federal 
custody population. In general, state capacity and custody counts 
exclude inmates held in private facilities, although five states 
include prisoners held in private facilities as part of the 
capacity of their prison systems: Florida, Georgia, Idaho, 
Louisiana, and Mississippi. For these states, prison population 
as a percentage of capacity includes inmates held in the states’ 
private facilities.

Noncitizen inmates
*********************

BJS asks state DOCs and the BOP to report the number of persons 
in their custody who were not citizens of the United States on 
December 31. While the intention is for jurisdictions to report 
based on inmates’ current citizenship status, a number of 
jurisdictions cannot provide that information, and instead report 
country of birth to NPS. These states are noted in appendix table 
6. As this is a custody count, noncitizens held in private prison 
facilities or local jails under the jurisdiction of state or 
federal correctional authorities are not included.

*************************************************************
The Bureau of Justice Statistics of the U.S. Department 
of Justice is the principal federal agency responsible 
for measuring crime, criminal victimization, criminal 
offenders, victims of crime, correlates of crime, and 
the operation of criminal and civil justice systems at 
the federal, state, tribal, and local levels. BJS collects, 
analyzes, and disseminates reliable and valid statistics 
on crime and justice systems in the United States, supports 
improvements to state and local criminal justice information 
systems, and participates with national and international 
organizations to develop and recommend national standards 
for justice statistics. William J. Sabol is director.

This report was written by E. Ann Carson. Todd Minton, 
Danielle Kaeble, Zhen Zeng, and Jennifer Bronson verified 
the report.

Lynne McConnell and Jill Thomas edited the report. 
Tina Dorsey produced the report.

September 2015, NCJ 248955
*************************************************************

*************************************************
Office of Justice Programs
Innovation * Partnerships * Safer Neighborhoods
www.ojp.usdoj.gov
*************************************************

***************************
9/1/2015 12:00pm JER
***************************

