U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Programs
Bureau of Justice Statistics

-------------------------------------------------

This file is text only without graphics and many 
of the tables. A Zip archive of the tables in this 
report in spreadsheet format (.csv) and the full 
report including tables and graphics in .pdf 
format are available on BJS website at 
http://www.bjs.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbdetail&iid=5869

This reports is one in series. More recent 
editions may be available. To view a list of all 
reports in the series go to 
http://www.bjs.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbse&sid=40
------------------------------------------------- 

Bulletin

Prisoners in 2015
 
E. Ann Carson, Ph.D., BJS Statistician
Elizabeth Anderson, BJS Intern

At yearend 2015, the United States had an estimated 1,526,800 
prisoners under the jurisdiction of state and federal correctional 
authorities. This was the smallest U.S. prison population since 
2005 (1,525,900 prisoners). The prison population decreased by 
more than 2% from the number of prisoners held in December 2014 
(figure 1). This was the largest decline in the number of persons 
under the jurisdiction of state or federal correctional 
authorities since 1978 (figure 2). 

The Federal Bureau of Prisons (BOP) had jurisdiction over 196,500 
prisoners at yearend 2015, a decrease of 14,100 prisoners from 
yearend 2014. This was the third consecutive year that the federal 
prison population declined and the lowest number of federal 
prisoners since 2006 (193,000). This decrease in federal prisoners 
accounted for 40% of the total change in the U.S. prison 
population.

The statistics in this report are based on the Bureau of Justice 
Statistics’ (BJS) National Prisoner Statistics (NPS) program, 
which collects annual data from state departments of corrections 
(DOCs) and the BOP on prisoner counts, prisoner characteristics, 
admissions, releases, and prison capacity. The 2015 NPS collection 
was number 91 in a series that began in 1926. Forty-eight states 
and the BOP reported NPS data for 2015, while data for Nevada and 
Oregon were obtained from other sources or were imputed (see 
Methodology).

**************************************************
*************
Highlights
*************
* The total number of prisoners under the jurisdiction of state 
and federal correctional authorities on December 31, 2015 
(1,526,800) decreased by 35,500 (down more than 2%) from yearend 
2014.

* The federal prison population decreased by 14,100 prisoners from 
2014 to 2015 (down almost 7%), accounting for 40% of the total 
change in the U.S. prison population.

* After increasing during the previous 2 years, the number of 
state and federal female prisoners decreased by 1% in 2015.

* State and federal prisons had jurisdiction over 1,476,800 
persons sentenced to more than 1 year on December 31, 2015.

* The imprisonment rate in the United States decreased 3%, from 
471 prisoners per 100,000 U.S. residents of all ages in 2014 to 
458 prisoners per 100,000 in 2015.

* State and federal prisons admitted 17,800 fewer prisoners in 
2015 and released 4,700 more than in 2014.

* More than half of prisoners in state prisons (53%) at yearend 
2014 were serving sentences for violent offenses, the most recent 
year for which data are available.

* Nearly half of federal prisoners incarcerated on September 30, 
2015 had been sentenced for drug offenses, the most recent date 
for which federal offense data were available.
**************************************************

**************************************************
***********************
Terms and definitions
***********************

* Adult imprisonment rate--The number of prisoners under state or 
federal jurisdiction sentenced to more than 1 year per 100,000 
U.S. residents age 18 or older.

* Capacity, design--The number of prisoners that planners or 
architects intended for a facility.

* Capacity, highest--The maximum number of beds reported across 
the three capacity measures: design capacity, operational 
capacity, and rated capacity.

* Capacity, lowest--The minimum number of beds across the three 
capacity measures: design capacity, operational capacity, and 
rated capacity.

* Capacity, operational--The number of prisoners that can be 
accommodated based on a facility’s staff, existing programs, and 
services.

* Capacity, rated--The number of beds or prisoners assigned by a 
rating official to institutions within a jurisdiction.

* Conditional releases--Includes discretionary parole, mandatory 
parole, post-custody probation, and other unspecified conditional 
releases.

* Conditional release violators--Return to prison of persons 
released to discretionary parole, mandatory parole, post-custody 
probation, and other unspecified conditional releases.

* Custody--Prisoners held in the physical custody of state or 
federal prisons or local jails, regardless of sentence length or 
authority having jurisdiction.

* Federal prison system--Includes persons held under the 
jurisdiction of the Federal Bureau of Prisons (BOP) in secure 
federal and private prison facilities, and persons held in 
nonsecure, privately operated community corrections facilities, 
and juveniles in contract facilities.

* Imprisonment rate--The number of prisoners under state or 
federal jurisdiction sentenced to more than 1 year per 100,000 
U.S. residents of all ages.

* Jail--A confinement facility usually administered by a local law 
enforcement agency that is intended for adults but sometimes holds 
juveniles for confinement before and after adjudication. Such 
facilities include jails and city or county correctional centers; 
special jail facilities, such as medical treatment or release 
centers; halfway houses; work farms; and temporary holding or 
lockup facilities that are part of the jail’s combined function. 
Prisoners sentenced to jail facilities usually have a sentence of 
1 year or less. Alaska, Connecticut, Delaware, Hawaii, Rhode 
Island, and Vermont operate integrated systems, which combine 
prisons and jails.

* Jurisdiction--The legal authority of state or federal 
correctional officials over a prisoner, regardless of where the 
prisoner is held.

* New court commitments--Admissions into prison of offenders 
convicted and sentenced by a court, usually to a term of more than 
1 year, including probation violators and persons with a split 
sentence to incarceration followed by court-ordered probation or 
parole.

* Parole violators--All conditional release violators returned to 
prison for either violating conditions of release or for new 
crimes.

* Prison--A long-term confinement facility, run by a state or the 
federal government, that typically holds felons and offenders with 
sentences of more than 1 year. Sentence length may vary by state. 
Alaska, Connecticut, Delaware, Hawaii, Rhode Island, and Vermont 
operate integrated systems, which combine prisons and jails.

* Prisoner--An individual confined in a state or federal 
correctional facility. 

* Sentenced prisoner--A prisoner sentenced to more than 1 year.

* Supervised mandatory releases--Conditional release with post-
custody supervision generally occurring in jurisdictions using 
determinate sentencing statutes.

* Unconditional releases--Expirations of sentences, commutations, 
and other unspecified unconditional releases.
**************************************************

*************************
Total prison population
*************************

State and federal prisons had jurisdiction over an estimated 
1,526,800 prisoners at yearend 2015, a more than 2% decrease (down 
35,500 prisoners) from yearend 2014 (table 1). Federal prisoners 
made up 13% of the total U.S. prison population at yearend 2015.

The decrease in the number of U.S. prisoners from yearend 2014 to 
2015 was similar to the decrease that occurred between 2011 and 
2012 (down almost 2%). The 2011–2012 decline coincided with 
California’s Public Safety Realignment Policy, which diverted 
newly sentenced nonviolent, nonserious, and nonsex offenders from 
state prisons to serve time in local jails and under community 
supervision. With the commitment by the U.S. Department of Justice 
in 2015 to reduce the number of nonviolent drug offenders held in 
federal prisons, the BOP began releasing more nonviolent drug 
offenders from prison in 2015.

States also enacted laws and policies to reduce prison 
populations. In California, Proposition 47 retroactively reduced 
some drug and property offenses from felonies to misdemeanors. In 
Indiana, prisoners with shorter sentences and good time credit 
were diverted from state prison to local jail facilities. Other 
states adopted diversionary techniques, including specialty 
courts, substance abuse treatment facilities, and reentry programs 
to decrease prison populations and reduce recidivism.

Forty percent of the total decline in the number of prisoners 
occurred in the federal population (down 14,100 prisoners from 
yearend 2014). The federal prison population decreased by almost 
7% between 2014 and 2015 to 196,500 prisoners, its lowest level 
since 2006 (193,000 prisoners). This was the third consecutive 
year of population decline among federal prisoners.

States held 21,400 fewer prisoners at yearend 2015 than 2014 (down 
almost 2%). Twenty-nine states showed decreases in the yearend 
prison population between 2014 and 2015 (table 2). Six states 
showed decreases of more than 1,000 prisoners in 2015, including 
California (down 6,500 or almost 5%), Texas (down 2,100 or 1%), 
Indiana (down 1,900 or 7%), Louisiana (down 1,700 or 4%), Florida 
(down 1,400 or 1%), and New Jersey (down 1,100 or 5%).

Of the 18 state prison populations that grew between 2014 and 
2015, Oklahoma (900 more prisoners at yearend 2015) and Virginia 
(up 860) had the largest increases in the number of prisoners, 
while the smaller jurisdiction of North Dakota (up 4%) had the 
most growth as a percentage of its population.

Females made up more than 7% of the total prison population 
nationally at yearend 2015, which remained largely unchanged from 
2005. The female prison population decreased by 1,500 prisoners 
(or more than 1%) between 2014 and 2015, after increasing almost 
4% between 2012 and 2014 (figure 3). Females contributed 7% of the 
total decline in the federal prison population (down 1,000 
prisoners) and 2% of the total decrease in the state prison 
population (down 500) between 2014 and 2015. Eighteen states and 
the federal prison population showed decreases in their female 
prison population at yearend 2015, including California (down 600 
female prisoners), Florida (down 400), and Indiana (down 300). 
Ohio, Oklahoma, and Virginia each had an increase of more than 200 
female prisoners between yearend 2014 and 2015, representing 
growth of more than 5% in their female prison populations.

*****************************
Sentenced prison population
*****************************

Prisoners sentenced to more than 1 year made up 97% of the total 
prison population in 2015. The remaining proportion had not been 
sentenced for an offense or had received a sentence of a year or 
less. BJS makes the distinction between the total number of 
persons held under the jurisdiction of state and federal 
correctional authorities and those sentenced to more than one year 
in prison.

State and federal prisoners sentenced 
to more than 1 year declined for the 
second consecutive year
*****************************************

From December 31, 2014 to December 31, 2015, the number of state 
and federal prisoners who were sentenced to more than 1 year 
declined by 30,900, a 2% decrease (table 3). This was the second 
consecutive year that prisoners sentenced to more than 1 year in 
prison declined. The number of prisoners who were unsentenced or 
sentenced to 1 year or less in prison decreased 8% from 2014 to 
2015, from 54,500 to 49,900 prisoners.

State prisons held 1,298,200 prisoners sentenced to more than 1 
year on December 31, 2015, which was 18,200 fewer sentenced 
prisoners than at yearend 2014 (down 1%). Federal prisoners had 
178,700 sentenced prisoners at yearend 2015, or 12,700 fewer than 
yearend 2014 (down less than 7%). 

From 2014 to 2015, 26 states and the federal prison system had a 
decline in the number of prisoners sentenced to more than 1 year 
(table 4). The federal system (down 12,700 prisoners), California 
(down 6,500), and Indiana (down 1,900) experienced the largest 
decrease in their sentenced prison populations. Virginia (up 860) 
and Oklahoma (up 850) had an increase of more than 800 sentenced 
prisoners. Rhode Island, one of six jurisdictions with combined 
prison-jail systems, had the largest percentage increase in its 
sentenced prison population, growing 15% (by almost 300 prisoners) 
between yearend 2014 and 2015. Rhode Island’s total prison 
population declined in size (down 3% or more than 100 prisoners) 
in the same period. Vermont, another combined prison-jail system, 
saw declines in both its total prison population (down 12%) and 
sentenced population (down 14%).

Blacks and Hispanics sentenced to more 
than 1 year in state or federal prison 
declined in 2015
*****************************************

At yearend 2015, there were 523,000 non-Hispanic black prisoners 
sentenced to more than 1 year under state or federal correctional 
authority. This was a 3% decrease from yearend 2014 and a 9% 
decline from yearend 2005. The number of non-Hispanic white 
prisoners sentenced to more than 1 year was virtually unchanged 
between 2005 (497,600 prisoners) and 2015 (499,400 prisoners). 
Hispanic prisoners sentenced to more than 1 year declined 2% 
between 2014 and 2015 and were down by 8% between 2010 and 2015.

******************
Imprisonment rate
******************

At yearend 2015, the imprisonment rate 
for sentenced prisoners of all ages 
was the lowest since 1997
*****************************************

At yearend 2015, there were 458 prisoners sentenced to more than 1 
year in state or federal prison per 100,000 U.S. residents of all 
ages (table 5). The imprisonment rate for the U.S. population of 
all ages was the lowest since 1997 (444 per 100,000 U.S. 
residents, not shown). Among U.S. residents age 18 or older, there 
were 593 prisoners sentenced to more than 1 year in state or 
federal prison per 100,000 U.S. adult residents. Both rates 
decreased since their peak in 2007. 

On December 31, 2015, 1% of adult males living in the United 
States were serving prison sentences of greater than 1 year. 
However, this imprisonment rate decreased 3% between yearend 2014 
(1,168 per 100,000 adult males) and yearend 2015 (1,131 per 
100,000). The rates for female imprisonment in 2015 (64 per 
100,000 females of all ages and 82 per 100,000 adult females) both 
decreased by about 2% from yearend 2014.

Maine had the lowest imprisonment rate at yearend 2015 (132 per 
100,000 residents of all ages), followed by Massachusetts (179) 
and Minnesota (196) (table 6). Louisiana had the highest 
imprisonment rate for persons of all ages in 2015 (776 per 100,000 
state residents) and adults (1,019 prisoners per 100,000 state 
residents age 18 or older), followed by Oklahoma (715 per 100,000 
state residents of all ages and 948 per 100,000 adult state 
residents). Seven additional states had imprisonment rates of more 
than 500 per 100,000 state residents of all ages, including 
Alabama (611 per 100,000), Mississippi (609), Arizona (596), 
Arkansas (591), Texas (568), Missouri (530), and Georgia (503).

Oklahoma had the highest imprisonment rate for females in the 
United States at yearend 2014 (151 female prisoners 
per 100,000 females of all ages). The states with the next 
highest imprisonment rates for females of all ages were 
Kentucky (115 per 100,000), Idaho (112), and Arizona 
and Missouri (105 each).

The imprisonment rates decreased for all 
races from 2014 to 2015
*****************************************

In 2015, imprisonment rates for white, black, and Hispanic adults 
were at their lowest levels since 2005 (figure 4). Between 
December 31, 2014, and December 31, 2015, the rate of imprisonment 
for black adults decreased 4% (from 1,824 per 100,000 in 2014 to 
1,745 in 2015). The rate for Hispanic adults decreased 5%, from 
860 per 100,000 to 820. The rate for whites also declined, from 
317 per 100,000 U.S. residents age 18 or older in 2014 to 312 per 
100,000 in 2015.

********************************
Prison admissions and releases
********************************

State and federal correctional authorities 
admitted 17,800 fewer prisoners in 2015 
than in 2014
********************************************

Federal and state correctional authorities admitted a total of 
608,300 prisoners sentenced to more than 1 year in 2015, including 
429,100 new court commitments (table 7). This represented a 3% 
decrease from the number of prison admissions (626,100) in 2014. 
Both California (down 10%) and the federal prison system (down 8%) 
admitted 4,000 fewer prisoners in 2015 than in 2014. Illinois 
(down 2,500 or 8%), Florida (down 1,600 or 5%), and Tennessee 
(down 1,500 or 10%) also had large declines in admissions from 
2014 to 2015. Washington had the largest increase in the number of 
admissions from 2014 to 2015, up by 5% or more than 1,000 entries 
to prison.

In 2015, new court commitments of prisoners sentenced to more than 
1 year accounted for 71% of all U.S. prison admissions, 91% of the 
federal system’s admissions, and 69% of admissions to state 
prisons. Admissions of persons who were on community supervision 
following a previous prison term, which included both new offenses 
and supervision term violations, made up the majority of the 
remaining admissions. In 2015, new court commitments made up 66% 
(49,600) of admissions in Texas, 91% (42,600) in the federal 
system, 88% (30,700) in California, and 97% (29,700) in Florida. 
In comparison, violations of post-custody supervision programs 
made up more than 60% each of admissions in Washington, Vermont, 
and Idaho.

Correctional authorities released 4,700 
more prisoners from state and federal 
prisons in 2015 than in 2014
*****************************************

The total number of prisoners released by state and federal 
correctional authorities was largely unchanged between 2014 and 
2015 (increasing by 4,700 releases or 1%). A total of 60,200 
prisoners were released from federal prison (up 10% from 2014), 
and 580,900 prisoners were released from state prisons (down less 
than 1% from 2014). States with smaller prison populations 
experienced the largest percentage increases and declines in 
releases during 2015, including North Dakota (up 42% or 400 more 
releases than in 2014), Mississippi (down 35% or 3,300), and Maine 
(down 34% or 300).

Among states that provided disaggregated counts by type of 
release, 70% of prisoners released in 2015 were discharged with 
some form of required post-custody community supervision. A total 
of 405,200 persons were released to state post-custody community 
supervision programs during 2015. Ten states (Arkansas, Delaware, 
Idaho, Louisiana, Mississippi, Missouri, New Hampshire, Oregon, 
Virginia, and Wisconsin) released more than 90% of prisoners onto 
post-custody community supervision. Connecticut, Florida, Hawaii, 
Massachusetts, New Jersey, and Rhode Island placed post-custody 
supervision conditions on less than half of prisoners released in 
2015.

******************************************
Demographic and offense characteristics 
of state and federal prisoners
******************************************

A tenth (11%) of prisoners sentenced to 
more than 1 year in state or federal prison 
at yearend 2015 were age 55 or older
********************************************

Prisoners age 55 or older made up almost 11% of the U.S. prison 
population sentenced to more than 1 year in 2015 (table 8). More 
than 11% of all prisoners were ages 18 to 24, but this varied by 
sex and race or Hispanic origin.  At yearend 2015, 8% of non-
Hispanic white males in state and federal prison were ages 18 to 
24, compared to almost 14% of non-Hispanic black males and 13% of 
Hispanic males. The percentage of white male prisoners age 60 or 
older (8%) in state and federal prison in 2015 was greater than 
among black and Hispanic male prisoners (4% each). 

A smaller percentage of female prisoners in 2015 were age 55 or 
older (7%) compared to males (almost 11%). The percentage of white 
female prisoners age 55 or older was higher for the other race 
groups of female prisoners. Twice as many white females (52,700 
prisoners) than black females (21,700) were in state and federal 
prison at yearend 2015. However, the imprisonment rate for black 
females (103 per 100,000 black female residents) was almost double 
that for white females (52 per 100,000) (appendix table 4). Among 
any age group, black females were between 1.5 and 4.0 times more 
likely to be imprisoned than white females and between 1.1 and 2.0 
times more likely than Hispanic females. As with males, females 
ages 30 to 34 had the highest rates of imprisonment of any age 
group (184 per 100,000 female residents).

Fifty-three percent of state prisoners 
were serving time for violent offenses
********************************************

More than half (53% or 696,900 prisoners) of all state prisoners 
sentenced to more than 1 year on December 31, 2014 (the most 
recent year for which state prison offense data are available) 
were serving sentences for violent offenses on their current term 
of imprisonment (table 9) (appendix table 5). At yearend 2014, 13% 
of sentenced prisoners (171,700 prisoners) were serving time in 
state prison for murder or nonnegligent manslaughter. An 
additional 162,800 state prisoners (12%) had been sentenced for 
rape or sexual assault. On December 31, 2015, 249,900 state 
prisoners (19%) were sentenced to at least 1 year for property 
offenses. Sixteen percent of state prisoners were serving 
sentences for drug-related offenses (206,300 prisoners). 

Violent offenders represented more than half (54%) of the 
sentenced male state prisoners. More than a third (36%) of female 
prisoners were violent offenders. Eighteen percent (223,700) of 
male state prisoners and 28% (26,000) of females were sentenced 
for property offenses. Twenty-five percent of female state 
prisoners (23,500 females) and 15% of male state prisoners 
(182,700 males) were sentenced for drug offenses.

A smaller percentage of whites were serving sentences of more than 
1 year in state prison for violent offenses (47% or 210,400 
prisoners) than blacks (58% or 263,800) or Hispanics (59% or 
152,900). This pattern was consistent across racial and ethnic 
groups for murder or nonnegligent manslaughter, robbery, and 
assault. Whites had a higher percentage of sentenced prisoners 
serving time in state facilities for rape or sexual assault (16%) 
than blacks (8%) or Hispanics (13%). Whites also had a higher 
percentage offenders serving a sentence of more than 1 year in 
state prison for property crimes (25%) than blacks (16%) and 
Hispanics (14%) at yearend 2014. The proportion of prisoners 
sentenced to more than 1 year in state prison for drug offenses 
was roughly equal between whites, blacks, and Hispanics (15.0% or 
67,800 white prisoners, 14.9% or 68,000 black prisoners, and 14.6% 
or 28,800 Hispanic prisoners).

Nearly half of federal prisoners in 2015 
were serving sentences for drug offenses
********************************************

Almost 50% (92,000 prisoners) of sentenced federal prisoners on 
September 30, 2015 (the most recent date for which federal offense 
data are available) were serving time for drug offenses (table 10) 
(appendix table 6). An additional 36% of federal offenders (67,500 
prisoners) were imprisoned for public order offenses, including 
30,200 (16% of all federal prisoners) for weapons offenses and 
14,900 (8%) for adjudicated immigration crimes. While 53% of 
sentenced state prisoners were serving time for violent offenses, 
7% of federal prisoners (13,700 prisoners) were serving sentences 
for violent crimes.

Among female federal prisoners, 59% were serving sentences for 
drug offenses, compared to 49% of males. A larger proportion of 
white prisoners in federal prison (42%) were serving time for 
public order offenses on September 30, 2015 than blacks (32%) or 
Hispanics (37%). More than half of black (51%) and Hispanic (58%) 
federal prisoners in 2015 were convicted of drug offenses.

**************************
Other selected findings
**************************

Prison capacity
*****************

* At yearend 2015, 18 states and the BOP met or exceeded the 
maximum measure of their prison facilities’ capacity, and 26 
states and the BOP had a number of prisoners in their custody that 
met or exceeded their minimum number of beds (appendix table 1).

* Prison facilities in Illinois held 46,200 prisoners at yearend 
2015, 145% of the rated capacity of 31,900 (their maximum 
capacity), and 165% of the design capacity of 28,000 (their 
minimum capacity).

* Jurisdictions with more prisoners in custody than the maximum 
number of beds for which their facilities were designed, rated, or 
operationally intended included Illinois (145%), Nebraska (125%), 
Massachusetts (123%), the BOP (120%), Delaware (117%), and Hawaii 
(115%).

Private prisons
****************

* In 2015, 8% of the total number of state and federal prisoners 
were held in privately operated facilities that were under the 
jurisdiction of 29 states and the BOP. The number of prisoners 
held in private facilities in 2015 (126,300) decreased 4% (5,500 
prisoners) from yearend 2014 (appendix table 2).

* Federal prisoners held in private prison decreased by 5,100 
prisoners, which accounted for 93% of the total decrease in the 
number of prisoners held in private prisons at yearend 2015.

* Private prison facilities, including nonsecure community 
corrections centers and home confinement, housed almost 18% of the 
federal prison population on December 31, 2015.

* Six states (Hawaii, Mississippi, Montana, New Mexico, North 
Dakota, and Oklahoma) housed at least 20% of their prison 
population in privately operated facilities.

* Vermont, Connecticut, Alabama, and Idaho experienced large 
percentage decreases in prisoners held in private facilities, 
while South Dakota, North Dakota, and Ohio observed large 
percentage increases.

Prisoners held in local jails
********************************

* At yearend 2015, almost 81,200 prisoners were held in the 
custody of local jails in 37 states and the BOP, an almost 1% 
decline (down 580 prisoners) from the 81,800 prisoners held in 
jail facilities in 2014.

* Nineteen states increased the number of prisoners held in local 
jails during 2015, while 17 states and the BOP reduced the number 
of prisoners held in local jails between 2014 and 2015.

* Four states (Arkansas, Indiana, Louisiana, and Mississippi) held 
at least 600 fewer prisoners in local jails in 2015 than in 2014.

* Louisiana saw a 7% decrease (1,400 prisoners) in the number of 
prisoners held in local jails in 2015. Louisiana held nearly half 
(49%) of the total state prisoners in local jails--the highest of 
any jurisdiction at yearend 2015.

U.S. military and territories
********************************

* At yearend 2015, the U.S. military held 1,100 persons sentenced 
to at least 1 year and 1,400 persons of all sentence lengths under 
their correctional authority (appendix table 7).

* About half (48%) of offenders under military correctional 
authority had served in the U.S. Army before imprisonment.

* The Army had custody of two-thirds (67%) of all military 
personnel sentenced to 1 year or more on December 31, 2015, and 
the U.S. Navy held nearly a third.

* Of military personnel with known offense data sentenced to any 
term of imprisonment under military jurisdiction, 45% had 
committed violent offenses, including 29% incarcerated for violent 
sexual offenses, 7% for murder, and 8% for assault (appendix table 
8).
*
Thirty-seven percent of the total military prison population 
committed some nonviolent sex offense, including sexual 
misconduct. 

* The five U.S. territories held a total of 12,900 persons in 
custody of correctional authorities at yearend 2015 (appendix 
table 10).

************************************
National Prisoner Statistics (NPS) 
program jurisdiction notes
************************************
Alabama--Prisons were not recently rated for official capacity. 
The majority of Alabama prisons were overcrowded. As of 2015, 
25,763 beds were in operation, which represented the physical 
capacity for prisoners but was not based on staffing, programs, 
and services. The operating capacity differs from the Bureau of 
Justice Statistics’ (BJS) definition.

Alaska--Alaska did not submit NPS data in 2014. In their 2015 
submission, the state updated custody and jurisdiction numbers 
that BJS estimated for the Prisoners in 2014 report. Alaska did 
not report admissions or releases of offenders with a sentence of 
more than 1 year in 2015 because it could not disaggregate these 
offenders from those with no sentence or sentences of 1 year or 
less. BJS based its estimate for admissions of offenders with 
sentences of more than 1 year on the total number of admissions 
(regardless of sentence length) from the Alaska Department of 
Corrections’ 2015 Offender Profile 
(http://www.correct.state.ak.us/admin/docs/2015profile.pdf). The 
percentage of all admissions for offenders with sentences of more 
than 1 year were based on Alaska’s reported admission records from 
the 2014 National Corrections Reporting Program (NCRP) data 
collection. The number of released offenders with sentences of 
more than 1 year was estimated as the difference between the 
yearend 2015 and 2014 populations plus 2015 admissions. BJS 
assumed the distribution of releases by type was identical to the 
distribution of release type for offenders sentenced to more than 
1 year reported by Alaska in the 2014 NCRP release file. 

Alaska did not report capacity measures for its prison system to 
the 2015 NPS-1B and has not reported capacity data since 2012. 
While data from prior years were used in earlier Prisoners 
reports, BJS could no longer assume that these reflected current 
capacity levels in Alaska correctional facilities. BJS assumed 
that the percentage of Alaska offenders age 17 or younger and 
those who were not U.S. citizens were the same in 2015 as in 2013, 
the last time Alaska reported these distributions.

Arizona--Jurisdiction counts were based on custody data and 
prisoners in contracted beds, but did not include prisoners held 
in other jurisdictions because Arizona receives an equal number of 
prisoners to house from other jurisdictions. Arizona abolished 
parole in 1994, and only prisoners released prior to 1994 were on 
parole. However, community supervision prisoners were supervised 
as parolees, so both parolees and community supervision violators 
were included in admissions as parole violators. In 2015, Arizona 
classified persons returned to prison from deportation as transfer 
admissions. In prior submissions, these persons had been included 
in the “other admissions” category. Other unconditional releases 
included prisoners released by the court. Other conditional 
releases included releases onto other community supervision 
programs. Other releases included persons released to deportation.

Arkansas--Other conditional releases included those released to 
boot camps.

California--Due to a high-level data conversion project by the 
California Department of Corrections and Rehabilitation (CDCR), 
the movement data used to report detailed counts of admissions and 
releases were not available for this report. CDCR was able to 
differentiate between new court commitment and parole violation 
admissions but was not able to provide any other detailed 
breakdown of other admission types or any release types. Custody 
counts included California out-of-state correctional facility 
contracted beds, community correctional facility private contract 
beds, and private work furlough prisoners. Jurisdiction counts for 
prisoners with maximum sentences of more than 1 year included 
felons who were temporarily absent, such as in court, jail, or a 
hospital. The majority of temporarily absent prisoners were absent 
for fewer than 30 days. California experienced an increase in 
releases during 2015 due to the enactment of Proposition 47, the 
Safe Neighborhoods and Schools Act. This proposition, passed in 
November 2014, allowed offenders convicted of specific drug- or 
property-related felonies to petition the court to resentence 
specified felonies to misdemeanors for expedited release from CDCR 
institutions during 2015. California was unable to differentiate 
between its prisoners held in federal or other state facilities. A 
total of 492 male and 301 female California prisoners were held in 
federal and other state facilities. Changes in design capacity 
were based on information from an annual facilities planning and 
management report.

Colorado--Jurisdiction and custody counts included a small, 
undetermined number of prisoners with a maximum sentence of 1 year 
or less and 224 males and 8 females who were part of the Youthful 
Offender System. Prisoners reported as housed in privately 
operated correctional facilities were offenders under Federal 
Transfer and Interstate Compact programs and were not reported in 
the department’s population and capacity counts. Jurisdictional 
population included a small number of prisoners from other states 
admitted under the interstate compact agreement. Prisoners who 
were absent without leave (AWOL) or who had escaped were not 
included in releases. Other conditional releases included 
discharges from youthful offender systems. Design and operational 
capacities did not include the privately run facilities in 
Colorado.

Connecticut--Prisons and jails formed one integrated system. All 
NPS data included jail and prison populations. New court 
commitment admissions included prisoners who were admitted on 
accused status but received a sentence later in 2015. Counts of 
other types of admissions and releases included persons with 
legitimate types of prison entries and exits that did not match 
BJS categories. Legislation in July 1995 abolished the capacity 
law, making a facility’s capacity a fluid number based on the 
needs of the department. The needs were dictated by security 
issues, populations, court decrees, legal mandates, staffing, and 
physical plant areas of facilities that served other purposes or 
had been decommissioned. The actual capacity of a facility was 
subject to change.

Delaware--Prisons and jails formed one integrated system. All NPS 
data included jail and prison populations. Capacity counts 
included the halfway houses under the Department of Corrections 
(DOC). Releases included offenders who received a combined 
sentence (prison and parole) of more than 1 year.

Federal Bureau of Prisons (BOP)--Data reflect prisoners under BOP 
jurisdiction on December 26, 2015. Jurisdiction counts included 
prisoners housed in secure private facilities where the BOP had a 
direct contract with a private operator and prisoners housed in 
secure facilities where there was a subcontract with a private 
provider at a local government facility. Jurisdiction counts also 
included prisoners housed in jail or short-term detention and 
others held in state-operated or other non-federal secure 
facilities. Counts included 9,153 prisoners (7,971 males and 1,182 
females) held in nonsecure, privately operated community 
corrections centers or halfway houses and 3,122 offenders on home 
confinement (2,723 males and 399 females). A total of 64 juveniles 
(58 males and 6 females) were held in contract facilities. These 
juvenile prisoners were included in the jurisdiction totals but 
excluded from the counts of private, locally, or federally 
operated facilities. Some of these juveniles were under the 
jurisdiction of U.S. probation but were being housed in the 
custody of the BOP in contract facilities. Due to information 
system configuration, Asians and Native Hawaiians or Other Pacific 
Islanders were combined, and prisoners of Hispanic origin were 
included in the racial categories. On December 31, 2015, the BOP 
held 62,324 male and 4,062 female prisoners of Hispanic origin. 
Parole violation counts included those with and without a new 
sentence. Other admissions include hospitalization and treatment. 
Expiration of sentence included good conduct releases that usually 
had a separate and distinct term of supervision, and releases from 
the residential drug abuse treatment program. In the category of 
unconditional releases, good conduct releases were included with 
expiration of sentence cases. Other releases included court-
ordered terminations, compassionate release, hospital treatment 
completions, and releases based on the amount of time served. The 
BOP population on December 31, 2015 was 160,946 prisoners 
(excluding contracted and private facilities), and the rated 
capacity on that date was 134,461. The crowding rate was 20%.

Florida--Other admissions included program supervision violations. 
In 2015, five prisoners received other unconditional releases 
through vacated sentences. Other conditional releases included 
provisional release supervision, conditional medical release, 
program supervision, mandatory conditional, and parole 
reinstatement. Prior to 2013, Florida identified noncitizen 
prisoners based on country of birth. In 2013, Florida changed 
their method for identifying noncitizen prisoners, basing it on 
citizenship status. Estimates of noncitizens from 2015 are only 
comparable to those submitted to BJS by Florida in 2013 and 2014.

Georgia--Custody populations included both state prisons and 
county correctional institutions. Subtotals of race, sex, sentence 
length for jurisdiction, and custody counts were adjusted by the 
Georgia DOC, using interpolation to match the overall totals. 
Counts of admissions and releases were adjusted using 
interpolation to balance the jurisdictional populations on January 
1, 2015 and December 31, 2015. Females were not housed in 
privately operated correctional facilities in Georgia. The Georgia 
DOC was not able to distinguish between parole violators who 
returned with a new sentence from violators who returned without a 
new sentence. In 2015, the Georgia overall population was slightly 
lower because the Georgia Criminal Justice Reform Initiatives (GA 
CJRI) affected both the commitments and admissions of offenders 
into the prison system.

Hawaii--Prisons and jails formed one integrated system. All NPS 
data included jail and prison populations. In custody and 
jurisdiction counts, sentenced felon probationers and probation 
violators were included with the counts of prisoners with a total 
maximum sentence of 1 year or less. Jurisdiction counts included 
dual-jurisdiction (State of Hawaii or federal) prisoners currently 
housed in federal facilities and in contracted federal detention 
center beds. Other releases included prisoners released due to 
status change. Hawaii did not have a rated capacity for its 
integrated prison and jail system. Information on foreign 
nationals held in correctional facilities was based on self-
reports by prisoners.

Idaho--Counts were estimates based on live data with some changing 
variability over time due to the movement and processing of 
offenders. Other unconditional releases included non-Idaho civil 
commitments.

Illinois--In December 2015, the Illinois DOC initiated a major 
information technology (IT) transition, moving to a web-based 
offender tracking system. During the transition, some traditional 
population counts and other measures were not collected. 
Therefore, the data the DOC provided to BJS reflected November 30, 
2015 populations. Entries (admissions) and discharges (exits) 
provided to BJS included 11 months of data (January through 
November 2015). BJS imputed 12-month admission and release data 
using Illinois NCRP data to estimate the number of admissions and 
releases in December 2015. The NCRP data showed that from 2010 to 
2014, an average of 7.5% of annual admissions and 8.6% of annual 
releases occurred in December. BJS assumed these percentages for 
December 2015 admissions and releases. All population counts were 
based on jurisdiction. Jurisdiction, custody population, 
admission, and release counts for prisoners with maximum sentences 
of more than 1 year included an undetermined number of prisoners 
with a 1-year sentence. Counts included escape admissions and 
releases that occurred at adult transition centers. Other 
admission and release types included an undetermined number of 
transfers to other jurisdictions and the net difference between 
long-term admissions and release movements not reported in other 
categories but required to balance yearend populations. Other 
unconditional releases included court orders.

Indiana--Other types of admissions included prisoners on active 
supervision or who were admitted for prior charges.

Iowa--In 2009, the Iowa DOC began including offenders on work 
release, in the operating-while-intoxicated population. Also, Iowa 
prisoners housed in out-of-state prisons were included in its 
jurisdiction counts. Iowa data included in BJS reports prior to 
2009 were custody counts only. The admission and release data and 
methodology were updated in 2013. Therefore, changes from counts 
in prior years may reflect these updates. The number of sentenced 
prisoners under Iowa jurisdiction that were transferred from other 
jurisdictions between January 1, 2015 and December 31, 2015 
includes offenders transferring from other jurisdictions with an 
Iowa sentence. Counts of AWOL admissions and releases were of the 
work release and operating-while-intoxicated populations. Escape 
admissions and releases were of the prison population only. Other 
admissions and releases included some unknown types. Other 
conditional releases included special sentences for sex offenders.

Kansas--Prior to 2014, actual time of incarceration rather than 
sentence length was used to differentiate persons sentenced to 1 
year or less from those sentenced to more than 1 year. The 
jurisdictional numbers for 2014 have been corrected, but Kansas 
custody and jurisdiction counts reported for 2014 and 2015 were 
not comparable to counts from prior years. Admissions data from 
2014 were updated because 399 male and 149 female admissions were 
incorrectly categorized as “sanctions from probation,” which had a 
maximum term of less than 1 year in 2014. These 548 prisoners were 
reclassified in the “other admissions” section. Other admissions 
included sanctions from probation for 30 to 180 days. Other 
unconditional releases included court appearance releases. Other 
conditional releases included people reparoled in Kansas, 
reparoled to another state, and supervised on conditional release.

Kentucky--Due to a misinterpretation of the counting rules in 
2014, the 2015 population counts were not comparable to 2014. 
Other types of admissions included special admissions and return 
from active release. Other types of conditional prison releases 
included exits to home incarceration, and other types of 
unconditional release included pardons. Other releases included 
release from jail and active release.

Louisiana--Jurisdiction and capacity counts are correct as of 
December 29, 2015. Other types of unconditional releases include 
court orders and releases for good time with no supervision. Other 
types of conditional release included reinstatement to probation. 
Other types of release included compassionate releases.

Maine--Other conditional releases included supervised community 
confinement program placement.

Maryland--The number of prisoners with a maximum sentence of more 
than 1 year for the jurisdiction, custody, admission, and release 
measures was estimated by taking the percentage of prisoners with 
a maximum sentence of more than 1 year from the automated data and 
applying these percentages to the manual headcounts for the 
measure of interest (December 31 jurisdiction population, December 
31 custody population, annual admissions, and annual releases). 
Any sentenced prisoners housed at the Baltimore City Detention 
Center or the Baltimore Central Booking and Intake Center were 
included in the jurisdiction and custody counts; pretrial 
prisoners at these facilities were not included. The unsentenced 
prisoners in Maryland’s custody on December 31, 2015, were all 
federal prisoners housed contractually at the Chesapeake 
Correctional Facility. The reported prisoners under Maryland’s 
jurisdiction that were housed in facilities operated by a county 
or local authority were prisoners that were sentenced to state 
prison by local jurisdictions and were waiting to be transferred 
to DOC custody. No sentence or demographic information were known 
for these prisoners, and they were not included in the total 
jurisdictional number. Note that the three additional male 
prisoners in the number of prisoners housed in local facilities 
operated by a county or local authority were part of a special 
program to serve the end of their prison sentence in a local 
facility, and they were included in the total jurisdiction. 
Hispanic or Latino origin was captured in the information system 
but may have been underreported because records for existing 
prisoners were still being updated. Due to implementation issues 
with a new information system, admissions and releases for 2015 
were estimates. The total number of new court commitments may have 
included a small, undetermined number of returns from appeal or 
bond. Mandatory release violators were included with parole 
violators. Maryland did not distinguish between AWOLs and 
escapees. Other unconditional releases included court order 
releases and a small, undetermined number of released to appeal or 
bond. Other releases were coded as “other, permanent exit.” 
Operational capacities included beds used for some Maryland pre-
trial prisoners that were not counted in the yearend counts.

Massachusetts--By law, offenders in Massachusetts may be sentenced 
to terms of up to 2.5 years in locally operated jails and 
correctional institutions. This population was excluded from the 
state count but was included in published population counts and 
rates for local jails and correctional institutions. Jurisdiction 
counts exclude approximately 2,652 prisoners (2,539 males and 113 
females) in the county system (local jails and houses of 
correction) who were serving a sentence of more than 1 year, but 
these prisoners were included in imprisonment rate calculations at 
the request of the Massachusetts DOC. Jurisdiction and custody 
counts may have included a small but undetermined number of 
prisoners who were remanded to court; transferred to the custody 
of another state, federal, or locally operated system; or 
subsequently released. There was a continued increase in prisoners 
transferred to local jails prior to their release from prison as 
part of a step-down initiative for reentry. Two juveniles under 
the jurisdiction of the Massachusetts DOC and housed in a 
Massachusetts Department of Youth Services facility were included 
in the count of prisoners housed on other arrangements.

Michigan--During the reporting year for 2015, the Michigan DOC’s 
major data system was under transition to a new data platform. As 
a result, statistical techniques had to be modified to obtain much 
of the data reported in this survey. However, the numbers reported 
were solidly in line with previous trends, which have remained 
stable. For example, the racial breakdown percentages stayed 
constant for several years. Similarly, the percentage of 
admissions from new court commitments has also stayed constant for 
several years. Therefore, BJS calculated the racial breakdowns and 
admissions from new court commitments based on previous trends. 
The data recorded for Hispanics were treated as an ethnicity 
rather than as a race, and reporting was optional. Therefore, the 
numbers for Hispanics were significantly under-reported. Rather 
than reporting an incorrect number, BJS has included the 
relatively small number of cases recorded as Hispanic under the 
“white” category. Releases to appeal or bond and admissions of 
prisoners returning from appeal or bond were not disaggregated by 
length of time out to court. These counts represented the net 
difference between all movements to and from court. Operational 
capacity was institutional net capacity.

Minnesota--Jurisdiction counts for parole violators increased from 
2014 to 2015 due to database updates. Because of data issues, the 
jurisdictional total with admissions and releases did not match 
yearend numbers. Jurisdiction included prisoners temporarily 
housed in local jails, on work release, or on community work crew 
programs. Admissions and releases due to AWOL or escape, returns 
from or releases to appeal or bond, and releases because of 
transfer were excluded from Minnesota’s database file. Minnesota 
measured only operational capacity.

Mississippi--Jurisdiction counts of local facilities included both 
local county jails and county regional facilities. Violators of 
parole and conditional release were not distinguished by their 
sentence status in the Mississippi file. Other types of admission 
and release data included corrections to data because of a lag in 
processing. Other conditional releases included earned release, 
house arrest, and medical release. Total operational capacity on 
December 31, 2015 was 23,516. This capacity included private 
prisons, county jails, and county regional facilities.

Missouri--Offenders reported to have a total maximum sentence of 1 
year or less had a sentence of exactly 1 year. Other types of 
unconditional releases included resentenced completions, court-
ordered discharges, and compensation. Other types of conditional 
releases included parole board holdover returns. Other releases 
included releases to the field. The Missouri DOC did not have the 
design capacity of its older prisons, nor did it update design 
capacity for prison extensions or improvements. Missouri did not 
use a rated capacity. The state defined operational capacity as 
the number of beds available, including those temporarily offline. 
Noncitizen data were based on self-reported place of birth.

Montana--DOC did not record Hispanic origin. Therefore, the number 
of Hispanics was not recorded.

Nebraska--Other admissions reflected movements in the population 
of the reentry furlough program. Other unconditional releases 
included amended sentences. Nebraska defined operational capacity 
as its stress capacity, which was 125% of design capacity for 
designated facilities. The total design and operational capacities 
for institutions that house females included one female 
multicustody facility. The department operates two coed facilities 
that represented a design capacity of 290 and were counted in the 
male design and operational capacities.

Nevada--Nevada did not submit the 2015 NPS data. BJS imputed all 
2015 responses from either Nevada DOC reports or the 2014 NPS-1B, 
as indicated below. For custody and jurisdiction counts, BJS 
compared the male and female populations in the Nevada DOC’s 
January 20, 2016 Fact Sheet 
(http://doc.nv.gov/uploadedFiles/docnvgov/content/About/Statistics
/WFS/20160120%20Fact%20Sheet.pdf) to the male and female 
population in the DOC’s January 2, 2015 Fact Sheet 
(http://doc.nv.gov/uploadedFiles/docnvgov/content/About/Statistics
/WFS/FactSheetsWeekly01022015.pdf). These two reports showed that 
the male (up 3.96%) and female (up 7.44%) populations had 
increased from yearend 2014 to yearend 2015. BJS increased the 
population figures in Nevada’s 2014 NPS data by these percentages 
to derive the 2015 figures. For the distribution of the Nevada 
prison population by race, BJS used the racial distribution 
provided in the January 20, 2016 fact sheet. Because the Nevada 
prison population increased from yearend 2014 to yearend 2015, BJS 
assumed that the number of releases in 2015 was the same as in 
2014, and that the population increase was due to increased 
admissions. BJS assumed the number of releases in 2015 was the 
same as in 2014. BJS assumed the distributions of admission and 
release types were the same in 2015 as in 2014. The number of 
noncitizen prisoners and those age 17 or younger were assumed to 
be the same as in 2014.

New Hampshire--Other conditional releases included end of 7-day or 
90-day detention for parole violation releases to home 
confinement.

New Jersey--Population counts for prisoners with a maximum 
sentence of more than 1 year included prisoners with sentences of 
a year. The New Jersey DOC had no jurisdiction over prisoners with 
sentences of less than 1 year or over unsentenced prisoners. 
Reporting of other conditional releases included those to an 
intensive supervision program. Other types of unconditional 
releases included vacated and amended sentences and court ordered 
releases. New Jersey data for escapes did not differentiate 
between prisoners who disappeared from confined walls and those 
who disappeared while out of institutions. Other releases included 
prisoners transferred early from county jails into the state 
prison system then released back to county jails, and other 
transfers.

New Mexico--Totals for admissions and releases included all 
entries and exits to New Mexico prisons, regardless of sentence 
length. New Mexico did not include its prisoners housed in other 
states under the interstate compact agreement in its total 
jurisdiction count. According to BJS definitions, these prisoners 
should be included in the total state jurisdiction and were in 
this report. The count of noncitizens included prisoners in both 
state-run and private facilities.

New York--Other admissions included the return to prison of 
persons erroneously discharged and those admitted for parole 
supervision. Other releases include errors, release to parole 
supervision, and other discharges.

North Carolina--As of December 1, 2011, North Carolina prisons no 
longer housed misdemeanor offenders with sentences of fewer than 
180 days. Captured escapees were not considered a prison admission 
type in North Carolina, and escape was not considered a type of 
prison release. Supervised mandatory releases were post-release 
offenders. Post-release supervision was defined as a reintegration 
program for serious offenders who served extensive prison terms. 
This form of supervision was created by the Structured Sentencing 
Act of 1993. Other unconditional releases included court-ordered 
interstate compact releases. Rated capacity was not available.

North Dakota--Other releases included court-ordered release.
Ohio—Population counts for prisoners with a maximum sentence of 
more than 1 year included an undetermined number of prisoners with 
a sentence of 1 year or less. Returns and conditional releases 
involving transitional control prisoners were reported only after 
movement from confinement to a terminal release status occurs. 
Admissions of parole violators without a new sentence included 
only formally revoked violators. Escapes included nonconfinement 
escapes. Other unconditional releases included vacated sentences. 
Rated capacity figures excluded two privately operated prison 
facilities. The count of noncitizens and prisoners age 17 or 
younger excluded prisoners housed in privately operated 
facilities.

Oklahoma--Most prisoners with sentences of less than 1 year were 
part of the Oklahoma Delayed Sentencing Program for Young Adults. 
On December 31, 2015, the number of prisoners under their 
jurisdiction with a maximum sentence of more than 1 year included 
285 males and 39 females who were waiting in county jails to be 
moved to state prisons. Prisoners held by Oklahoma for other 
states were excluded from all jurisdiction counts. Waiting in 
county consisted of offenders who had been sentenced to DOC but 
not yet taken into custody. Jurisdiction counts included offenders 
in a DOC jail program, those in court, escapees in the custody of 
local jails, and those sentenced to the DOC but not yet in 
custody. Offenders in the custody of other states were mostly 
escapees. Numbers reported in “escapes from confinement” 
represented escapes from state-run prisons. Only DOC facilities 
were included in the capacity counts. Noncitizen status was 
determined by country of birth.

Oregon--This state did not submit 2015 NPS data. BJS imputed all 
2015 responses from the Oregon DOC report 
(http://www.oregon.gov/doc/OC/docs/pdf/IB-53-Quick%20Facts.pdf) 
and the 2014 NPS-1B. For jurisdiction and custody counts, BJS 
assumed that the sentence length distributions were the same in 
2015 as in 2014, and that the ratio of the size of the custody to 
jurisdiction populations was also the same. In addition, BJS 
assumed that the percentage of persons held in private facilities, 
local jails, and in other states was the same in 2015 as in 2014. 
BJS used race data on the custody population from the DOC report 
and applied this distribution to the total jurisdiction population 
count. For counts of admissions and releases, BJS used the total 
number of admissions and releases reported by the Oregon DOC and 
assumed the distributions of admission and release types remained 
the same as in 2014. BJS assumed Oregon had the same prison 
capacity in 2015 as in 2014, and that the percentage of noncitizen 
prisoners and those age 17 or younger did not change in 2015.

Pennsylvania--Release counts included 59 offenders whose sentences 
are less than 1 year. Other admissions included admissions from 
the state hospital and unspecified reasons. Other types of 
unconditional releases included vacated sentences and convictions. 
Other releases included temporary absences.

Rhode Island--Prisons and jails formed one integrated system. All 
NPS data included jail and prison populations. Jurisdiction counts 
included prisoners who had dual jurisdiction or those serving 
Rhode Island sentences out of state while also serving that 
state’s sentence. The Rhode Island data system recorded Hispanic 
origin as a race rather than an ethnicity and did not capture 
Native Hawaiians, Other Pacific Islanders, or persons identifying 
as two or more races, including those who may identify themselves 
as Hispanic second to another race. Prison admissions classified 
as escape returns included admissions under home confinement, 
serving out of state, and minimum-security facilities. Rhode 
Island DOC’s data system could not differentiate between parole 
violation admissions with and without new sentences. Other types 
of unconditional releases consisted of court-ordered discharges. 
Other types of conditional releases included discharge to the 
Institute for Mental Health. Other releases included those 
prisoners discharged out of state.

South Carolina--The December 31, 2015 count of unsentenced 
prisoners included 13 unsentenced males: 9 safekeeper and 4 
Interstate Compact Commission prisoners. As of July 1, 2003, the 
South Carolina Department of Corrections (SCDC) began releasing 
prisoners due for release and housed in SCDC institutions on the 
first day of each month. Because January 1, 2016 was a holiday, 
prisoners eligible for release on January 1 were released on 
December 31, 2015. Therefore, the prisoner count was at its lowest 
point for the month on December 31, 2015. All prisoners in private 
facilities in South Carolina were housed in private medical 
facilities. The local facilities holding prisoners on December 31, 
2015 included designated facilities and persons AWOL to county or 
local facilities. South Carolina did not have a specific race code 
to designate persons identifying as two or more races. These 
individuals were included in other specific race groups or labeled 
as other race. Other types of admissions included resentenced 
Youthful Offender Act (YOA) conversion admissions and prisoners 
who were resentenced. Other types of unconditional releases 
consisted of remands and releases by court order. Conditional 
release counts included prisoners released under community 
supervision after serving 85% of their sentence under truth in 
sentencing and supervised reentry. Other release types included 
persons who were resentenced. There were two paroling authorities 
within the adult correctional system in South Carolina. The 
Intensive Supervision Administrative Release Authority of SCDC 
(ISARA) assumed YOA Parole Board duties on February 1, 2013. Prior 
to that, the Youthful Offender Branch of SCDC handled YOA paroles. 
ISARA paroled 804 offenders sentenced under the YOA, and the South 
Carolina Department of Probation, Parole, and Pardon Services 
paroled 747 non-YOA sentenced offenders. South Carolina used the 
operational capacity concept in its management reports and other 
requested surveys.

South Dakota--Custody and jurisdiction counts of prisoners serving 
a maximum sentence of 1 year or less included those under the 
sentence of probation who, as a condition of probation, must serve 
up to 180 days in state prison. The reporting system for the South 
Dakota DOC did not have a category for prisoners of two or more 
races. These prisoners were included in the counts of other race 
prisoners. South Dakota did not separate discretionary and 
presumptive parole releases. Parole detainees were included in the 
counts of other admissions and other release types. Prior to 2014, 
these persons had not been included. The operational capacity 
reported was planned capacity. South Dakota did not have rated or 
design capacities. South Dakota did not record the number of 
prisoners with a sentence of greater than 1 year who were admitted 
in 2015. Instead, in its place they used the total number of 
prisoners under their jurisdiction with a total sentence of 1 year 
or greater as of December 31, 2014. Other admissions included 
parole or supervised release detainees.

Tennessee--Other admissions included those admitted for unknown 
reasons. Other conditional releases included those who were 
released to community corrections. The total rated capacity 
included the rated capacity of three private prisons. The total 
operational capacity included the operational capacity of three 
private prisons.

Texas--Offenders in custody were all offenders serving time in a 
facility owned and operated by the Texas Department of Criminal 
Justice at the time of data collection. Jurisdiction counts 
included offenders in custody and those held in privately operated 
prisons, intermediate-sanction facilities, substance abuse felony 
punishment facilities, and halfway houses; offenders temporarily 
released to a county for fewer than 30 days; and offenders 
awaiting paperwork for transfer to state-funded custody. 
Capacities excluded county jail beds because they do not have a 
minimum or maximum number of beds available for paper-ready and 
bench-warrant prisoners. Admissions and releases included 
offenders received into an intermediate-sanction facility, which 
was a sanction in lieu of revocation. These offenders were counted 
in the parole violator category, although these were not 
revocations. Other conditional releases included discretionary 
mandatory releases. Other admissions and other release types 
included transfers between divisions. Executions are included in 
other releases.

Utah--Other types of unconditional release included discharges of 
cases or prisoners holds.
Vermont--Prisons and jails formed one integrated system. Vermont 
did not complete the 2015 NPS-1B form. The Vermont DOC provided 
the total jurisdiction population by sex, the number unsentenced 
by sex, and the number housed out of state by sex. Based on the 
2014 NPS, BJS assumed that the only difference between the custody 
and jurisdiction populations was the 241 male offenders housed in 
an out-of-state private prison. BJS assumed that the distribution 
of sentenced offenders in custody or under jurisdiction receiving 
a sentence of more than 1 year was the same in 2015 as 2014. BJS 
assumed the race distribution was the same in 2015 as 2014. BJS 
assumed the number of admissions in 2015 was equal to the number 
in 2014 and that the decrease in the jurisdiction population was 
due solely to an increase in releases in 2015. Admission and 
release type distributions were assumed to be the same in 2015 as 
2014. BJS used the same prison capacity reported in 2014 for 2015 
and assumed the number of noncitizen offenders and those age 17 or 
younger were the same in 2015 as 2014.

Virginia--Jurisdiction counts were for December 31, 2014. As of 
September 1, 1998, the state was responsible for prisoners with a 
sentence of 1 year or more or a sentence of 12 months plus 1 day. 
Prior to September 1, 1998, the state had been responsible for a 
1-year sentence, while local authorities were responsible for 
sentences of 12 months or fewer. Prior to 2013, the count of 
prisoners housed in local facilities was taken from Compensation 
Board reports. Starting in 2013, these counts were obtained from 
DOC data. Virginia DOC revised its method of reporting prison 
capacity in 2014 to match BJS definitions. As a result, 
comparisons should not be made to estimates before 2014. The 
counts do not include beds assigned to institutional hospitals 
that cannot be designated as only male or only female and do not 
include detention and diversion centers. Native Hawaiians and 
Other Pacific Islanders are included in the Asian racial category. 
Admissions and releases are preliminary fiscal year 2015 figures. 
Other unconditional releases included court ordered releases.

Washington--Offenders sentenced to 1 year or less and unsentenced 
offenders generally resided in county jails, but revisions to law 
allowed certain prisoners with sentences of less than 1 year to be 
housed in prison. Admission and release counts included offenders 
who did not receive sentences of greater than 1 year. They 
included offenders who served time in county jails who were 
released to community supervision, and then returned to a county 
jail for a term of less than 30 days because they violated the 
terms of their community supervision. Also included in admissions 
and releases of conditional release violators were offenders who 
received probation sentences and were sent to county jails for a 
term of less than 30 days for violating the conditions of their 
probation. Native Hawaiians and Other Pacific Islanders were 
included in the Asian racial category. Other unconditional 
releases included vacated sentences.

West Virginia--Other types of admissions and releases included 
those to and from the Anthony Center for Young Adults and 
Diagnostics. Other types of unconditional releases included court-
ordered releases.

Wisconsin--Consistent with the method used to generate population 
estimates in 2014, the Wisconsin DOC used the time between a 
prisoner’s admission date and their maximum discharge date to 
determine sentence length for yearend counts. If a maximum 
discharge date was not recorded, the mandatory release date was 
used. If this date was not recorded, the prisoner’s release date 
was used. Therefore, this may not accurately reflect whether the 
prisoner was initially sentenced to 1 year or less or more than 1 
year. Custody measures include prisoners without Wisconsin 
sentences who were physically housed in a Wisconsin prison. 
Jurisdiction measures include prisoners with Wisconsin sentences, 
regardless of where they were physically located. Unsentenced 
prisoners were those who had not yet had data entered reflecting 
their mandatory release date and maximum discharge date and some 
offenders temporarily held in the Milwaukee facility. An offender 
on a temporary hold who was on probation did not have a mandatory 
release date or maximum discharge date. To determine sentence 
length for admissions totals, the time between a prisoner’s 
admission date and their maximum discharge date was used. If a 
maximum discharge date was not recorded, the mandatory release 
date was used. If this date was not recorded, the prisoner’s 
release date was used. Therefore, this may not accurately reflect 
whether the prisoner was initially sentenced to 1 year or less or 
more than 1 year. Other admissions included temporary holds, 
alternatives to revocation, persons admitted under the corrections 
compact, and erroneous releases. To determine sentence length for 
the releases total, the time between a prisoner’s admission date 
and release date was used. This may not accurately reflect whether 
a prisoner was initially sentenced to 1 year or less or more than 
1 year. Native Hawaiian and Other Pacific Islander prisoners are 
included in the Asian category.

Wyoming--No notes were submitted.

**************
Methodology
**************

The National Prisoner Statistics (NPS) program started in 1926 
under a mandate from Congress to collects annual data on prisoners 
at yearend. The Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS) sponsors the 
survey, and the U.S. Census Bureau serves as the data collection 
agent. BJS depends entirely on voluntary participation by state 
departments of corrections (DOC) and the Federal Bureau of Prisons 
(BOP) for NPS data.

The NPS distinguishes between prisoners in custody and prisoners 
under jurisdiction. To have custody of a prisoner, a state or the 
BOP must hold the prisoner in one of its facilities. To have 
jurisdiction over a prisoner, the state or BOP must have legal 
authority over that prisoner, regardless of where the prisoner is 
incarcerated or supervised. Some states were unable to provide 
counts that distinguish between custody and jurisdiction. (See 
Jurisdiction notes to determine which states did not distinguish 
between custody and jurisdiction counts.)

The NPS jurisdiction counts include persons held in prisons, 
penitentiaries, correctional facilities, halfway houses, boot 
camps, farms, training or treatment centers, and hospitals. Counts 
also include prisoners who were temporarily absent (fewer than 30 
days), in court, or on work release; housed in privately operated 
facilities, local jails, or other state or federal facilities; and 
serving concurrent sentences for more than one correctional 
authority.

The NPS custody counts include all prisoners held within a 
respondent’s facility, including prisoners housed for other 
correctional facilities. The custody counts exclude prisoners held 
in local jails and other jurisdictions. With a few exceptions, the 
NPS custody counts exclude prisoners held in privately operated 
facilities.

Respondents to NPS surveys are permitted to update prior counts of 
prisoners held in custody and under jurisdiction. Some statistics 
on jurisdiction and sentenced prison populations for prior years 
have been updated in this report. All tables showing data based on 
jurisdiction counts, including tables of imprisonment rates, were 
based on the updated and most recently available data that 
respondents provided.

Admissions include new court commitments, parole and probation 
violator returns, other conditional release violator returns, 
transfers from other jurisdictions, returns of prisoners who were 
absent without leave (AWOL) with or without a new sentence, escape 
returns with or without a new sentence; returns from appeal or 
bond, and other admissions. For reporting purposes, BJS admission 
counts exclude transfers from other jurisdictions, AWOL returns, 
and escape returns.

Releases include unconditional releases (e.g., expirations of 
sentence or commutations), conditional releases (e.g., probations, 
supervised mandatory releases, or discretionary paroles), deaths, 
AWOLs, escapes from confinement, transfers to other jurisdictions, 
releases to appeal or bond, and other releases. For reporting 
purposes, BJS release counts exclude AWOLs, escapes, and transfers 
to other jurisdictions.

The NPS has historically included counts of prisoners in the 
combined jail and prison systems in Alaska, Connecticut, Delaware, 
Hawaii, Rhode Island, and Vermont. The District of Columbia has 
not operated a prison system since yearend 2001. Felons sentenced 
under the District of Columbia criminal code are housed in federal 
facilities. Jail inmates in the District of Columbia are included 
in the Annual Survey of Jails. Some previously published prisoner 
counts and the percentage change in population include jail 
prisoners in the District of Columbia for 2001, the last year of 
collection. Additional information about the NPS, including the 
data collection instrument, is available on the BJS website.

Data on prisoners under the jurisdiction of U.S. territorial 
correctional authorities are collected separately from state and 
federal NPS data, and U.S. totals in this report do not include 
territorial counts. Three territories (American Samoa, Guam, and 
the U.S. Virgin Islands) did not provide 2015 data for NPS. Data 
from prior years are shown in appendix table 10.

Nonreporting states
********************

The Nevada and Oregon state DOCs did not respond to the 2015 NPS 
survey. For Nevada jurisdiction and custody counts, BJS compared 
the male and female populations in the DOC’s January 20, 2016 Fact 
Sheet 
(http://doc.nv.gov/uploadedFiles/docnvgov/content/About/Statistics
/WFS/20160120%20Fact%20Sheet.pdf) to the male and female 
population in the DOC’s January 2, 2015 Fact Sheet 
(http://doc.nv.gov/uploadedFiles/docnvgov/content/About/Statistics
/WFS/FactSheetsWeekly01022015.pdf). These two reports showed that 
the male (up 4.0%) and female (up 7.4%) populations had increased 
from yearend 2014 to yearend 2015. BJS increased the population 
figures in Nevada’s 2014 NPS-1B by these percentages to derive the 
2015 counts. BJS assumed that the increase in the 2015 
jurisdiction counts was due to an increase in admissions, and that 
there was no change in the number of releases from 2014 to 2015. 
BJS assumed that the race and Hispanic origin distribution of the 
jurisdiction population and estimates for capacity, noncitizens, 
and prisoners age 17 or younger had not changed from 2014.

For Oregon, BJS used custody figures from the DOC report 
(http://www.oregon.gov/doc/OC/docs/pdf/IB-53-Quick%20Facts.pdf) 
and assumed that the distribution of sentence length for offenders 
was the same in 2015 as in 2014. In addition, BJS assumed that the 
ratio of custody to jurisdiction population had not changed in 
2015 from that reported on the 2014 NPS-1B. The DOC report 
provided the race and Hispanic origin distribution in addition to 
the total number of admissions and releases for Oregon during 
2015. BJS assumed that the estimates for prison facility capacity, 
the percentage of noncitizens and prisoners age 17 or younger, or 
the distributions of admission and release types did not change 
from 2014.

Vermont only reported sex-specific jurisdiction counts in 2015, 
including the number of unsentenced prisoners and those held out 
of state. BJS made estimates for admissions, releases, capacity, 
and special populations based on 2014 data. See Jurisdiction notes 
for estimation details.

Military correctional data
****************************

BJS obtains an annual aggregate count of service personnel under 
military jurisdiction and limited demographic and offense data 
from the Office of the Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel 
and Readiness. The Department of Defense disaggregates these data 
by the branch in which prisoners served, the branch having 
physical custody of the prisoner, and whether the prisoner was an 
officer or enlisted.

Estimating yearend counts of prison 
population by age, sex, race, and 
Hispanic origin
****************************************

National-level estimates of the number of persons by race under 
the jurisdiction of state prisons on December 31, 2015 were based 
on an adjustment of NPS counts to comply with Office of Management 
and Budget (OMB) definitions of race and Hispanic origin. OMB 
defines persons of Hispanic or Latino origin as a separate 
category. Racial categories are defined exclusive of Hispanic 
origin. OMB adopted guidelines for collecting these data in 1997, 
requiring the collection of data on Hispanic origin in addition to 
data on race.

Not all NPS providers’ information systems categorize race and 
Hispanic origin in this way. In 1991, the earliest point in the 
analysis, only a few states were able to report information on 
Hispanic origin separately from race. BJS adjusted the NPS data on 
race and Hispanic origin by the ratio of the relative distribution 
of prisoners by race and Hispanic origin in self-report prisoner 
surveys that use OMB categories for race to the relative 
distribution of prisoners by race and Hispanic origin in the NPS 
data. For this report, the 2004 Survey of Inmates in State 
Correctional Facilities was used to calculate the ratio used for 
statistics on racial distributions in 2015. The ratio obtained by 
comparing the within-year relative distributions by race and 
Hispanic origin was then multiplied by the NPS distribution in a 
year to generate the estimate of persons by race and Hispanic 
origin.

Estimates of the total number of sentenced prisoners by age, sex, 
race, and Hispanic origin on December 31, 2014 were generated by 
creating separate totals for federal and state prisons. For the 
federal estimates, each sex and race count that BOP reported to 
the NPS was multiplied by the ratio of the age category count 
within the sex and race combination in the Federal Justice 
Statistics Program (FJSP) to the FJSP total count within the sex 
and race combination (e.g., FJSP white males ages 18 to 19 divided 
by FJSP white males). The resulting product yielded the FJSP-
adjusted NPS counts for each sex and race combination by age group 
(e.g., white male prisoners ages 18 to 19 in the federal prison 
system). State prison age distributions for the NPS use a similar 
sex and race ratio adjustment based on individual-level data from 
the National Corrections Reporting Program (NCRP). State and 
federal estimates were added together to obtain national estimates 
for yearend prison populations.

In the current report, BJS publishes the unadjusted jurisdiction-
level counts of prisoners by race and Hispanic origin (appendix 
table 3). Historical counts of prisoners by race are archived 
through the National Archive of Criminal Justice Data 
(http://www.icpsr.umich.edu/icpsrweb/NACJD/studies/36281). These 
data are administrative or operational in nature and do not 
necessarily reflect how individual prisoners might choose to 
report their race or Hispanic origin. National level estimates 
(table 8) have been adjusted to more accurately reflect the 
distributions among race and Hispanic origin as reported by 
prisoners in BJS prisoner surveys.

Estimating imprisonment rates by age, 
sex, race, and Hispanic origin
****************************************

BJS calculated age-specific imprisonment rates for each age, sex, 
and racial group by dividing the estimated number of sentenced 
prisoners within each age group under jurisdiction on December 31, 
2015 by the estimated number of U.S. residents in each age group 
on January 1, 2016. BJS multiplied the result by 100,000 and 
rounded to the nearest whole number. Totals by sex include all 
prisoners and U.S. residents, regardless of race or Hispanic 
origin.

Estimating offense distribution in the 
state and federal prison populations 
by age, sex, race, and Hispanic origin
****************************************

BJS employed a ratio adjustment method to weight the individual-
level race and Hispanic origin or sex-specific offense data from 
the NCRP to the state prison control totals for sex and the 
estimated race or Hispanic origin from the NPS, which yielded a 
national offense distribution for state prisoners. Prisoners 
missing offense data were excluded from the analysis prior to the 
weighting. Because data submission for the NCRP typically lags 
behind that of the NPS, state offense distribution estimates are 
published for the previous calendar year.

Data presented in table 10 and appendix table 6 are drawn from 
FJSP and encompass all prisoners in federal custody, regardless of 
sentence length. Data are limited to prisoners sentenced on U.S. 
district court commitments, District of Columbia superior court 
commitments, and those returned to federal custody following 
violations of probation (both federal and District of Columbia), 
parole, supervised release, or mandatory release. Due to these 
methodological differences, the estimates in table 10 and appendix 
table 6 will differ from previously published federal offense 
distributions presented in the FJSP web tool 
(http://www.bjs.gov/fjsrc/) or Federal Justice Statistics 
bulletins and statistical tables on the BJS website. Because FJSP 
is a custody collection, the total count of prisoners in table 10 
and appendix table 6 will differ from the jurisdiction count of 
prisoners reported to NPS.

Prison capacities
******************** 

State and federal correctional authorities provide three measures 
of their facilities’ capacity: design capacity, operational 
capacity, and rated capacity. Estimates of the prison populations 
as a percentage of capacity are based on a state or federal 
custody population. In general, state capacity and custody counts 
exclude prisoners held in private facilities, although five states 
include prisoners held in private facilities as part of the 
capacity of their prison systems: Florida, Georgia, Idaho, 
Louisiana, and Mississippi. For these states, prison population as 
a percentage of capacity includes prisoners held in the states’ 
private facilities.

Noncitizen prisoners
************************

BJS asks state DOCs and the BOP to report the number of persons in 
their custody who were not citizens of the United States on 
December 31, 2015. While the intention is for jurisdictions to 
report based on prisoners’ current citizenship status, a number of 
jurisdictions cannot provide that information and instead report 
country of birth to NPS. These states are noted in appendix table 
9. As this is a custody count, noncitizens held in private prison 
facilities or local jails under the jurisdiction of state or 
federal correctional authorities are not included.

**********************************************************
The Bureau of Justice Statistics of the U.S. Department of Justice 
is the principal federal agency responsible for measuring crime, 
criminal victimization, criminal offenders, victims of crime, 
correlates of crime, and the operation of criminal and civil 
justice systems at the federal, state, tribal, and local levels. 
BJS collects, analyzes, and disseminates reliable and valid 
statistics on crime and justice systems in the United States, 
supports improvements to state and local criminal justice 
information systems, and participates with national and 
international organizations to develop and recommend national 
standards for justice statistics. Jeri M. Mulrow is acting 
director.

This report was written by E. Ann Carson. Joshua Markman, Danielle 
Kaeble, Laura Maruschak, and Mariel Alper verified the report.

Monika Potemra, Jill Thomas, and Morgan Young edited the report. 
Tina Dorsey produced the report.

December 2016, NCJ 250229
**********************************************************
**************************************************
Office of Justice Programs
Building Solutions • Supporting Communities • 
Advancing Justice
www.ojp.usdoj.gov
**************************************************
**************************
12/12/2016 JER 11:25am
*************************


