U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Programs
Bureau of Justice Statistics
-----------------------------------------------------
This report is one in series. More recent editions may 
be available. 
To view a list of all reports in the series go to 
http://www.bjs.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbse&sid=63

This file is text only without graphics and many of the 
tables. A Zip archive of the tables in this report in 
spreadsheet format (.csv) and the 
full report including tables and graphics in .pdf format 
are available on 
BJS website at: http://bjs.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbdetail&iid=4637
------------------------------------------------------
Prison Rape Elimination Act of 2013

PREA Data Collection Activities, 2013

Allen J. Beck, PH.D.,BJS Statistician

June 2013, NCJ 242114
************************************************************

The Prison Rape Elimination Act of 2003 (PREA; P.L. 108-79) 
requires the Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS) to carry out, for 
each calendar year, a comprehensive statistical review and analysis 
of the incidence and effects of prison rape. The act further 
specifies that the review and analysis shall be based on a random 
sample, or other scientifically appropriate sample of not less than 
10 percent of all prisons, and a representative sample of municipal 
prisons. 

In 2012, more than 7,600 correctional facilities nationwide were 
covered by PREA. The Act requires the Attorney General to submit, 
not later than June 30 of each year, a report that lists 
institutions in the sample and ranks them according to the 
incidence of prison rape. BJS has developed a multiple-measure, 
multiple-mode data collection strategy to fully implement 
requirements under PREA.
*****************************************************************

*************************************
Data collections during2012 and 2013
*************************************

The National Inmate Survey (NIS) gathers data on the prevalence and 
incidence of sexual assault in adult prison and local jail 
facilities, as reported by inmates. The inmates use audio computer-
assisted self-interviewing (ACASI) technology with a laptop 
touchscreen and an audio feed to maximize inmate confidentiality 
and minimize literacy issues. The first NIS (NIS-1) was conducted 
in 2007, producing two reports: Sexual Victimization in State and 
Federal Prisons Reported by Inmates, 2007, and Sexual Victimization 
in Local Jails Reported by Inmates, 2007. The second NIS (NIS-2) 
was conducted between October 2008 and December 2009, producing a 
combined prison and jail report: Sexual Victimization in Prisons 
and Jails Reported by Inmates, 2008–09.

Data collection for the third NIS (NIS-3) was completed in May 
2012. BJS modified the survey design to provide the first-ever 
national-level estimates of sexual victimization of youth ages 16 
to 17 held in prisons and jails. The survey was also modified to 
include measures of mental and physical health, as well as 
indicators of facility safety and security. The first report from 
NIS-3 was issued in May 2013: Sexual Victimization in Prisons and 
Jails Reported by Inmates, 2011–12.

The NIS-3 was conducted in 233 state and federal prisons, 358 local 
jails, and 15 special confinement facilities operated by 
Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE), the U.S. Military, and 
correctional authorities in Indian country. A total of 92,449 
inmates age 18 or older participated in the survey, including 
38,251 prison inmates, 52,926 jail inmates, 573 ICE detainees, 539 
inmates in military facilities, and 160 inmates in Indian country 
facilities. The survey was also administered to 527 juveniles ages 
16 to 17 held in state prisons and 1,211 juveniles ages 16 to 17 in 
local jails.

Among the findings--

* In 2011–12, an estimated 4.0% of state and federal prison inmates 
and 3.2% of jail inmates reported experiencing one or more 
incidents of sexual victimization by another inmate or facility 
staff in the past 12 months or since admission to the facility, if 
less than 12 months.
 
* Using the same methodology since 2007, the change in rate of 
sexual victimization among state and federal prison inmates over 
the three surveys (4.5% in 2007, 4.4% in 2008–09, and 4.0% in 2011–
12) was not statistically significant. Among jail inmates, the rate 
of sexual victimization was nearly unchanged--3.2% in 2007, 3.1% in 
2008–09, and 3.2% in 2011–12.
 
* Among state and federal prison inmates, 2.0% (or an estimated 
29,300 prisoners) reported an incident involving another inmate, 
2.4% (34,100) reported an incident involving facility staff, and 
0.4% (5,500) reported both an incident by another inmate and staff.
 
* About 1.6% of jail inmates (11,900) reported an incident with 
another inmate, 1.8% (13,200) reported an incident with staff, and 
0.2% (2,400) reported both an incident by another inmate and staff.
 
* From 2007 to 2011–12, reports of “willing” sexual activity with 
staff (excluding touching) declined in prisons and jails, while 
reports of other types of sexual victimization remained stable.

* In 2011–12, juvenile inmates ages 16 to 17 held in adult prisons 
and jails did not have significantly higher rates of sexual 
victimization than adult inmates: 

** An estimated 1.8% of juveniles ages 16 to 17 held in adult 
prisons and jails reported being victimized by another inmate, 
compared to 2.0% of adults in prisons and 1.6% of adults in jails. 

** An estimated 3.2% of juveniles ages 16 to 17 held in adult 
prisons and jails reported experiencing staff sexual misconduct. 
Though higher, these rates were not statistically different from 
the 2.4% of adults in prisons and 1.8% of adults in jails. 

* Inmates with a history of mental health problems reported higher 
rates of sexual victimization than other inmates in 2011–12. Among 
inmates who had been told they had a specific disorder as specified 
in the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM-
IV), an estimated 3.8% of prison inmates and 2.9% of jail inmates 
reported that they were sexually victimized by another inmate.

Among state and federal prison inmates, an estimated 6.3% of those 
identified with serious psychological distress reported that they 
were sexually victimized by another inmate. In comparison, among 
prisoners with no indication of mental illness, 0.7% reported being 
victimized by another inmate. 

* Similar differences were reported by jail inmates with and 
without mental health problems. An estimated 3.6% of those 
identified with serious psychological distress reported inmate-on-
inmate sexual victimization, compared to 0.7% of inmates with no 
indication of mental health problems.
 
* Inmates who reported their sexual orientation as gay, lesbian, 
bisexual, or other were among those with the highest rates of 
sexual victimization in 2011–12. Among non-heterosexual inmates, 
12.2% of prisoners and 8.5% of jail inmates reported being sexually 
victimized by another inmate; 5.4% of prisoners and 4.3% of jail 
inmates reported being victimized by staff. 

* Eleven male prisons, 1 female prison, and 9 jails were identified 
as high-rate facilities based on the prevalence of inmate-on-inmate 
sexual victimization in 2011–12. Eight male prisons, 4 female 
prisons, and 12 jails were identified as high rate based on the 
prevalence of staff sexual misconduct. Each of these facilities had 
a lower bound of the 95%-confidence interval that was at least 55% 
higher than the average rate among comparable facilities. 

The National Survey of Youth in Custody (NSYC) provides facility-
level estimates of youth reporting sexual victimization in juvenile 
facilities. The first NSYC (NSYC-1) was conducted between June 2008 
and April 2009, and the second (NSYC-2) was conducted between 
February 2012 and September 2012. 

BJS modified the survey in 2012 to include new measures for 
assessing the accuracy of youth self-reports and to more fully 
understand staff sexual misconduct. BJS also developed methods to 
enhance response rates and expanded the sample to include youth 
held in small facilities and facilities under contract to state 
juvenile correctional authorities. BJS also added a special 
questionnaire to collect information about each facility and living 
unit. Items included data on facility staffing, use of video 
surveillance, characteristics of youth held, and factors related to 
placement of youth in different living units within the facility. 

The NSYC-2 was conducted in 273 state-owned or -operated juvenile 
facilities and 53 locally or privately operated facilities that 
held adjudicated youth under state contract. The survey was 
completed by 8,707 adjudicated youth sampled from at least one 
facility in every state and the District of Columbia. The first 
report from NSYC-2, Sexual Victimization in Juvenile Facilities 
Reported by Youth, 2012, was released in June 2013.

Among the findings--

* An estimated 9.5% of adjudicated youth in state juvenile 
facilities and state-contract facilities (representing 1,720 youth 
nationwide) reported experiencing one or more incidents of sexual 
victimization by another youth or staff in the past 12 months or 
since admission, if less than 12 months.


* About 2.5% of youth (450 nationwide) reported an incident 
involving another youth, and 7.7% (1,390) reported an incident 
involving facility staff.

* Among the estimated 1,390 youth who reported victimization by 
staff, 89.1% were males reporting sexual activity with female staff 
and 3.0% were males reporting sexual activity with both male and 
female staff. In comparison, males comprised 91% of adjudicated 
youth in the survey and female staff accounted for 44% of staff in 
the sampled facilities.

* Most victims of staff sexual misconduct reported more than one 
incident (85.9%). Among these youth, nearly 1 in 5 (20.4%) reported 
11 or more incidents.

* An estimated 3.5% of youth reported having sex or other sexual 
contact with facility staff as a result of force or other forms of 
coercion, while 4.7% of youth reported sexual contact with staff 
without any force, threat, or explicit form of coercion.

* About 20.3% of youth victims of staff sexual misconduct 
experienced physical force or threat of force, 12.3% were offered 
protection, and 21.5% were given drugs or alcohol to engage in 
sexual contact.

* When youth were asked who initiated sexual contact, 36.4% 
reported that the facility staff always made the first move, 17.4% 
reported that they always made the first move, and 46.3% said that 
sometimes the facility staff made the first move and sometimes they 
did.

* Among state-owned or -operated juvenile facilities only, the rate 
of sexual victimization declined from 12.6% in 2008–09 (when the 
first survey was conducted) to 9.9% in 2012. The decline in state 
facilities was linked to staff sexual misconduct with force 
(declining from 4.5% of youth in 2008–09 to 3.6% in 2012) and staff 
sexual misconduct without force (declining from 6.7% to 5.1%).

* Rates of reported sexual victimization varied among youth:

** 8.2% of male youth and 2.8% of female youth reported sexual 
activity with staff.

** 5.4% of female youth and 2.2% of male youth reported forced 
sexual activity with another youth at a facility.

** Youth who identified their sexual orientation as gay, lesbian, 
bisexual, or other reported a substantially higher rate of youth-
on-youth victimization (10.3%) than heterosexual youth (1.5%).

* Thirteen facilities were identified as high rate, based on the 
prevalence of sexual victimization by youth or staff. Rates in each 
of these facilities had a 95%-confidence interval with a lower 
bound that was at least 35% higher than the average rate of sexual 
victimization among youth facilities nationwide.

* For the first time, state-level estimates were added to the 
survey:
 
** Three states (Delaware, Massachusetts, and New York) and the 
District of Columbia had no reported incidents of sexual 
victimization. 

** Four states (Georgia, Illinois, Ohio, and South Carolina) had 
high rates, based on the lower bound of the 95%-confidence interval 
of at least 35% higher than the national average. Each of these 
states had an overall sexual victimization rate exceeding 15% of 
the average rate among youth facilities nationwide, which was 
primarily due to high rates of staff sexual misconduct. 

The Survey of Sexual Violence (SSV) collects data annually from 
administrative records on the incidence of sexual violence in adult 
and juvenile correctional facilities. This collection, the first of 
a series of data collections implemented to meet PREA mandates, 
began in 2004. The surveys include measures of four different types 
of sexual victimization, and it is administered to a sample of at 
least 10% of all correctional facilities covered under PREA. 
Additional detail is collected on the characteristics of 
substantiated incidents of sexual violence.

The administrative records surveys provide a basis for the annual 
statistical review required under PREA. The surveys include all 
federal and state prison systems, as well as facilities operated by 
the U.S. Military and ICE. The surveys also include representative 
samples of jail jurisdictions, privately operated adult prisons and 
jails, and jails in Indian country. Each year the SSV also includes 
all state-owned or -operated juvenile facilities and a 
representative sample of locally and privately operated juvenile 
facilities.

Results from the SSV for adult facilities are expected in October 
2013 and from the SSV for juvenile facilities in February 2014.

Other PREA–related data collections have been completed:

* The National Former Prisoner Survey (NFPS) provided the first-
ever national estimates of the prevalence of sexual victimization 
based on reports of former state prison inmates. The report, Sexual 
Victimization Reported by Former State Prisoners, 2008, was 
released in May 2012.

* The Clinical Indicators of Sexual Violence in Custody (CISVC) was 
conducted during 2010 and 2011. In collaboration with the National 
Institute of Justice (NIJ) and the Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention (CDC), BJS conducted a feasibility study using medical 
indicators and medical surveillance methodologies in 19 prisons and 
11 jails. Based on results of the 12-month pilot study, BJS 
determined that a national data collection was not feasible.

****************************
Upcoming Reports in 2013–14
****************************

* Sexual Victimization Reported by Adult Correctional Authorities, 
2009–11 (October 2013).

* Sexual Victimization Reported by Juvenile Correctional 
Authorities, 2007–11 (February 2014).

****************************
Previously Released Reports
****************************

* Sexual Victimization in Juvenile Facilities Reported by Youth, 
2012, NCJ 241708, June 2013.

* Sexual Victimization in Prisons and Jails Reported by Inmates, 
2011–12, NCJ 241399, May 2013.

* Sexual Victimization Reported by Former State Prisoners, 
2008, NCJ 237363, May 2012.

* Sexual Victimization Reported by Adult Correctional Authorities, 
2007–2008, NCJ 231172, January 2011.

* Sexual Victimization in Prisons and Jails Reported by Inmates, 
2008–09, NCJ 231169, August 2010.

* Sexual Victimization in Juvenile Facilities Reported by Youth, 
2008–09, NCJ 228416, January 2010.

* Sexual Violence Reported by Juvenile Correctional Authorities, 
2005–06, NCJ 215337, July 2008.

* Sexual Victimization in Local Jails Reported by Inmates, 
2007, NCJ 221946, June 2008.

* Sexual Victimization in State and Federal Prisons Reported 
by Inmates, 2007, NCJ 219414, December 2007.

* Sexual Violence Reported by Correctional Authorities, 2006, 
NCJ 218914, August 2007.

* Sexual Violence Reported by Correctional Authorities, 2005, 
NCJ 214646, July 2006.

* Sexual Violence Reported by Correctional Authorities, 2004, 
NCJ 210333, July 2005.

**********************************************************

The Bureau of Justice Statistics is the statistics agency of the 
U.S. Department of Justice. William J. Sabol is the acting 
director. 

This report was written by Allen J. Beck, Ph.D., BJS statistician.
Morgan Young edited the report and Tina Dorsey produced the report, 
under the supervision of Doris J. James.

June 2013, NCJ 242114
***********************************************************

************************************************
Office of Justice Programs
Innovation • Partnerships • Safer Neighborhoods
www.ojp.usdoj.gov
*************************************************

*************************
6/3/2013/ JER/ 11:00
*************************

