U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Programs
Bureau of Justice Statistics

Status Report

Prea Data Collection Activities, 2009

June 2009,  NCJ 227377

--------------------------------------------------


--------------------------------------------------

This file is text only. The full report in .pdf 
format is available from:
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/abstract/pdca09.htm.

--------------------------------------------------

Prison Rape Elimination Act of 2003                
--------------------------------------------------  
     
PREA Data Collection Activities, 2009

Data collection activities during 2008 and 2009

Survey on Sexual Violence (SSV) in Correctional Facilities
collects data annually on the incidence of sexual violence in
adult and juvenile correctional facilities. This
administrative records collection was first conducted in 2004
and was the first in a series of planned data collections to
fully implement the mandates contained in the Prison Rape
Elimination Act of 2003. The survey includes measures of four
different types of sexual violence, and it is administered to
a sample of at least 10% of the nearly 8,700 correctional
facilities covered under the Act. Additional detail is
collected on the characteristics of substantiated incidents
of sexual violence. Data were collected in 2004, 2005, 2006,
and 2007. The 2008 SSV is in progress.

The administrative records surveys provide a basis for the
annual statistical review required under the Act. The surveys
include all federal and state prison systems and facilities
operated by the U.S. Armed Services (in the continental U.S.)
and U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement. The surveys
also include representative samples of jail jurisdictions,
privately operated adult prisons and jails, and jails in
Indian country. Overall, the SSV includes facilities housing
nearly 2 million inmates, or more than 80% of all inmates
held in adult facilities in 2007.
 
*All state and federal prison systems, all military
facilities, and all sampled public and private jail
facilities (542) responded to the survey. Eight of 50
facilities housing adults in Indian country and 1 of 13
facilities operated by U.S. Immigration and Customs
Enforcement refused or did not respond to repeated requests.
Results of the 2007 survey are expected to be released in
August 2009. 

*The administrative records surveys also include all state
juvenile correctional systems and a representative sample of
locally and privately operated juvenile facilities. As
enumerated in the 2006 Juvenile Residential Facility Census,
there were 3,025 non-tribal facilities. The 2007 SSV included
all state facilities (501) and a sample of 330 local or
private facilities. All state systems and the District of
Columbia responded to the survey; two local or private
facilities refused or did not respond to repeated requests.

*The 2008 SSV juvenile collection is currently in the field.
Detailed information on substantiated incidents collected in
2007 and 2008 will be combined and issued in a separate
report.     
                                
National Inmate Survey (NIS) gathers data on the incidence of
sexual assault in correctional facilities. Data are collected
directly from inmates in a private setting using Audio
Computer-Assisted Self Interview (ACASI) technology with a
laptop touchscreen and an audio feed to maximize inmate
confidentiality and minimize literacy issues. 

*Between October 2008 and January 2009, BJS completed the
second annual NIS in 167 state and federal prisons. A total
of 29,900 inmates participated in the survey, yielding a
response rate of 71%.

*The 2008 NIS was designed in accordance with the requirement
that BJS draw a random sample of not less than 10% of prison
facilities. All of the sampled prison facilities (171)
participated in the survey, except four that were determined
to be ineligible.

*In 2008 BJS expanded NIS to include facilities operated by
U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement, facilities operated
by the U.S. Armed Services, and jails in Indian country. The
2008 NIS was also modified to provide more in-depth data on
the number of incidents, the timing of sexual victimization
after entry to the facility, and the relationship of inmate
victimization to pat downs and strip searches by staff.

*In October 2009 BJS expects to release the report entitled
Sexual Victimization in State and Federal Prisons as Reported
by Inmates, 2008, which will provide rankings of prison
facilities as required under the Act.
 
*Data collection in 330 randomly selected public and
privately operated jails is in progress. Collection
activities will be completed by September 2009. Jail rankings
are expected to be released by March 2010.

Former Prisoner Survey (FPS) will provide a national estimate
of the incidence of sexual victimization based on reports of
former state prison inmates. Parole offices from across the
nation were sampled, and a selection of former inmates under
active parole supervision were interviewed using ACASI
technology. The survey collects data on the totality of the
prior term of incarceration, including any time in a local
jail, state prison, or community correctional facility prior
to final discharge.

*Between January and November 2008, BJS completed the FPS in
a sample of 285 parole offices with nearly 18,000 former
inmates.

*The dataset is being cleaned and weighted, with delivery of
a final file in August 2009. Results are expected to be
released by January 2010.

National Survey of Youth in Custody (NSYC) will provide
facility-level estimates of youth reporting sexual
victimization in juvenile facilities, as required under the
Prison Rape Elimination Act of 2003. The NSYC includes a
sample of state facilities and large locally or privately
operated facilities housing adjudicated youth. After
obtaining either individual parental consent or in loco
parentis from the facility, a sample of youth in each
selected facility was interviewed in a private setting using
ACASI.

*The NSYC includes about 10,400 adjudicated youth in a sample
of 168 state-operated facilities and 29 large non-state
facilities with an average daily population of 150 or more
youth during 2005. Data collection began in June 2008 and was
completed in April 2009.

*In April 2009 BJS held a national workshop in Washington,
DC, to discuss the NSYC data collection experience, the
multiple measures of sexual violence, and different
approaches for ranking facilities. Attendees of the day-long
workshop included state juvenile correctional administrators,
BJS statisticians, and staff from WESTAT, Inc., the NSYC data
collection agent.

*The final dataset is being cleaned and weighted, with
delivery anticipated in July 2009. Facility rankings will be
released in a report by December 2009.

Clinical Indicators of Sexual Violence in Custody (CISVC) is
a BJS collaboration with the National Institute of Justice
and the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention to conduct
a feasibility study using medical indicators and medical
surveillance methodologies. The study will measure the
incidence and prevalence of sexual assault in correctional
facilities. 

*The CISVC is designed to be conducted in the health care
section of each participating correctional facility. Medical
staff will complete a one-page surveillance form for adult
male inmates who either make an allegation of sexual violence
or display any of five clinical conditions (i.e., rectal
bleeding; rectal or anal tears or fissures; bruises,
scratches, or abrasions on buttocks; genital bruising; or
nipple injuries). 

*In April 2009 the Office of Management and Budget (OMB)
approved the 12-month feasibility study. Recruitment of 25
prisons and 10 jails is underway, with data collection to
begin in January 2010.

Released Reports

Sexual Victimization in Local Jails Reported by Inmates,
2007, NCJ 221946
<http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/abstract/svljri07.htm>.

Sexual Violence Reported by Juvenile Correctional
Authorities, 2005-2006, NCJ 215337
<http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/abstract/svrjca0506.htm>.

Sexual Victimization in State and Federal Prisons as 
Reported by Inmates, 2007, NCJ 219414
<http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/abstract/svsfpri07.htm>.

Sexual Violence Reported by Correctional Authorities, 
2006, NCJ 218914
<http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/abstract/svrca06.htm>.

Sexual Violence Reported by Correctional Authorities, 
2005, NCJ 214646
<http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/abstract/svrca05.htm>.

Sexual Violence Reported by Correctional Authorities, 
2004, NCJ 210333
<http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/abstract/svrca04.htm>.


08/03/2009 JER
            




                          


                                               