U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Programs
Bureau of Justice Statistics

****************************************************************
This file is text only without graphics and many of the
tables. A Zip archive of the tables in this report in
spreadsheet format (.csv) and the full report including
tables and graphics in .pdf format are available on BJS
website at: http://www.bjs.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbdetail&iid=5968
****************************************************************

**************************************************************
This report is one in a series. More recent editions 
may be available. To view a list of all in the series 
go to https://www.bjs.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbse&sid=63
************************************************************

******************************
DATA COLLECTION PROFILE
*******************************

Prison Rape Elimination Act of 2003
************************************

**************************************** 
PREA Data Collection Activities, 2017
****************************************

The Prison Rape Elimination Act of 2003 (PREA; P.L. 108-79) 
requires the Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS) to carry out, for 
each calendar year, a comprehensive statistical review and 
analysis of the incidence and effects of prison rape. PREA 
further specifies that the review and analysis shall be based on 
a random sample, or other scientifically appropriate sample of 
not less than 10% of all prisons, and a representative sample of 
municipal prisons.

In 2016, more than 7,600 prisons, jails, community-based 
facilities, and juvenile correctional facilities nationwide were 
covered by PREA. The act requires the Attorney General to submit—
no later than June 30 of each year—a report that lists 
institutions in the sample and ranks them according to the 
incidence of prison rape. BJS has developed a multiple-measure, 
multiple-mode data collection strategy to fully implement 
requirements under PREA.

***************************************************************** 
DATA COLLECTIONS AND DEVELOPMENT ACTIVITIES DURING 2016 AND 2017
***************************************************************** 

The National Survey of Youth in Custody (NSYC) provides facility-
level estimates of youth reporting sexual victimization in 
juvenile facilities. To collect this information, the youth use 
audio computer-assisted self-interviewing (ACASI) technology with 
a touchscreen-enabled laptop and an audio feed to maximize 
confidentiality of responses and minimize literacy issues. The 
first NSYC (NSYC-1) was conducted from June 2008 to April 2009, 
and the second (NSYC-2) was conducted from February 2012 to 
September 2012. The third data collection (NSYC-3) will begin in 
late 2017. 

In previous surveys, a large number of juveniles have been 
interviewed, including more than 9,000 during 2008-09 in 195 
facilities and 8,700 in 2012 in 326 facilities. These surveys 
have found that juveniles have high rates of sexual victimization 
(9.5% in 2012) when compared to incarcerated adults in prisons 
(4.0% during 2011-12) and jails (3.2% during 2011-12). Because of 
these higher rates of sexual victimization, NSYC-3 will be the 
first in the series of upcoming PREA collections to be conducted 
by BJS in 2017 since the release of the PREA standards in 2012. 
In addition to ranking facilities as required under the act, 
NSYC-3 will measure the impact of the PREA standards and other 
efforts on the prevalence of sexual victimization, type of 
incidents, reporting behaviors of victims, and response by 
correctional staff when incidents occur. 

In June 2016, BJS released Facility-level and Individual-level 
Correlates of Sexual Victimization in Juvenile Facilities, 2012 
(NCJ 249877, BJS web), which used NSYC-2 data to examine how the 
environment of a juvenile facility impacts youth sexual 
victimization. The report also considered critical youth-level 
predictors. Overall, facilities with higher rates of sexual 
assault housed more youth who had submitted written complaints 
against staff, did not have enough staff to monitor the facility, 
and had higher levels of gang fights. However, the report found 
that a juvenile’s individual characteristics—including 
victimization history, sex, gender, and offense history—were more 
important than facility factors in predicting sexual 
victimization. 
 
Among facility-level findings--

* Rates of youth-on-youth sexual assault in female-only juvenile 
facilities (5.3%) were more than three times greater than those 
in male-only facilities (1.5%). 

* Youth-on-youth sexual assault was lowest (1.1%) in facilities 
where almost all youth in the facility reported that they first 
learned sexual assault was not allowed within the first 24 hours 
of arrival.

* Youth-on-youth sexual assault was most prevalent (4.5%) when 
facilities had a high concentration of youth with histories of 
sexual abuse (24.0% or more of youth), a concentration of 
lesbian, gay, or bisexual (LGB) youth (5.0% in facilities with 
18% or more of LGB youth), and a greater-than-average proportion 
of youth held for violent sexual assault (3.3%).

* Sexual assault by another youth (4.0%) was more common in 
facilities that held greater concentrations of youth with a 
history of psychiatric conditions (76% or more of youth).

* Staff sexual misconduct was reported by 5.9% of youth in 
facilities with multiple living units, compared to 2.1% of youth 
in facilities with single units.

* Staff sexual misconduct was most prevalent in detention centers 
(7.4%) and training/long-term secure facilities (7.3%). It was 
lowest in residential treatment centers (3.1%) and nonstate-
operated facilities (3.1%).

* In male-only juvenile facilities, 5.7% of youth reported staff 
sexual misconduct, compared to 1.4% in female-only facilities.

* Facilities with a change in staffing levels during the previous 
12 months (7.1%) had higher rates of staff sexual misconduct than 
facilities with no change (3.1%).

* Rates of staff sexual misconduct were highest in facilities 
where youth perceived the facility staff to be unfair (10.3%), 
youth had the fewest positive perceptions of staff (9.7%), and 
youth worried about physical assault by other youth (8.2%) or 
staff (11.2%).

* In facilities where the majority of youth reported gang fights, 
the rate of staff sexual misconduct (10.6%) was more than double 
the facility average (5.2%).

In preparation for NSYC-3, BJS engaged in the following 
activities during 2016-17 to assess the prior NSYC-1 and NSYC-2 
surveys and to develop new items:

* From January to April 2016, BJS conducted an item-by-item 
assessment of the NSYC-1 and NSYC-2 questionnaires to determine 
the basis for additional items and revisions to past items in the 
sexual victimization and facility characteristics surveys.

* In April 2016, BJS convened a national workshop of juvenile 
correctional facilities’ administrators and other stakeholders 
(as required under Section 4 of PREA) to solicit their views on 
potential revisions for the next data collection. 

* In April 2016, BJS issued a competitive solicitation to obtain 
a collection agent through a cooperative agreement to administer 
the NSYC-3. It was awarded to Westat (Rockville, MD) in August 
2016. 

* In August 2016, BJS conducted a cognitive test of new and 
revised items in the NSYC-3 survey among 20 youth in three state-
operated facilities. A total of 68 questions were tested.

* In August and November 2016, BJS also tested new items on 
sexual orientation, sexual preference, and gender identity. Given 
the higher rates of sexual victimization reported by lesbian, 
gay, and bisexual (LGB) youth in previous NSYC surveys, these 
tests were designed to further refine the questions and response 
items. The tests were conducted with 20 male and female 
adjudicated youth in three juvenile correctional facilities 
during the cognitive test if time permitted, and with 15 youth 
not held in a facility who were lesbian, gay, bisexual, and 
transgender (LGBT) or had a close family member or friend who 
were LGBT.

* In October and November 2016, BJS completed an expert review of 
the facility characteristics survey with members of the Council 
of Juvenile Correctional Administrators (CJCA). Expert reviewers 
from seven states reviewed the wording of the questions and 
provided feedback on their ability to provide the data being 
requested by the survey. Additional input on measures related to 
the use of restrictive housing were obtained from CJCA’s PREA 
committee.

* In April 2017, BJS conducted a pilot test of the NSYC-3 
collection protocols and revised survey instruments. The test was 
completed in six facilities with 150 completed youth interviews 
and six completed facility surveys.

* In May 2017, BJS conducted a cognitive test of the youth 
survey’s Spanish language version. This test, which represents 
the final test before national collection, was conducted in two 
state-operated juvenile facilities that held a large number of 
Spanish-speaking youth.

* National data collection is scheduled to begin in late 2017 
once the survey has been approved by the Office of Management and 
Budget. The first report from NSYC-3 is expected in early 2019. 

The National Inmate Survey (NIS) gathers data on the prevalence 
and incidence of sexual assault in adult prisons and local jails 
as reported by inmates. The 2007 NIS (NIS-1) completed 63,817 
interviews, the 2008-09 NIS (NIS-2) completed 81,566 interviews, 
and the 2011-12 NIS (NIS-3) completed 92,449 interviews. Inmates 
have been interviewed using ACASI technology with a touchscreen-
enabled laptop and an audio feed to maximize inmate 
confidentiality and minimize literacy issues.

The act requires BJS to provide a listing of prison and jail 
institutions “ranked according to the incidence of prison rape in 
each institution” (P.L. 108-79). Past NIS collections show that 
prisoners have higher rates of sexual victimization than jail 
inmates. In NIS-3, 4.0% of state and federal prisoners reported 
having experienced some type of sexual victimization perpetrated 
by another inmate (2.0%) or staff (2.4%). In comparison, 3.2% of 
jail inmates reported some type of sexual victimization that was 
perpetrated by another inmate (1.6%) or staff (1.8%).

BJS determined that the NIS-4 will be administered separately in 
prison and jail facilities. Data collection in state and federal 
prisons will occur in 2018-19, followed by data collection in 
local jails in 2019-20. Although separate collections are a 
result of funding constraints, they will provide BJS with the 
opportunity to modify the data collection protocols and 
questionnaires to address differences between prisons and jails 
in the types of inmates housed and the circumstances surrounding 
their victimization.

In preparation for the NIS-4 prisons survey, BJS convened a 
national workshop in April 2016 to solicit views of correctional 
administrators and ensure that the NIS-4 will maximize data 
quality and minimize burden on sampled facilities. Participants 
reviewed key findings from prior NIS surveys, addressed 
alternative sampling designs for NIS-4, suggested improvements to 
the sexual victimization surveys, and commented on a draft 
facility characteristics survey.

Since the April 2016 workshop, BJS has completed an assessment of 
all aspects of the NIS-3 survey and begun work on the design of 
the next survey. Completed tasks include development of--

* an optimal sample design that will provide both reliable 
estimates for sampled prison facilities and the ability to 
measure change from past NIS collections. Sampling objectives 
included estimating the sexual victimization rates among (1) 
female inmates with similar or better precision than past NIS 
studies; (2) inmates who have ever been told that they have a 
serious psychological disorder (SPD), with similar precision to 
past NIS studies; and (3) juveniles held in adult facilities 
despite their declining numbers in prison.

* a revised sexual victimization questionnaire, including items 
designed to capture detailed characteristics of the most recent 
incident by type of victimization. New items have been 
established to measure the relationships between victims and 
perpetrators, prior to and after the incidents occurred; steps 
inmates have taken to reduce their chances of being victimized in 
the future; and impact on the victim and perpetrator as a result 
of reporting the incident.

* a revised alternative questionnaire that will be administered 
to a random sample of selected inmates (10% of the NIS-4 sample) 
to provide greater confidentiality and anonymity protections for 
survey respondents. The questionnaire includes items on family 
structure, past employment, exposure to violence before age 18, 
current conditions of confinement, daily activities, work 
assignments, involvement in fights, measures of facility safety, 
and program participation.

* a web-administered supplemental facility survey, which has been 
designed to measure the extent to which facilities are in 
compliance with PREA standards and other facility characteristics 
that may co-vary with sexual victimization. Items include custody 
levels, staff characteristics, staff turnover, background checks, 
and inmate misconduct.

In May 2017, BJS issued a competitive solicitation to obtain a 
collection agent through a cooperative agreement to administer 
the NIS-4 prisons collection. Before implementing the survey in 
2018-19, BJS will cognitively test all new or revised survey 
items, conduct an expert review of the facility characteristics 
survey, and pilot test all survey instruments and data collection 
protocols.

Throughout 2017, BJS will continue to conduct stakeholder 
outreach activities to redesign the NIS-4 jails collection. A 
national workshop for jail administrators and sheriffs is planned 
for the late summer of 2017. Pending sufficient funding in FY 
2018, BJS expects to issue a competitive solicitation to obtain a 
data collection agent through a cooperative agreement to conduct 
a cognitive test and pretest and administer the NIS-4 jails 
collection nationwide in 2019-20. 

The Survey of Sexual Victimization (SSV), formerly known as the 
Survey of Sexual Violence, collects data annually from 
administrative records on incidents of sexual victimization in 
adult and juvenile correctional facilities. The first of a series 
of data collections implemented to meet PREA mandates, this 
collection began in 2004. The survey includes measures of five 
different types of sexual victimization and is administered to a 
sample of at least 10% of all correctional facilities covered 
under PREA. It gathers information on allegations and 
substantiated incidents that occur each calendar year.

The administrative records surveys provide a basis for the annual 
statistical review required under PREA. The surveys include all 
federal and state prison systems and facilities operated by the 
U.S. military and Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE). The 
surveys also include representative samples of jail 
jurisdictions, privately operated adult prisons and jails, and 
jails in Indian country. Each year, the SSV also includes all 
state-owned or -operated juvenile facilities and a representative 
sample of locally and privately operated juvenile facilities.

During 2016-17, BJS and the U.S. Census Bureau completed data 
collection for the 2015 reference year. BJS received data from 
the Federal Bureau of Prisons, 49 state departments of 
corrections, and all state juvenile justice agencies. Among the 
700 sampled local jails, five refused to or did not respond to 
the survey. Among the 291 sampled privately operated prisons and 
jails, adult jails in Indian country, and facilities operated by 
the U.S. military or ICE, five refused or did not respond. Among 
the 549 sampled local or privately operated juvenile facilities 
and juvenile facilities in Indian country, six refused or did not 
respond. Overall, the 2015 SSV achieved a 99% response rate from 
agencies and sampled facilities known to be in operation at the 
time of the survey.

Results from the SSV for adult prisons and jails and facilities 
operated by the U.S. military and ICE are expected to be released 
by yearend 2017. Results for state juvenile facilities and local 
or privately operated juvenile facilities are expected to be 
released by yearend 2018.

**************************
UPCOMING REPORT IN 2017
**************************

* Sexual Victimization Reported by Adult Correctional 
Authorities, 2012–14 (September 2017)

*******************************
PREVIOUSLY RELEASED REPORTS
*******************************

* Facility-level and Individual-level Correlates of Sexual 
Victimization in Juvenile Facilities, 2012, NCJ 249877, June 2016

* Sexual Victimization Reported by Juvenile Correctional 
Authorities, 2007–12, NCJ 249145, January 2016

* Survey of Sexual Violence in Juvenile Correctional Facilities, 
2007–12 - Statistical Tables, NCJ 249143, January 2016

* Survey of Sexual Violence in Adult Correctional Facilities, 
2009–11 - Statistical Tables, NCJ 244227, January 2014

* Sexual Victimization Reported by Adult Correctional 
Authorities, 2009–11, NCJ 243904, January 2014

* Sexual Victimization in Juvenile Facilities Reported by Youth, 
2012, NCJ 241708, June 2013

* Sexual Victimization in Prisons and Jails Reported by Inmates, 
2011–12, NCJ 241399, May 2013

* Sexual Victimization Reported by Former State Prisoners, 2008, 
NCJ 237363, May 2012

* Sexual Victimization Reported by Adult Correctional 
Authorities, 2007–2008, NCJ 231172, January 2011

* Sexual Victimization in Prisons and Jails Reported by Inmates, 
2008–09, NCJ 231169, August 2010

* Sexual Victimization in Juvenile Facilities Reported by Youth, 
2008–09, NCJ 228416, January 2010

* Sexual Violence Reported by Juvenile Correctional Authorities, 
2005–06, NCJ 215337, July 2008

* Sexual Victimization in Local Jails Reported by Inmates, 2007, 
NCJ 221946, June 2008

* Sexual Victimization in State and Federal Prisons Reported by 
Inmates, 2007, NCJ 219414, December 2007

* Sexual Violence Reported by Correctional Authorities, 2006, NCJ 
218914, August 2007

* Sexual Violence Reported by Correctional Authorities, 2005, NCJ 
214646, July 2006

* Sexual Violence Reported by Correctional Authorities, 2004, NCJ 
210333, July 2005

***************************************************************** 
The Bureau of Justice Statistics of the U.S. Department of 
Justice is the principal federal agency responsible for measuring 
crime, criminal victimization, criminal offenders, victims of 
crime, correlates of crime, and the operation of criminal and 
civil justice systems at the federal, state, tribal, and local 
levels. BJS collects, analyzes, and disseminates reliable and 
valid statistics on crime and justice systems in the United 
States, supports improvements to state and local criminal justice 
information systems, and participates with national and 
international organizations to develop and recommend national 
standards for justice statistics. Jeri M. Mulrow is acting 
director.

This report was written by Allen J. Beck, Ph.D., and Jessica 
Stroop. Jennifer Bronson verified the report.

Monika Potemra and Jill Thomas edited the report. Steve 
Grudziecki produced the report.

June 2017, NCJ 250752
**************************************************************** 

****************************************************************
Office of Justice Programs
Building Solutions * Supporting Communities * Advancing Justice
www.ojp.usdoj.gov
****************************************************************

****************************
6/5/2017/ JER/ 10:00am
****************************

