U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Programs
Bureau of Justice Statistics

-----------------------------------------------------
This file is text only without graphics and many of the
tables. A Zip archive of the tables in this report in
spreadsheet format (.csv) and the full report including
tables and graphics in .pdf format are available on BJS
website at:http://www.bjs.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbdetail&iid=4595

------------------------------------------------------

***************
Special Report
***************

Pretrial Detention and Misconduct in Federal District 
Courts, 1995-2010

Thomas H. Cohen, Ph.D., BJS Statistician

Between fiscal years 1995 and 2010, the number of defendants 
with cases disposed in federal district courts increased by 
120%, from 45,635 in 1995 to 100,622 in 2010 (figure 1). For 
this report, a defendant is a person with a case disposed in 
the federal courts, while a disposition involves the act of 
terminating the defendant's case through guilty plea or trial 
conviction, dismissal, or acquittal (see Methodology). From 
1995 to 2010, the percentage of federal defendants who were 
detained pretrial increased from 59% to 76%.
 
Data for this report were provided to the Bureau of Justice 
Statistics' (BJS) Federal Justice Statistics Program (FJSP) by 
the Administrative Office of the U.S. Courts' (AOUSC) Office 
of Probation and Pretrial Services Automated Case Tracking 
System (PACTS). The PACTS data cover various aspects of 
pretrial release in the federal district courts, including 
the decision to release or detain a defendant and the 
behavior of defendants while on pretrial release. In 
addition, the data contain detailed information on defendants 
by most serious offense charged and criminal history (see 
Methodology). The PACTS data analyzed for this report include 
defendants whose cases were disposed by the federal courts 
between fiscal years 1995 and 2010.
***********************************************************

***********
Highlights
***********

* The number of defendants with cases disposed in federal 
district courts more than doubled from 45,635 in 1995 to 
100,622 in 2010.

* The percentage of defendants detained prior to case 
disposition increased from 59% in 1995 to 76% in 2010.

* The number of defendants with cases disposed who were 
detained pretrial increased by 184%, from 27,004 in 1995 to 
76,589 in 2010.

* Growth in the number of pretrial detentions was driven 
primarily by immigration caseloads, which increased by 664%, 
from 5,103 cases in 1995 to 39,001 in 2010.

* The percentage of immigration defendants in cases disposed 
who were detained pretrial increased from 86% in 1995 to 98% 
in 2008, before declining to 88% in 2010.

* The percentage of drug defendants detained pretrial 
increased from 76% in 1995 to 84% in 2010.

* Weapons caseloads nearly tripled between 1995 and 2010, and 
the percentage of weapons defendants detained pretrial 
increased from 66% to 86% during the same period.

* For defendants released pretrial, the percentage committing 
pretrial misconduct peaked in 2006 at 22% and then declined 
to a percentage (17%) similar to that in 1995.
***********************************************************

**************************************
Federal defendants detained for the 
duration of a case increased from 42% 
in 1995 to 64% in 2010
**************************************

A defendant could be detained for the duration of a case, 
released after a period of detention, or never be detained 
pretrial. Eighteen percent of defendants were released after 
a period of pretrial detention in 1995 (figure 2). During the 
same year, a similar percentage of defendants were never 
detained (41%) or were detained for the duration of a case 
(42%). Between 1995 and 2010, the percentage of defendants 
never detained declined from 41% to 24%, while the percentage 
detained for the entire duration of a case rose from 42% to 
64%. During this period, the percentage of defendants 
released after a period of detention declined from 18% to 
12%.
***********************************************************

**************************************
Pretrial release and detention in the 
federal criminal justice system
**************************************

Traditionally, courts have used financial bond to ensure that 
an accused person makes all scheduled court appearances and 
does not become a flight risk. In a bond system, persons 
accused of criminal conduct can remain free pending case 
disposition by posting a security bond, usually property or 
money, as a guarantee that they will make all court 
appearances. In most situations, defendants post a bond with 
the court through a deposit bond program or through a bail 
bondsman. Before 1966, the federal courts relied almost 
exclusively on financial bond. The Bail Reform Act of 1966 
reformed federal pretrial practices and deemphasized the use 
of financial bail. The act mandated that federal courts 
release any defendant charged with noncapital offenses on 
either his or her own recognizance or an unsecured appearance 
bond. For cases in which additional supervision was needed, 
the court could impose other conditions necessary to assure 
that a defendant made all court appearances. 

The Bail Reform Act of 1984 (18 U.S.C. § 3141) further 
codified the pretrial release process in the federal courts. 
Under the act, when defendants first appear before a judicial 
officer they may be 1) released on personal recognizance or 
unsecured bond; 2) released subject to conditions imposed by 
the court; 3) temporarily detained to permit deportation, 
exclusion, or the revocation of previously granted 
conditional release; or 4) detained pending the outcome of a 
detention hearing. At a detention hearing, the act required 
the government to prove by clear and convincing evidence that 
no conditions of release would reasonably ensure that the 
defendant would appear for trial and not pose a risk to the 
community. The act also expanded the scope of factors federal 
courts could consider when making pretrial release decisions 
to include the degree of dangerousness that a defendant posed 
to the community.
***********************************************************

**************************************
Between 1995 and 2010, the number 
of defendants detained pretrial 
increased by 184%
**************************************

The number of federal defendants detained at any time in the 
pretrial process increased by 184%, from 27,004 in 1995 to 
76,589 in 2010 (figure 3). Both increases in the number of 
federal case dispositions and the pretrial detention rate 
contributed to the rise in defendants detained pretrial. The 
number of defendants with cases disposed by federal courts 
doubled from 45,635 in 1995 to 100,622 in 2010. The 
percentage of defendants detained prior to case disposition 
increased from 59% in 1995 to 76% in 2010, peaking at 82% in 
2008. In comparison to pretrial detentions, the number of 
defendants released pretrial increased by 35% between 1995 
and 2010.

**************************************
Growth in the number of pretrial 
detentions were driven by immigration 
caseloads, which increased by 664% 
between 1995 and 2010
**************************************

The number of immigration defendants with cases disposed in 
federal courts increased by 664%, from 5,103 in 1995 to 
39,001 in 2010 (table 1). In 2009, immigration was the 
largest category of cases handled by the federal courts. The 
percentage of immigration defendants detained pretrial 
increased from 86% in 1995 to 98% in 2008, before declining 
to 88% in 2010. The combination of rising caseloads and, to a 
much lesser degree, the small increase in the pretrial 
detention rate for immigration defendants resulted in the 
number of immigration defendants detained pretrial increasing 
by 674%, from 4,411 in 1995 to 34,127 in 2010 (figure 4). 

**************************************
Between 1995 and 2010, the percentage 
of drug defendants detained pretrial 
rose from 76% to 84%
**************************************

Between 1995 and 2008, dispositions involving drug cases 
constituted the largest offense category within the federal 
court system, but was surpassed by immigration cases in 2009. 
The number of drug defendants with federal case dispositions 
increased by 54%, from 17,893 in 1995 to 27,555 in 2010. The 
percentage of drug defendants detained prior to case 
disposition increased from 76% in 1995 to 88% in 2008. In 
2009 and 2010, the pretrial detention rate for drug 
defendants declined to 84%--a level last seen in 2002. As a 
result of an increase in case dispositions and an increase in 
the pretrial detention rate, the number of drug defendants 
detained pretrial increased by 72%, from 13,524 in 1995 to 
23,232 in 2010. 

**************************************
Weapons caseloads nearly tripled from 
1995 to 2010, while the percentage of 
these defendants detained pretrial 
increased from 66% to 86%
**************************************

Both the percentage of weapons defendants detained pretrial 
and the number of weapons defendants increased between 1995 
and 2010. The number of defendants charged with weapons 
violations disposed by the federal courts increased by 177%, 
from 2,591 in 1995 to 7,176 in 2010. In 1995, 66% of weapons 
defendants were detained pretrial, while 86% of these 
defendants were detained before case disposition in 2010. The 
growth in the number of defendants with weapons case 
dispositions, combined with an increase in the pretrial 
detention rate for defendants charged with weapons offenses, 
resulted in a 258% increase in the number of defendants 
detained pretrial on weapons charges, from 1,716 in 1995 to 
6,142 in 2010.

***********************************************************

**************************************
Growth in immigration caseloads 
accounted for 60% of the increase 
in the number of federal pretrial 
detentions between 1995 and 2010 
**************************************

Decomposition analysis can be used to assess the contribution 
of each offense category's changing caseloads and pretrial 
detention rates to the 184% growth in federal pretrial 
detentions (see Methodology). This analysis shows that 84% of 
the growth in the number of defendants detained pretrial was 
due to increases in federal caseloads, while changes in the 
pretrial detention rate accounted for 16% of the growth 
(table 2).  

The growth in pretrial detentions can be further decomposed 
by the major federal offense categories. The rise in 
immigration cases contributed to 60% of the overall increase 
in the number of defendants detained pretrial in federal 
district courts between 1995 and 2010. In comparison, the 
change in the pretrial detention rate for immigration 
defendants accounted for 1% of the overall growth in the 
number of defendants detained pretrial. The growth in federal 
drug dispositions accounted for 15% of the overall increase 
in pretrial detentions between 1995 and 2010, while the 
increase in the pretrial detention rate for drug defendants 
contributed to 5% of the overall growth in the number of 
defendants detained pretrial.  The growth in weapons offenses 
contributed to 6% of the overall increase in pretrial 
detentions from 1995 to 2010. In addition, the increasing 
pretrial detention rate for defendants charged with weapons 
offenses accounted for 3% of the growth in the total number 
of defendants detained pretrial.
***********************************************************

**************************************
Defendants with serious or lengthy 
criminal histories had the highest 
percentages of pretrial detention
**************************************

The 1984 Bail Reform Act requires judges and magistrates to 
consider a defendant's criminal history when making pretrial 
detention decisions. Following the guidance of the act, 
defendants with more serious criminal histories should have a 
higher probability of pretrial detention compared to those 
with less substantial criminal backgrounds. This relationship 
between criminal history and pretrial detention is validated 
by the federal data which show that defendants with serious 
or lengthy criminal histories have a greater likelihood of 
pretrial detention than those with less severe criminal 
records. The percentage of defendants detained pretrial in 
1995 was 47% for defendants with no prior arrest history, 63% 
for defendants with two to four prior arrests, and 79% for 
defendants with five or more prior arrests (table 3). In 
2010, 64% of defendants with no prior arrest history were 
detained pretrial, while 79% of defendants with two to four 
prior arrests and 85% of defendants with five or more prior 
arrests were detained prior to case disposition.

**************************************
Criminal history profile of defendants 
processed by federal courts increased 
in severity between 1995 and 2010
**************************************

Another change that has occurred in the federal district 
courts involves the criminal backgrounds of federal 
defendants. Between 1995 and 2010, criminal histories of 
these defendants became more serious. The growth in the 
severity of defendant criminal history is displayed by 
examining changes in the arrest and conviction history of 
federal defendants from 1995 to 2010. In 1995, 39% of 
defendants had no prior arrests, while by 2010, 28% of 
defendants had no prior arrests (figure 5). In comparison, 
the percentage of defendants with five or more prior arrests 
increased from 26% in 1995 to 37% in 2010.

Between 1995 and 2010, prior felony and misdemeanor 
conviction trends among federal defendants mirrored prior 
arrest trends. The percentage of federal defendants with no 
conviction record declined from 51% in 1995 to 40% in 2010 
(figure 6). The percentage of defendants with five or more 
prior felony and misdemeanor convictions increased from 13% 
in 1995 to 20% in 2010.

The nature of federal defendants' criminal convictions also 
became more severe between 1995 and 2010. In 1995, 
34% of federal defendants had a prior felony conviction, 
which increased to 41% by 2010 (figure 7). Fourteen percent 
of defendants had a prior violent felony conviction in 1995, 
while 17% reported a prior violent felony conviction in 2010. 

**************************************
In 2010, the percentage of released 
defendants committing pretrial 
misconduct had declined to levels 
last seen in the mid-1990s
**************************************

For defendants released pretrial, the percentage who 
committed pretrial misconduct peaked in 2006 (22%) and then 
declined to 17% in 2010, returning to a level similar to the 
mid-1990s (table 4). The percentage of released defendants 
that committed technical violations increased from 12% in 
1995 to 19% between 2005 and 2008, then declined to 15% in 
2010.
 
In comparison, the percentage of defendants released pretrial 
who failed to make court appearances or were rearrested for 
new offenses have remained relatively stable. Between 1995 
and 2010, the percentage of released defendants who failed to 
make court appearances ranged from 1% to 3%, and the 
percentage rearrested for felony or misdemeanor offenses 
ranged from 1% to 2%.

************
Methodology
************

**************************************
Federal Justice Statistics Program 
(FJSP)
**************************************

Data used in this report are from the Bureau of Justice 
Statistics' (BJS) Federal Justice Statistics Program (FJSP) 
database. The FJSP is constructed from source files provided 
by the U.S. Marshals Service, Executive Office for U.S. 
Attorneys, Administrative Office of the U.S. Courts (AOUSC), 
United States Sentencing Commission, and Federal Bureau of 
Prisons. In addition to providing data describing defendants 
in cases processed by the federal judiciary, the AOUSC 
provides data describing defendants processed by the federal 
pretrial services agencies and the federal probation and 
supervision service. For more information about the FJSP, see 
Federal Justice Statistics, 2009, NCJ 234184, BJS website, 
December 2011.

**************************************
Office of Probation and Pretrial 
Services Automated Case Tracking 
System (PACTS)
**************************************

For this report, all tables were created from data in the 
AOUSC's Office of Probation and Pretrial Services Automated 
Case Tracking System (PACTS), which were subsequently 
processed for the FJSP. The PACTS data contain information on 
defendants interviewed, investigated, or supervised by 
federal pretrial services. The information covers defendants' 
pretrial hearings, detentions, and releases from the time 
they were interviewed through the disposition of their cases 
in federal district courts. The data describe defendants 
processed by federal pretrial service agencies within each 
district. Defendants who received pretrial services through a 
local, nonfederal agency were excluded. Since the District of 
Columbia operates its pretrial services agency separately 
from the AOUSC, data describing defendants prosecuted in the 
U.S. district court for the District of Columbia but 
processed by the D.C. pretrial services agency were excluded 
in this analysis.

The data include defendants who were under the jurisdiction 
of federal pretrial services during fiscal years 1995 through 
2010, and whose cases were filed by complaint, indictment, or 
information. Federal pretrial service agencies have 
jurisdiction over both released and detained defendants from 
the time of arrest until their case is disposed by federal 
courts. A disposition occurs through a guilty plea or trial 
conviction, dismissal, or acquittal. For this report, the 
totals include records for defendants whose offense or other 
attributes were missing or unknown.

Offenses in the PACTS are based on the most serious charged 
offense, as determined by the probation officer responsible 
for interviewing the defendant. The probation officer 
classifies the major offense charged into AOUSC four-digit 
offense codes. For defendants charged with more than one 
offense on an indictment, the probation officer chooses the 
major charged offense as the one carrying the most severe 
penalty or, in the case of two or more charges carrying the 
same penalty, the one with the greatest offense severity. The 
offense severity is determined by the AOUSC, which ranks 
offenses according to the maximum sentence, type of crime, 
and maximum fine amount. These four-digit codes are then 
aggregated into the primary offense charges used in both the 
Federal Justice Statistics series and this report.

**************************************
Defining pretrial detention within 
the PACTS data
**************************************

Defendants are identified as detained pretrial if they were 
detained at any time during the period between the initial 
appearance hearing and case disposition. A detained defendant 
may have been detained at the initial appearance hearing and 
released at the detention or bond hearing, or detained for 
the entire duration of a case. For this report, defendants 
detained at any time before case disposition, including those 
initially detained and then subsequently released, are 
counted as detained. Due to this method of counting detained 
defendants, it is not possible to obtain totals for 
defendants with federal court dispositions by summing the 
numbers of released and detained defendants. Figure 1 
provides annual totals for the number of defendants with 
federal dispositions.

In addition, the percentage of detained defendants reported 
in BJS's Federal Justice Statistics reports for fiscal years 
2008 and 2009 will differ from those in this report due to 
recent adjustments with the PACTS data. For the 2008 and 2009 
reports, defendants were identified as being detained 
pretrial only if they were detained during the initial 
appearance or detention hearing stages of a criminal case. 
Pretrial detentions did not cover defendants detained after 
these events. The 2008 and 2009 PACTS files analyzed for this 
report were adjusted so that defendants detained anytime 
during the course of a case were coded as detained pretrial. 
This method of identifying detained defendants encompasses a 
broader range of pretrial detentions and is similar to those 
used in BJS's Federal Justice Statistics reports that were 
published prior to 2008. For more information, see Federal 
Justice Statistics, 2008 - Statistical Tables, NCJ 231822, 
BJS website, November 2008, and Federal Justice Statistics, 
2009, NCJ 234184, BJS website, December 2011.

**************************************
Decomposing trends in the number of 
defendants detained pretrial
**************************************

Changes to the number of defendants detained pretrial were 
decomposed between growth in the number of pretrial case 
depositions and increasing pretrial detention rates. The 
decomposition approach works by calculating the percentage 
change in the number of pretrial detentions from one fiscal 
year to the next as conditioned on changes in the number of 
federal dispositions and the percentages of pretrial 
detention for each offense category. The change in the number 
of pretrial detentions can be expressed as a conditional 
probability of changes in the number of violent, property, 
drug, public-order, weapons, and immigration dispositions 
between two points of time and changes in the pretrial 
detention rates for each of these offense categories between 
two time points.
 
Changes in the number of defendants detained pretrial between 
any two time points can be expressed through the following 
equation:

ΔPD=(V2Rv2-V1Rv1)+(P2Rp2-P1Rp1)+(D2Rd2-D1Rd1)+(O2Ro2-
O1Ro1)+(W2Rw2-W1Rw1)+(I2Ri2-I1Ri1)

Where:

ΔPD = change in the number of defendants detained pretrial 
between time 2 and time 1.

V2 = Number of violent dispositions, time 2.

V1 = Number of violent dispositions, time 1.

P2 = Number of property dispositions, time 2.

P1 = Number of property dispositions, time 1.

D2 = Number of drug dispositions, time 2.

D1 = Number of drug dispositions, time 1.

O2 = Number of public-order dispositions, time 2.

O1 = Number of public-order dispositions, time 1.

W2 = Number of weapons dispositions, time 2. 

W1 = Number of weapons dispositions, time 1.

I2 = Number of immigration dispositions, time 2.

I1 = Number of immigration dispositions, time 1.

R2 = Pretrial detention rate per offense category (e.g., 

Rv2, Rp2, Rd2, Ro2, Rw2, Ri2), time 2.

R1 = Pretrial detention rate per offense category (e.g., 

Rv1, Rp1, Rd1, Ro1, Rw1, Ri1), time 1.

The equation can then be rearranged into the following: 

ΔPD=[(V2-V1)(Rv1)+(V2)(Rv2-Rv1)]+[(P2-P1)(Rp1)+
(P2)(Rp2-Rp1)]+[(D2-D1)(Rd1)+(D2)(Rd2-Rd1)]+
[(O2-O1)(Ro1)+(O2)(Ro2-Ro1)]+[(W2-W1)(Rw1)+
(W2)(Rw2-Rw1)]+[(I2-I1)(Ri1)+I2(Ri2-Ri1)]

The first part of the equation [(V2-V1)(Rv1)+(V2)(Rv2-Rv1)] 
measures the contribution of violent offenses to the overall 
change in the number of pretrial detentions between time 1 
and time 2. The first term (V2-V1)(Rv1) calculates the 
contribution of the change in the number of violent 
dispositions between the two time points, while the term 
(V2)(Rv2-Rv1) calculates the contribution of the change in 
the pretrial detention rate for violent offenses between the 
two time points. The second part of the equation [(P2-
P1)(Rp1)+(P2)(Rp2-Rp1)] calculates the contribution of the 
property offense category to the changes in the pretrial 
detention numbers, and so on. 

************
Key terms
************

Detained defendant--Defendant is counted as detained if the 
courts detains him or her any time during the period from 
initial appearance hearing to case disposition. In some 
instances, a defendant will be detained and then released at 
a later time. Under this definition, that defendant is 
counted as detained.

Federal court disposition--The act of terminating a case 
proceeding through a guilty plea or trial conviction, 
dismissal, or acquittal. The defendant is no longer under 
supervision of the federal pretrial authority after 
disposition.

Defendant (unit of analysis)--In the Federal Justice 
Statistics Program, the unit of analysis is a combination of 
a person and a case. For example, if the same person is 
involved in three different criminal cases during the period 
specified in this report, then these cases are counted as 
three defendants, or three cases disposed. Similarly, a 
single criminal case involving four defendants is counted as 
four cases disposed.
 
Initial appearance--The first time that a defendant charged 
with a federal offense appears before a federal judicial 
officer, typically a magistrate judge. At the initial 
appearance stage, the defendant can either be released 
pretrial or detained for additional hearings. For those 
defendants not released at initial appearance, pretrial 
release can occur at subsequent events including detention or 
bond hearings, or the defendant can be held for the duration 
of the entire case. 

Pretrial misconduct--Instances in which a released defendant 
violated their pretrial release conditions. 

The following types of events are included under pretrial 
misconduct: 

Technical violation--Events in which the defendant failed to 
comply with their pretrial release conditions, including 
failing a drug test, failing to maintain or seek employment, 
refusing to maintain contact with a pretrial supervision 
officer, or violating weapons prohibitions. 

Failure to appear--Occurs when a defendant misses a scheduled 
court appearance.
 
Rearrest for new offenses--Occurs when a defendant is 
rearrested for felony or misdemeanor offenses committed while 
out on pretrial release.

**************************************
Definitions of major offense categories
**************************************

Violent offenses--Threatening, attempting, or actually using 
physical force against a person. Includes murder, negligent 
manslaughter, assault, robbery, sexual abuse, kidnapping, and 
threats against the President.

Property offenses, fraudulent--Property offenses that involve 
elements of deceit or intentional misrepresentation. These 
offenses specifically include embezzlement, fraud (excluding 
tax fraud), forgery, and counterfeiting.

Property offenses, non-fraudulent--Violent offenses against 
property, including burglary, larceny, motor vehicle theft, 
arson, transportation of stolen property, and other property 
offenses, such as the destruction of property and 
trespassing. These offenses are termed non-fraudulent to 
distinguish them from the category of property offenses, 
fraudulent, within the glossary.

Property offenses, other--Offenses that involve the 
destruction of property moving in interstate or foreign 
commerce and in the possession of a common or contract 
carrier. Also includes the malicious destruction of 
government property, or injury to United States postal 
property such as to mailboxes or mailbags. Trespassing on 
timber and government lands is also included in this offense 
category.

Drug offenses--Offenses under federal or state laws 
prohibiting the manufacture, import, export, distribution, or 
dispensing of a controlled or counterfeit substance, or the 
possession of a controlled or counterfeit substance with the 
intent to manufacture, import, export, distribute, or 
dispense the substance. Drug offenses include using any 
communication facilities that cause or facilitate a felony 
under title 21, or furnishing fraudulent or false information 
concerning prescriptions, as well as any other unspecified 
drug-related offense. See also, distribution, possession, and 
drug trafficking.

Drug distribution--Delivery (other than by administering or 
dispensing) of a controlled substance. The term "controlled 
substance" means any drug or other substance, or immediate 
precursor, included in schedule I, II, III, IV, or V of part 
B of subchapter I of Chapter 13 (Drug Abuse, Prevention, and 
Control), Title 21 (Food and Drugs). The term does not 
include distilled spirits, wine, malt beverages, or tobacco, 
as those terms are defined or used in subtitle E of the 
Internal Revenue Code of 1986.

Drug trafficking--Knowingly and intentionally importing or 
exporting any controlled substance in schedule I, II, III, 
IV, or V (as defined by 21 U.S.C. § 812). Drug trafficking 
includes manufacturing, distributing, dispensing, selling, or 
possessing with the intent to manufacture, distribute, or 
sell a controlled substance or a counterfeit substance. It 
also includes exporting any controlled substance in schedules 
I through V, and the manufacture or distribution of a 
controlled substance in schedule I or II, for the purposes of 
unlawful importation. Also includes the making or 
distributing of any punch, die, plate, stone, or any other 
thing designed to reproduce the label upon any drug or 
container, or removing or obliterating the label or symbol of 
any drug or container. Knowingly opening, maintaining, or 
managing any place for manufacturing, distributing, or using 
any controlled substance are also included in drug 
trafficking.

Drug possession--An offense involving the possession of a 
controlled substance, acquiring a controlled substance by 
misrepresentation or fraud, attempting or conspiring to 
possess, or simple possession of a controlled substance in 
schedules I through V, as defined by 21 U.S.C. § 812. 
Includes possession of a controlled substance in schedule I 
or II, or a narcotic drug in schedule III or IV onboard a 
United States vessel or vessels within custom waters of the 
United States, or by any United States citizen on board a 
vessel. In addition, possessing any punch, die, plate, stone, 
or any other thing designed to reproduce the label upon any 
drug or container is an offense under this category. 
Distributing a small amount of marijuana for no remuneration 
is treated as simple possession and is included in this 
offense category.

Public-order offenses, regulatory--Violations of regulatory 
laws and regulations in agriculture, antitrust, labor law, 
food and drug, motor carrier, and other regulatory offenses 
that are not specifically listed in the category public-order 
offenses, non-regulatory.

Public-order offenses, non-regulatory--Offenses concerning 
tax law violations (tax fraud); bribery; perjury; national 
defense; escape; racketeering and extortion; gambling; 
liquor; mailing or transporting of obscene materials; 
traffic; migratory birds; conspiracy, aiding and abetting, 
and jurisdictional offenses; and other public-order offenses. 
These offenses are termed non-regulatory to distinguish them 
from the category public-order offenses, regulatory within 
this glossary.

Public-order offenses, other--Violations of laws pertaining 
to bigamy, disorderly conduct on the United States Capitol 
grounds, civil disorder, and travel to incite to riot. Also 
included in public-order offenses, non-regulatory.

Weapons violation offenses--Violations of any provisions of 
18 U.S.C. §§ 922 (unlawful acts) and 923 (licensing) with 
regard to the manufacturing, importing, possessing, 
receiving, and licensing of firearms and ammunition. Includes 
manufacturing, selling, possessing, or transporting any 
switchblade knife; or making, receiving, possessing, or 
transporting a firearm not registered in the National 
Firearms Registration Transfer Record within any territory or 
possession of the United States, within Indian country, or 
within the special maritime and territorial jurisdiction of 
the United States. Also, engaging in importing, 
manufacturing, or dealing in firearms if not registered with 
the secretary in the Internal Revenue Service District in 
which the business is conducted or not having paid a special 
occupational tax. In addition, this code covers cases wherein 
a crime of violence or drug trafficking enhanced punishment 
is handed down when the crime was committed with a deadly 
weapon.

Immigration offenses--Offenses involving illegal entry into 
the United States, illegally reentering the United States 
after deportation, willfully failing to deport when so 
ordered, willfully remaining beyond days allowed on 
conditional permit, or falsely representing oneself to be a 
United States citizen. Immigration offenses include 
violations relating to provisions for special agricultural 
workers and to provisions relating to limitations on 
immigrant status such as employment. Also includes bringing 
in or harboring any aliens not duly admitted by an 
immigration officer.

********************************************************
The Bureau of Justice Statistics is the statistical 
agency of the U.S. Department of Justice. William J. Sabol 
is the acting director.

This report was written by Thomas H. Cohen. Mark Motivans 
verified the report. Barbara Parthasarathy of the Urban 
Institute provided comments.

Brian Higgins of Lockheed Martin, Jill Thomas, and Morgan 
Young edited the report, and Barbara Quinn and Morgan Young 
produced the report under the supervision of Doris J. James.

February 2013, NCJ 239673
********************************************************

******************************************************
Office of Justice Programs * Innovation * Partnerships 
* Safer Neighborhoods * http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov
******************************************************
______________________
2/12/13/JER/12:35pm


