U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Programs
Bureau of Justice Statistics
-----------------------------------------------------------------

This file is text only without graphics and many of the 
tables. A Zip archive of the tables in this report in
spreadsheet format (.csv) and the full report including
tables and graphics in .pdf format are available on BJS
website at: 
http://www.bjs.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbdetail&iid=5827

This report is one in a series. More recent editions 
may be available. To view a list of all in the series 
go to http://www.bjs.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbse&sid=75
-----------------------------------------------------------------

**********
Bulletin
*********

*********************************
Publicly Funded Forensic Crime
Laboratories: Resources and
Services, 2014
*********************************

Matthew R. Durose and Andrea M. Burch, BJS Statisticians
Kelly Walsh and Emily Tiry, Urban Institute

In 2014, the nation’s 409 crime labs received an estimated 3.8 
million requests for forensic services, down from the 4 million 
requests received in 2009 (figure 1). The analysis of controlled 
substances, biological samples collected from convicted offenders 
and arrestees for a DNA database, and toxicology accounted for 
about 3 in 4 requests submitted to crime labs in both 2009 and 
2014.

This report summarizes data from the Bureau of Justice 
Statistics’ (BJS) 2014 Census of Publicly Funded Forensic Crime 
Laboratories (CPFFCL) and provides comparisons with data from 
prior years. It focuses on the forensic services performed by 
crime labs across the nation and the resources devoted to 
completing the work. For information on accreditations, 
proficiency tests, and other quality assurances within publicly 
operated labs, see Publicly Funded Forensic Crime Laboratories: 
Quality Assurance Practices, 2014 (NCJ 250152, BJS web,
November 2016).

****************************************************
***************
HIGHLIGHTS
****************

* Publicly funded crime labs received an estimated 3.8 million 
forensic requests in 2014 and completed 3.6 million requests that 
year (which included requests received prior to 2014).

* At the end of 2014, U.S. crime labs had an estimated backlog of 
570,100 requests for forensic services--a decline from 895,500 
backlogged requests at yearend 2009.

* DNA database samples from convicted offenders and arrestees 
made up 39% of requests to federal labs, 36% of state labs, and 
less than 5% of requests to county and municipal labs.

* Thirty-eight percent of publicly funded crime labs outsourced 
one or more types of forensic services during 2014.

* Publicly funded crime labs employed 14,300 full-time personnel 
in 2014.

* The combined operating budgets for publicly funded crime labs 
in 2014 was $1.7 billion.
*****************************************************

Publicly funded forensic crime labs examine and report on 
physical evidence collected during criminal investigations for 
federal, state, and local jurisdictions. Crime labs perform a 
variety of forensic analyses and receive requests for these 
services from criminal justice agencies, such as police 
departments, prosecutors offices, courts, and correctional 
facilities. The ability of a lab to handle its forensic workload
depends on many factors, including the complexity of the 
procedures and the availability of analysts and other resources.

************************************
Most crime labs provided forensic 
services in multiple disciplines 
************************************

Publicly funded crime labs provided an average of five different 
forensic functions in 2014 (not shown) (See Methodology for 
definitions of forensic functions.) Since 2002, crime labs most 
commonly performed analyses of controlled substances.
Eighty-one percent of crime labs handled the identification of
illegal drugs and other controlled substances in 2014 (table 1) 
Among crime labs that processed controlled substances,
9 in 10 analyzed synthetic cannabinoids (e.g., Spice or K2) and 
synthetic cathinones (e.g., bath salts) in 2014 (not shown).

Sixty-two percent of crime labs analyzed biological samples, such 
as blood and saliva, during 2014. Sixty-one percent analyzed 
forensic biology collected during criminal casework from crime 
scenes, victims, or suspects, and 16% analyzed biological samples 
collected from convicted offenders and arrestees for inclusion in 
a local, state, or national DNA database (not shown). Crime labs 
enter DNA profiles from criminal casework, convicted offenders, 
and arrestees into the FBI’s Combined DNA Index System (CODIS). 
CODIS software allows crime labs to compare biological evidence 
collected from criminal investigations to DNA profiles stored in 
a database for the purpose of linking serial crimes together and 
identifying suspects. All 50 states, the District of Columbia, 
and the federal government require offenders convicted of certain 
crimes to provide DNA samples. Some jurisdictions must also 
collect DNA from certain arrestees. In 2014, state labs (25%) 
were more likely than county (9%) and municipal (4%) labs to 
analyze biological samples collected from convicted offenders and 
arrestees for a DNA database (table 2).

Among crime labs that handled forensic biology requests in 2014, 
15% conducted familial searching of a DNA database for the 
purpose of identifying close biological relatives to an unknown 
DNA profile collected from a crime scene (not shown). Three 
percent of crime labs that performed forensic biology services in 
2014 reported using a Rapid DNA instrument, which provided a 
fully automated method to develop a DNA profile for a database.

The majority (63%) of crime labs analyzed latent (or hidden) 
fingerprints recovered from crime scenes. About 8 in 10 (82%) of 
these labs used the FBI’s Integrated Automated Fingerprint 
Identification System to perform latent fingerprint comparisons 
in 2014 (not shown). Overall, nearly half (48%) of crime labs 
examined trace evidence in 2014. Among these crime labs, 70% 
performed fire debris analysis, 44% conducted hair examinations, 
and 38% analyzed gunshot residue (table 3).

*****************************************
Crime labs received nearly 4 million 
requests for forensic services in 2014
*****************************************

Crime labs play a critical role in the justice system, analyzing 
millions of pieces of evidence from criminal investigations each 
year. A criminal case may generate more than one type of request 
to process or analyze evidence. For example, a crime lab may 
receive fingerprints and DNA evidence from the same case, which 
requires two separate requests for analysis by different sections 
of the lab.

The CPFFCL asked labs to provide the total number of requests 
received and completed within their facility for each forensic 
service. Completed requests included those received prior to and 
during 2014. Submitting agencies sometimes canceled requests 
before labs completed them because services were no longer needed 
(e.g., law enforcement solved or closed the case). The CPFFCL 
defined a pending forensic request as backlogged if it was not 
completed within 30 days.

In 2014, the nation’s 409 crime labs received an estimated 3.8 
million new requests for forensic services and completed 3.6 
million requests (table 4). About three-quarters of requests 
received in 2014 were for either analysis of controlled 
substances (33%), biological samples collected from convicted 
offenders and arrestees for a database of DNA profiles (24%), and 
toxicology (15%). Forensic biology casework accounted for a 
larger proportion of the overall number of requests received in 
2014 (9%) than in 2009 (6%).

********************************************
More than half of all requests for 
forensic services were sent to state labs
********************************************

In 2014, more than half (2.2 million) of the estimated 3.8 
million requests for forensic services received by publicly 
funded crime labs nationwide were submitted to state labs (table 
5). Labs serving county and municipal jurisdictions received 1.4 
million forensic requests in 2014.

The composition of the forensic work handled by U.S. crime labs 
during 2014 varied among those serving federal, state, county, 
and municipal jurisdictions. Toxicology requests accounted for 
25% of the requests received by county labs, compared to less 
than 10% received by federal and municipal labs. In comparison, 
biological samples collected from convicted offenders and 
arrestees for a database of DNA profiles comprised 39% of 
requests made to federal labs and 36% of requests to state labs, 
compared to less than 5% of requests to county (1%) and municipal 
(4%) labs. Crime scene investigations accounted for 17% of 
requests made to municipal labs, compared to 9% of requests to 
county labs and less than 1% of requests to state and federal 
labs.

Publicly funded crime labs had a backlog of 570,100 requests for 
forensic services at yearend 2014, down from 895,500 backlogged 
requests at yearend 2009 (table 6). Biological samples collected 
from convicted offenders or arrestees for a DNA database that 
were backlogged decreased from 502,500 at yearend 2009 to 64,800 
at yearend 2014. The FBI crime lab reported the majority of these 
backlogged requests in 2009 because of an increase in the 
collection of DNA samples as mandated by federal legislation. 
Since 2009, the FBI crime lab has reduced its backlog of requests 
for DNA samples taken from convicted offenders and arrestees. The 
overall reduction in DNA samples led to a decline in the overall 
number of backlogged requests within U.S. crime labs observed at 
yearend 2009. The DNA samples collected from convicted offenders 
and arrestees for a database of DNA profiles made up 11% of all 
backlogged requests at yearend 2014. Forensic biology casework 
samples accounted for 19% of the overall backlog at yearend 2014.

The CPFFCL asked labs about requests to process forensic biology 
from sexual assault cases. Not all labs that handled forensic 
biology requests were able to separately report how many 
received, completed, or backlogged requests were from sexual 
assault cases. In the 2014 CPFFCL, 135 labs reported receiving an 
estimated 45,000 requests to process sexual assault evidence 
during 2014 and completed about 43,000 of these types of requests 
that year (not shown). The requests completed in 2014 included 
evidence collected before and during 2014. At yearend 2014, 128 
crime labs reported approximately 9,000 backlogged requests to 
process sexual assault evidence.

********************************************
About 4 in 10 labs outsourced some 
forensic work in 2014
********************************************

To address the demands for forensic services, some publicly 
funded crime labs outsourced work to private labs or other public 
facilities. Thirty-eight percent of publicly funded crime labs 
outsourced one or more types of forensic services in 2014, up 
from 28% in 2009 (table 7). During 2014, municipal labs (60%) 
were more likely than federal (28%) and state (23%) labs to 
outsource requests for services. Publicly funded crime labs that 
outsourced requests to private or other public labs in 2014 were 
most likely to outsource toxicology analysis (68%) and forensic 
biology casework (55%) (table 8).

********************************************
More than 14,000 full-time employees 
worked in crime labs in 2014
********************************************

Overall, the combined operating budgets for the 409 crime labs in 
2014 was $1.7 billion (table 9). Labs serving state jurisdictions 
accounted for nearly half ($796 million) of the overall budget in 
2014. Labs with 25 or more employees accounted for more than 80% 
of the total combined budget nationwide. Typical expenditures 
among crime labs include personnel (salaries and fringe 
benefits), supplies, equipment, and construction costs. In 
addition to their budgets, crime labs received funding from other 
sources, such as grants and fees. In 2014, about 4 in 10 crime 
labs charged the submitting agencies fees for completing the 
forensic services (not shown).

Publicly funded crime labs employed 14,300 full-time personnel in 
2014, an increase from 11,000 in the 351 labs operating in 2002 
(table 10). Nearly half (6,600) of these employees in 2014 worked 
in state-operated labs. In 2014, the majority (59%) of crime labs 
had 24 or fewer employees (not shown). The mean number of full-
time lab employees was 35, and the median number was 20 employees 
per lab. Twenty-six percent of federal labs, 19% of state labs, 
and 18% of county and municipal labs had 100 or more employees in 
2014. In 2014, more than half (60%) of crime lab employees were 
analysts or examiners who prepared and analyzed evidence and 
reported on their conclusions (table 11). The majority of 
analysts were intermediate- or senior-level employees. Municipal 
and county labs were more likely than state and federal labs to 
employ crime scene technicians, who record and collect evidence 
from crime scenes and submit that evidence to a crime lab for 
analysis.

***************
Methodology
***************

Overview
**********

The Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS) periodically conducts the 
Census of Publicly Funded Forensic Crime Laboratories (CPFFCL) to 
collect data on crime lab services, budgets, staffing, workload, 
outsourcing, and quality assurance practices. The data collection 
is directed to federal, state, county, and municipal crime labs 
that are funded solely by the government or whose parent 
organization is a government agency. The CPFFCL includes agencies 
that employ one or more full-time scientists (1) with a minimum 
of a bachelor’s degree in chemistry, physics, biology, 
criminalistics, or a closely related forensic science field, and 
(2) whose principal function is examining physical evidence in 
criminal matters and providing reports and testimony to courts of 
law regarding such evidence.

About half of the crime labs included in the CPFFCL were part of 
a multi-lab system (two or more physically separate facilities 
that were overseen by a single organization). The CPFFCL 
attempted to collect information from each lab in multi-lab 
systems. The CPFFCL did not include operations that engage 
exclusively in evidence collection and documentation, such as 
fingerprint recovery and development, crime scene response, and 
photography. In addition, the census did not collect data on the 
forensic services performed by police identification units 
outside of the crime lab, and it also did not include privately 
operated crime labs.

Data collection and response rate
**********************************

BJS conducted its fourth CPFFCL to collect detailed information 
on the workload and operations of the nation’s 409 crime labs 
during 2014 and to examine changes since the previous censuses 
conducted in 2002, 2005, and 2009. The CPFFCL population frame 
and questionnaire were developed by BJS and the Urban Institute 
with input from the American Society of Crime Laboratory 
Directors and researchers and practitioners in the forensic 
science field. BJS pretested the CPFFCL questionnaire on a small 
sample of labs representing facilities of different sizes and 
governmental affiliations. 

In April 2015, the Urban Institute initiated the data collection 
on behalf of BJS through a web-based data collection interface 
and mailed questionnaire. Follow-up emails and phone calls were 
made to nonrespondents and labs that submitted incomplete 
questionnaires. Of the 409 eligible crime labs that received the 
questionnaire, 360 (88%) provided responses to at least some of 
the items (table 12). ***Footnote * Of the 351 crime labs in the 
2002 CPFFCL, 306 (87%) provided responses to the 2002 questionnaire. 
Of the 389 crime labs in the 2005 CPFFCL, 351 (90%) provided 
responses to the questionnaire. Of the 411 crime labs surveyed 
in the 2009 CPFFCL, 397 (97%) provided responses to that data 
collection.*** Of the 360 respondents, 351 (98%) completed the 
questionnaire through the automated web system. The 2014 CPFFCL 
response rate ranged from 72% for federal labs to 94% for state labs.

Methods for producing national estimates
*********************************************

To generate national estimates for this report, BJS used several 
imputation methods to account for missing data among labs that 
did not respond to either the entire CPFFCL questionnaire (unit-
level response) or certain questions (item-level response). 
Because the CPFFCL data collection was a census with no sampling, 
each crime lab was initially self-representing and had a design 
weight of 1. BJS developed weighting class adjustments for the 
2002, 2005, 2009, and 2014 CPFFCL data to compensate for unit 
nonresponse and reduce nonresponse bias. Sixteen subpopulations 
of labs were stratified into groups by crossing four categories 
of jurisdiction (federal, state, county, and municipal) and four 
categories of staff size (9 or fewer, 10 to 24, 25 to 49, and 50 
or more). A seventeenth stratum was assigned to the FBI crime 
laboratory, given its unique size of more than 500 employees. 
Within each of the subgroups, statistical weights were applied to 
the data from the crime labs that responded to the census to 
allow their responses to represent the labs that did not respond.

In addition to adjusting for unit nonresponse through the use of 
weighting class adjustments, BJS also imputed for item 
nonresponse. BJS measured staff size by full-time equivalent 
employees and included both full-time and part-time employees 
with part-time employees weighted by 0.5. For the labs that 
responded to the CPFFCL but did not report employee data, 
imputations were made for the count- and percentage-based 
measures using their employee data reported in the other CPFFCL 
data collections. If that information was not available, BJS used 
the median staff size in 2014 among labs of similar jurisdiction. 
Among the 360 labs that responded to the 2014 CPFFCL, 339 
reported their 2014 employee total. For the 22 labs that did not 
report their 2014 staff total, the previous reported staff total 
was used. Estimates for the 2002, 2005, and 2009 CPFFCL were 
generated using similar imputation methods. When employee totals 
from other CPFFCL data collections were not available to account 
for item nonresponse, the median staff size of labs of similar 
jurisdiction was used.

When a crime lab responded to the CPFFCL questionnaire but was 
unable to provide budget data, imputations were made for the 
count- and percentage-based measures using their budget data from 
the other CPFFCL data collections. If that information was 
unavailable, the lab’s staff size was multiplied by the median 
ratio of budgets per employee for labs of similar jurisdiction 
and size. Among the 360 labs that responded to the 2014 CPFFCL, 
331 reported their 2014 budget. Twenty-four labs did not report 
their 2014 budget and the previous reported budget was used. Five 
labs did not report their 2014 or previous budget and the median 
ratio of budgets per employee was used.

When a crime lab responded to the CPFFCL questionnaire but did 
not provide data on the number and types of requests received, 
completed, and backlogged, data imputations were made for the 
count- and percentage-based measures within each category of a 
forensic function they performed that year. Depending on the 
availability of data, imputations for requests received and 
completed were based on either information provided in the other 
CPFFCL data collections or on the median number of requests among 
labs of similar size and jurisdiction. Depending on the 
availability of information, imputations for backlogs were made 
using the number of pending requests in 2014, the number of 
backlogged requests reported in the other CPFFCL data 
collections, or the median backlog among labs of similar size and 
jurisdiction.

When a crime lab responded to the CPFFCL questionnaire but could 
not provide data on outsourcing requests for services, BJS used 
sequential hot-deck imputation procedures to impute the missing 
responses for 2002, 2005, 2009, and 2014. Sequential hot-deck 
imputation replaces a missing value with a response provided by a 
crime lab with similar characteristics. Data on outsourcing were 
reported by 93% of the 360 labs responding to the 2014 CPFFCL,
98% of the 397 labs responding to the 2009 CPFFCL, 76% of the 351 
labs responding to the 2005 CPFFCL, and 88% of the 306 labs 
responding to the 2002 CPFFCL. BJS grouped both respondents and 
nonrespondents into the strata previously described and then 
sorted within each stratum by the number of forensic functions 
each lab performed. Once the list of crime labs was sorted within 
strata, the respondents provided donor responses for 
nonrespondents using the nearest neighbor method. This method 
identifies and replaces a missing value with the response donated 
from the lab listed immediately prior to the lab with missing 
data. If the donor listed immediately prior to the lab with 
missing data also had a missing response, BJS imputed a response 
from a donor listed immediately after the lab with the missing 
value. BJS repeated the process of going backwards and forwards 
to obtain donated responses from neighbors until all missing 
values were imputed.

Comparability to prior reports
*******************************

Except for count-based estimates for staff size, budget, and 
workload, data presented in the 2002, 2005, and 2009 CPFFCL 
reports were not adjusted for unit or item nonresponse. Estimates 
presented in this report may be different from previously 
presented data because some adjustments for unit or item 
nonresponse were made. For example, Census of Publicly Funded 
Forensic Crime Laboratories, 2009 (NCJ 238252, BJS web, August 
2012) reported that 31% of municipal crime labs outsourced 
forensic services in 2009. However, this publication reported 
that 32% of municipal crime labs outsourced forensic services in 
2009. In the August 2012 report, data on outsourcing were based 
on 389 crime labs (of the 397 labs that responded to the 2009 
CPFFCL). In this report, 2009 data have been adjusted to account 
for nonresponse and represent all 411 crime labs in the 2009 
CPFFCL. In addition to the revisions to the workload estimates 
based on the new imputation procedures, the overall number of 
requests received, completed, and backlogged in 2009 for forensic 
biology casework reported in Census of Publicly Funded Forensic 
Crime Laboratories, 2009 were adjusted because of a revision in 
the information collected from the FBI crime lab.

Conducting tests of statistical significance
***********************************************

BJS conducted tests to determine whether differences in the 
estimates were statistically significant. All differences 
discussed in this report are statistically significant at or 
above the 95% confidence interval. Standard errors were generated 
using SPSS statistical software that estimates variance for 
complex survey designs. The standard errors for the tables and 
figures are presented in appendix tables. These standard error 
estimates may be used to construct confidence intervals around 
percentages in this report. For example, the 95% confidence 
interval around the percentage of crime labs that outsourced 
requests for services in 2014 is 38% ± 1.96 × 0.9% (or 
approximately 1.8%), where 38% is the point estimate in table 6 
and 0.9% is the standard error in appendix table 7.

The standard errors may also be used to test the significance of 
the difference between two statistics by pooling the standard 
errors of the two estimates. For example, the standard error of 
the difference between state and county crime labs that 
outsourced requests for services in 2014 is 3.9% (or the square 
root of the sum of the squared standard errors for each group). 
The 95% confidence interval around the difference is 1.96 × 2% 
(or 3.9%). Because the observed difference of 31% (54% minus 23%) 
is greater than 3.9%, the difference is considered statistically 
significant.

Pilot study of digital evidence laboratories
********************************************************

BJS expanded the 2014 CPFFCL from previous data collections to 
include a pilot study of agencies that solely analyze digital and 
multimedia evidence in support of criminal investigations and 
prosecutions. Law enforcement agencies obtain digital evidence in 
various formats, including audio, video, and graphical images 
from computers, cell phones, cameras, and other electronic 
devices. The traditional CPFFCL definition of a crime lab limited 
the information collected about digital evidence. Some crime labs 
only handle this type of evidence and employ forensic experts 
with training in computer science or information technology as 
opposed to natural sciences. The expanded scope of the 2014 
CPFFCL included additional questions related to the analysis of 
digital evidence. BJS will use the results of this pilot study to 
inform future data collections directed toward criminal justice 
agencies that process forensic evidence.

Definitions
*************

Analyst/examiner--an investigator who inspects, analyzes, and 
interprets physical evidence, writes reports, and delivers 
testimony in court about the evidence.

Backlogged request--a request that has been submitted to a 
specialized area of the crime laboratory and is not completed 
within 30 days.

Controlled substance analysis--the identification of drugs and 
other substances whose possession or use, in either legal or 
illicit dosages, is restricted by the government.

Crime scene analysis--the identification, documentation, 
collection, and interpretation of physical evidence at a location 
external to a laboratory facility and where a suspected crime has 
occurred.

Digital evidence--the investigation of various types of analog or 
multimedia evidence, such as the recovery, extraction, and 
analysis of computer files, film, tape, and magnetic and optical 
media.

Firearms analysis--the examination and comparison of evidence 
resulting from the discharge or use of firearms.

Forensic biology--includes the discipline areas of biology 
screening and DNA analysis. Biology screening is the examination 
of evidence for the presence of stains from blood, saliva and 
other physiological fluids. DNA analysis is the process used to 
develop a DNA profile from convicted offenders or arrestees as 
required by federal and state laws or casework samples collected 
from crime scenes, victims, or suspects.

Impressions analysis--the identification, documentation, 
collection, and interpretation of two- and three-dimensional 
impressions and imprints found at crime scenes (including shoes 
and tires).

Latent prints analysis--the development or comparison of finger 
or palm print impressions.

Municipal--cities, towns, villages, and boroughs.

Questioned documents analysis--the examination of printed, typed, 
or written material for the purpose of identifying the source or 
determining alterations, or other means of gaining information 
about the item or the circumstances surrounding its production.

Request--the submission of physical evidence from a case to a 
single specialized area of a crime laboratory. Multiple 
submissions of new evidence from the same case to one or more 
sections of the laboratory are counted as separate requests.

Synthetic cannabinoids--synthetically produced compounds that 
mimic naturally occurring cannabinoids. These compounds are added 
to some other substrate, marketed as “spice” or herbal incense 
products, and are used illicitly for their psycho-active 
properties.

Synthetic cathinones--a cathinone is a compound naturally found 
in the khat plant. When produced synthetically, these compounds 
are marketed as bath salts and abused for their stimulant 
properties.

Toolmark analysis--the comparison of marks made by various tools.

Toxicology—the analysis of biological samples for the presence of 
drugs and other potentially toxic materials. Includes antemortem, 
postmortem, and blood alcohol content.

Trace evidence--any analytical procedure using microscopy or 
chemical and instrumental techniques. Includes the examination of 
gunshot residue, explosives, hair, fibers, and fire debris.

*********************************************************
The Bureau of Justice Statistics of the U.S. Department of 
Justice is the principal federal agency responsible for measuring 
crime, criminal victimization, criminal offenders, victims of 
crime, correlates of crime, and the operation of criminal and 
civil justice systems at the federal, state, tribal, and local 
levels. BJS collects, analyzes, and disseminates reliable and
valid statistics on crime and justice systems in the United 
States, supports improvements to state and local criminal justice 
information systems, and participates with national and 
international organizations to develop and recommend national 
standards for justice statistics. Jeri M. Mulrow is acting 
director.

This report was written by Matthew R. Durose and Andrea M. Burch 
of BJS and Kelly Walsh and Emily Tiry of Urban Institute. 
Christina Aldada, Samantha Lowry, Eddie Mohr, Elizabeth 
Pelletier, Jennifer Yahner, and Lilly Yu from the Urban Institute 
assisted with data collection and processing activities. 
Anastasios Tsoutis verified the report.

Caitlin Scoville and Jill Thomas edited the report. Tina Dorsey 
and Barbara Quinn produced the report.

November 2016, NCJ 250151
**********************************************************

**************************************************
Office of Justice Programs
Innovation * Partnerships * Safer Neighborhoods
www.ojp.usdoj.gov
**************************************************

**********************
10/31/2016/JER/12:55pm
**********************
