U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Programs
Bureau of Justice Statistics
-----------------------------------------------------------------

This file is text only without graphics and many of the 
tables. A Zip archive of the tables in this report in
spreadsheet format (.csv) and the full report including
tables and graphics in .pdf format are available on BJS
website at: 
http://www.bjs.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbdetail&iid=5828

This report is one in a series. More recent editions 
may be available. To view a list of all in the series 
go to http://www.bjs.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbse&sid=75
-----------------------------------------------------------------

**********
Bulletin
*********

*********************************
Publicly Funded Forensic Crime
Laboratories: Quality Assurance
Practices, 2014
*********************************

Andrea M. Burch and Matthew R. Durose, BJS Statisticians
Kelly Walsh and Emily Tiry, Urban Institute

As of December 31, 2014, 88% of the nation’s 409 publicly funded 
forensic crime laboratories were accredited by a professional
forensic science organization, compared to 82% in 2009 and 70% 
in 2002 (figure 1). Similar to previous years, state labs were 
more likely to be accredited than labs operated by other 
jurisdictions. Since 2002, the proportion of accredited crime 
labs increased among all jurisdictions. The most growth occurred 
among municipal labs, which increased from 44% in 2002 to
67% in 2014.

This report presents data from the Bureau of Justice Statistics’ 
(BJS) 2014 Census of Publicly Funded Forensic Crime Laboratories 
(CPFFCL) and provides comparisons with data from prior years. The 
report describes the quality assurance practices of U.S. crime 
labs, such as accreditation, proficiency testing, written 
standards for performance expectations, codes of ethics, 
externally certified personnel, and resources dedicated to 
research. For information on lab operations, functions, budgets, 
personnel, workload, and outsourcing, see Publicly Funded 
Forensic Crime Laboratories: Resources and Services, 2014
(NCJ 250151, BJS web, November 2016).


****************************************************
***************
HIGHLIGHTS
****************

* In 2014, 88% of the nation’s crime labs were accredited by a 
professional organization, up from 70% in 2002.

* State crime labs were more likely to be accredited than labs 
operated by other jurisdictions in 2014.

* In 2014, more crime labs held accreditation by the American 
Society of Crime Lab Directors/Laboratory Accreditation Board, 
International (ASCLD/LAB, International) (73%) than any other 
type of accreditation.

* As in previous years, nearly all (98%) crime labs conducted 
proficiency testing in 2014.

* Seventy-five percent of crime labs had written standards for 
employee performance expectations in 2014.

*In 2014, 94% of crime labs maintained a written code of ethics.

* A larger proportion of crime labs employed at least one 
externally certified analyst in 2014 (72%) than in 2009 (60%).

* The proportion of crime labs that dedicated resources 
to research doubled from 7% in 2009 to 14% in 2014

*****************************************************

Crime labs receive requests from criminal justice agencies to 
examine and report on physical evidence collected during criminal 
investigations. In 2014, U.S. crime labs received an estimated 
3.8 million requests for forensic services (see Publicly Funded 
Forensic Crime Laboratories: Resources and Services, 2014, NCJ 
250151, BJS web, November 2016). Forensic findings and expert 
opinions are often presented in legal proceedings and play a 
critical role in the administration of justice. To ensure the 
accuracy and dependability of their work, crime labs use quality 
assurance practices. (See Description of quality assurance 
practices text box.) 

**************************************
Nearly all (99%) state crime labs 
were accredited in 2014 
**************************************

Eighty-eight percent of crime labs were accredited by a 
professional forensic science organization in 2014 (table 1). 
During 2014, state crime labs (99%) were more likely than federal 
(89%), county (85%), and municipal (67%) labs to be accredited by 
a professional forensic organization.

More than 98% of crime labs employing 25 or more full-time 
employees were accredited in 2014. In comparison, 90% of crime 
labs employing between 10 and 24 full-time personnel and 70% of 
crime labs employing nine or fewer personnel were accredited 
during the same year.

An estimated 98% of crime labs that performed eight or more 
forensic functions were accredited in 2014. A larger proportion 
of single-function (91%) crime labs were accredited than labs 
performing between two and four forensic functions (81%).

****************************************
ASCLD/LAB, International was the most 
common type of accreditation in 2014
****************************************

Eighty-three percent of crime labs held an international 
accreditation standard in 2014, with 73% accredited by the 
American Society of Crime Lab Directors/Laboratory Accreditation 
Board, International (ASCLD/LAB, International) and 10% 
accredited by Forensic Quality Services, International (FQS-
International). ***Footnote 1 ANSI-ASQ National Accreditation 
Board (ANAB) acquired FQS and is in the process of acquiring 
ASCLD/LAB, International. See http://anab.org/news/
latest-news/anab-and-ascldlab-merge-operations/***.
 International accreditation programs are based on the 
International Organization for Standardization (ISO) and have 
more rigorous requirements than noninternational standards. 
***Footnote 2 ISO develops worldwide standards for a variety of 
industries to promote quality, safety, and efficiency of products 
and services. See http://www.iso.org/
iso/catalogue_detail.htm?csnumber=39883***. Both ASCLD/LAB, 
International and FQS-International require crime labs to comply 
with the ISO/International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC) 
17025 standard, which specifies the requirements for competence 
to carry out tests and calibrations to produce precise and 
accurate data.

Since 2009, the proportion of crime labs with an ISO-based 
accreditation standard increased from 27% to 83%.***Footnote 3 
See Census of Publicly Funded Forensic Crime Laboratories, 2009 
(NCJ 238252, BJS web, August 2012)***. The ASCLD/LAB, 
International’s sunset of the noninternational Legacy 
Accreditation Program resulted in a significant increase in the 
proportion of labs with an ISO-based accreditation standard. 
***Footnote 4 The last applications for ASCLD/LAB, Legacy program 
were accepted on March 31, 2009. Since then, applications for 
accreditation or re-accreditation must be in the ASCLD/LAB, 
International program. Due to the 5-year cycle for 
recertification, all labs were expected to transition from the 
ASCLD/LAB, Legacy program to ASCLD/LAB, International by 2015***.

In 2014, state crime labs (90%) were more likely than county 
(65%), federal (65%), and municipal (43%) crime labs to be 
accredited by an ISO standard through ASCLD/LAB, International. 
An estimated 15% of municipal crime labs held FQS-International 
accreditation, compared to 9% of county and 8% of state labs.

A larger proportion of crime labs employing 25 or more full-time 
employees were accredited by ASCLD/LAB, International than labs 
with 24 or fewer employees. Labs with 100 or more full-time 
employees (31%) were most likely to hold FQS-International 
accreditation. About 75% of single-function crime labs held 
ASCLD/LAB, International. In comparison, 2% of single-function 
crime labs were accredited by FQS-International.

***********************************************************
*************************
Description of quality 
assurance practices
*************************

Quality assurance practices are systems of management procedures 
that help improve the validity and reliability of findings by 
establishing standard processes and methods for conducting 
forensic work. Forensic crime labs develop quality assurance 
practices and implement them to reduce errors in forensic 
techniques and analysts’ interpretation. These practices also 
help improve consistency across practitioners. Practices such as 
obtaining professional accreditation, testing the proficiency of 
analysts, and external certification of analysts are regarded as 
benchmarks for measuring compliance to industry-established best 
practices.

Accreditation is the process in which third-party professional 
forensic science accreditation bodies assess a crime lab’s 
policies and procedures to evaluate technical competency and 
ability to generate valid forensic findings and interpret 
results. The accreditation process includes reviews of the crime 
lab’s management practices, staff competence, training, 
continuing education, appropriateness of test methods, 
maintenance of test equipment, testing environment, handling of 
test items, sampling, documentation, and quality assurance of 
data. Professional accreditation organizations periodically 
monitor accredited labs to ensure crime labs maintain the 
standards required to remain compliant with industry best 
practices. Although accreditation does not guarantee that a crime 
lab will not make an error, it does increase confidence in the 
lab’s ability to produce valid results by demonstrating that the 
lab is complying with standard operating procedures.

Proficiency testing is a quality control tool used to examine the 
performance of the crime lab personnel and to determine whether 
personnel are following industry standards. To receive and 
maintain professional accreditation, a crime lab is required to 
evaluate the technical competence of analysts, other personnel, 
and the overall performance of the crime lab through proficiency 
testing. Proficiency tests are conducted internally or externally 
using declared tests (an examiner knows the sample to be analyzed 
is a test sample), random case reanalysis (an examiner’s work is 
randomly selected for reanalysis by another examiner), and blind 
tests (the examiner or crime lab is not aware of being tested).

Analyst certification is recognition by an external organization 
that an individual has acquired and demonstrated specialized 
knowledge, skills, and abilities in the standard practices 
necessary to perform duties and produce valid forensic findings. 
While accreditation is a quality assessment of a crime lab, 
certification is a quality assessment of an individual. External 
certification programs may assess analysts though exams, 
proficiency testing, evaluation of education, training and 
practical experience, adherence to codes of ethics, and other 
standards.
************************************************************

1 in 3 crime labs conducted random case reanalysis in 2014 In 
2014, 98% of crime labs conducted proficiency testing, which was 
similar to 2009 (97%) and 2002 (97%) (figure 2). As in previous 
years, nearly all (95%) crime labs evaluated the technical 
competence of employees through declared examinations. The 
percentage of crime labs that conducted random case reanalysis in 
2014 (35%) was similar to that reported in 2009 (34%), but a 
decrease from 2002 (54%). The proportion of crime labs conducting 
blind examinations decreased from 27% in 2002 to 10% in both 2009 
and 2014.

In 2014, federal crime labs (39%) were more likely than county 
(8%), state (7%), and municipal (5%) labs to test the proficiency 
of employees through blind examinations (table 2). In addition, 
federal crime labs (49%) were also more likely to conduct random 
case reanalysis than labs operated by other jurisdictions.

About 1 in 5 (21%) mid-sized crime labs operating with between 25 
and 49 full-time employees performed blind proficiency tests. A 
larger proportion of mid-sized crime labs than labs of other 
sizes conducted blind proficiency tests. Crime labs with 24 or 
fewer (5%) full-time employees were less likely than labs with 25 
or more full-time employees to conduct blind proficiency tests. A 
larger proportion of crime labs performing a single forensic 
function (19%) than labs performing two or more functions 
conducted blind proficiency tests.

An estimated 61% of crime labs with 100 or more full-time 
employees performed random case reanalysis tests, compared to 
less than 30% of crime labs with 24 or fewer full-time employees. 
An estimated 44% of crime labs performing eight or more forensic 
functions conducted random case reanalysis tests in 2014, 
compared to about a third of labs performing between five and 
seven functions (34%), between two and four functions (32%), and 
a single function (32%).

**************************************
Municipal crime labs with written 
standards for performance increased 
between 2009 and 2014
**************************************

In 2014, 75% of crime labs had written standards
for performance expectations, up from 72% in 2009
(figure 3). Written standards establish a threshold for employee
performance and ensure that performance measures are
applied consistently across employees with similar roles.
Federal crime labs (97%) were more likely than state (83%),
municipal (75%), and county (51%) labs to have written
standards for performance in 2014. Between 2009 and 2014,
the most growth in the proportion of labs with written
standards for performance expectations occurred in municipal
crime labs, increasing from 59% to 75%. The proportion of
county crime labs with written standards of performance
expectations declined from 59% in 2009 to 51% in 2014.

**************************************
The majority (94%) of crime labs 
maintained a written code of ethics 
in 2014
**************************************

An estimated 94% of crime labs had a written code of ethics in 
2014 (table 3). Labs create or adopt ethical codes to improve the 
quality of forensic findings. Ethical codes guide behaviors to 
ensure analysts work within the confines of their expertise, 
provide objective findings and testimony, avoid conflicts of 
interest, and avoid susceptibility to outside influences. State 
crime labs (98%) were more likely than county (94%), municipal 
(87%), and federal (85%) crime labs to have a written code of 
ethics in 2014. The majority (67%) of crime labs adopted one of 
many existing code of ethics, while 27% of crime labs created and 
implemented their own written code of ethics. ***Footnote 5 See 
National Academies Press Code of Ethics section at 
http://www.nap.edu/read/12589/chapter/2?term=code#26***.
 State crime labs (32%) were more likely than county
(23%) and federal (14%) crime labs to create their own written 
code of ethics.

**************************************
More crime labs employed externally 
certified analysts in 2014 than 
in 2009
**************************************

During 2014, 72% of crime labs employed at least one externally 
certified analyst (figure 4). The proportion of crime labs 
employing one or more analysts with external certification 
increased from 60% in 2009 to 72% in 2014 (up 20%). Seventy-eight 
percent of municipal crime labs employed one or more externally 
certified analysts in 2014, compared to 70% of state and 63% of 
federal crime labs. Between 2009 and 2014, state-operated crime 
labs experienced the largest increase in the proportion of labs 
employing one or more externally certified analysts. The decrease 
from 2009 to 2014 in the proportion of federal crime labs with at 
least one externally certified analyst was not statistically 
significant.

In 2014, about 9 in 10 crime labs with 50 or more full-time 
personnel employed at least one externally certified analyst 
(table 4). In comparison, about 45% of labs with nine or fewer 
full-time employees employed one or more externally certified 
analysts in 2014. Crime labs that performed eight or more 
forensic functions (88%) were more likely than crime labs 
performing fewer functions to employ at least one externally 
certified analyst. An estimated 24% of crime labs performing a 
single forensic function employed at least one externally 
certified analyst in 2014. Crime labs with professional 
accreditation (74%) were more likely than crime labs without 
accreditation (57%) to employ at least one externally certified 
analyst.

**************************************
More than half (56%) of federal crime 
labs dedicated resources to research 
in 2014
**************************************

An estimated 14% of crime labs devoted staff, time, supplies, or 
other resources to forensic science research in 2014 (table 5).
Forensic science research includes experimentation aimed at the 
discovery and interpretation of facts, the revision of accepted 
methods, or practical application of new or revised methods or 
technologies. The National Institute of Justice (NIJ) provided 
the most resources dedicated to research. Between 2009 and 2014, 
NIJ funded nearly $120 million in forensic science research 
projects. ***Footnote 6 See The Impact of Forensic Science 
Research and Development. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government 
Printing Office***.  This funding sought to provide new crime-
solving techniques and increase the reliability and efficiency of 
forensic testing.

The proportion of crime labs that dedicated resources to research 
doubled from 7% in 2009 to 14% in 2014, a proportion similar to 
2002 (13%). As in 2009, federal crime labs (56%) were more likely 
than state (11%), county (11%), and municipal labs (4%) to have 
resources dedicated to research in 2014. Between 2009 and 2014, 
federal crime labs had the largest increase in the proportion of 
crime labs with resources dedicated to research. For all years 
with available data, larger crime labs were more likely to 
dedicate resources to research than smaller labs.

***************
Methodology
***************

Overview
**********

The Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS) periodically conducts the 
Census of Publicly Funded Forensic Crime Laboratories (CPFFCL) to 
collect data on crime lab services, budgets, staffing, workload, 
outsourcing, and quality assurance practices. The data collection 
is directed to federal, state, county, and municipal crime labs 
that are funded solely by the government or whose parent 
organization is a government agency. The CPFFCL includes agencies 
that employ one or more full-time scientists (1) with a minimum 
of a bachelor’s degree in chemistry, physics, biology, 
criminalistics, or a closely related forensic science field, and 
(2) whose principal function is examining physical evidence in 
criminal matters and providing reports and testimony to courts of 
law regarding such evidence.

About half of the crime labs included in the CPFFCL were part of 
a multi-lab system (two or more physically separate facilities 
that are overseen by a single organization). The CPFFCL attempted 
to collect information from each lab in multi-lab systems. The 
CPFFCL did not include operations that engage exclusively in 
evidence collection and documentation, such as fingerprint 
recovery and development, crime scene response, and photography. 
In addition, the census did not collect data on the forensic 
services performed by police identification units outside of the 
crime lab and it did not include privately operated crime labs.

Data collection and response rate
**********************************

BJS conducted its fourth CPFFCL to collect detailed information 
on the workload and operations of the nation’s 409 crime labs 
during 2014 and to examine changes since the previous censuses 
conducted in 2002, 2005, and 2009. The CPFFCL population frame 
and questionnaire were developed by BJS and the Urban Institute 
with input from the American Society of Crime Laboratory 
Directors as well as researchers and practitioners in the 
forensic science field. BJS pretested the CPFFCL questionnaire on 
a small sample of labs representing facilities of different sizes 
and governmental affiliations.

In April 2015, the Urban Institute initiated the data collection 
on behalf of BJS through a web-based data collection interface 
and mailed questionnaire. Follow-up emails and phone calls were 
made to nonrespondents and labs that submitted incomplete 
questionnaires. Of the 409 eligible crime labs that received the 
questionnaire, 360 (88%) provided responses to at least some of 
the items (table 6). ***Footnote 7 A total of 306 (87%) of the 351 
crime labs in 2002 provided responses to the 2002 CPFFCL 
questionnaire. Of the 389 crime labs in the 2005 CPFFCL, 351 
(90%) provided responses to the 2005 questionnaire. Of the 411 
crime labs surveyed in the 2009 CPFFCL, 397 (97%) provided 
responses to that data collection***.Of the 360 respondents, 351 
(98%) completed the questionnaire through the automated web 
system. The 2014 CPFFCL response rate ranged from 94% for state 
labs to 72% for federal labs.

Methods for producing national estimates
******************************************

To generate national estimates for this report, BJS used 
imputation methods to account for missing data among labs that 
did not respond to either the entire CPFFCL questionnaire (unit-
level response) or certain questions (item-level response). 
Because the CPFFCL data collection was a census with no sampling, 
each crime lab was initially self-representing and had a design 
weight of 1. BJS developed weighting class adjustments for the 
2002, 2005, 2009, and 2014 CPFFCL data to compensate for unit 
nonresponse and reduce nonresponse bias. Sixteen subpopulations 
of labs were stratified into groups by crossing four categories 
of jurisdiction (federal, state, county, and municipal) and four 
categories of staff size (9 or fewer, 10 to 24, 25 to 49, and 50 
or more). A seventeenth stratum was assigned to the FBI crime 
laboratory, given its unique size of more than 500 employees. 
Within each of the subgroups, statistical weights were applied to 
the data from the crime labs that responded to the census to 
allow their responses to represent the labs that did not respond.

In addition to adjusting for unit nonresponse through the use of 
weighting class adjustments, BJS also imputed for item 
nonresponse. BJS measured staff size by full-time equivalent 
employees and included both full-time and part-time employees 
with part-time employees weighted by 0.5. For the labs that 
responded to the CPFFCL but did not report employee data, 
imputations were made for the count- and percentage-based 
measures using their employee data reported in the other CPFFCL 
data collections. If that information was not available, BJS used 
the median staff size in 2014 among labs of similar jurisdiction. 
Among the 360 labs that responded to the 2014 CPFFCL, 339 
reported their 2014 employee total. For the 22 labs that did not 
report their 2014 staff total, the previous reported staff total 
was used. Estimates for the 2002, 2005, and 2009 CPFFCL were 
generated using similar imputation methods. When employee totals 
from other CPFFCL data collections were not available to account 
for item nonresponse, the median staff size of labs of similar 
jurisdiction was used.

When a respondent was unable to provide some requested items, BJS 
used sequential hot-deck imputation procedures to impute the 
missing responses in the 2002, 2005, 2009, and 2014 data. 
Sequential hot-deck imputation replaces a missing value with a 
response provided by a crime lab with similar characteristics. 
BJS grouped both respondents and nonrespondents into the strata 
described above and then sorted within each stratum by the number 
of forensic functions each lab performed. Once the list of crime 
labs were sorted within strata, the respondents provided donor 
responses for nonrespondents using the nearest neighbor method. 
This method identifies and replaces a missing value with the 
response donated from the lab listed immediately prior to the lab 
with missing data. If the donor listed immediately prior to the 
lab with missing data also had a missing response, BJS imputed a 
response from a donor listed immediately after the lab with the 
missing value. BJS repeated the process of going backwards and 
forwards to obtain donated responses from neighbors until all 
missing values were imputed.

Comparability to prior reports
*******************************

Data on quality assurance practices presented in the 2002, 2005, 
and 2009 CPFFCL reports were not adjusted for lab nonresponse. 
Estimates presented in this report may differ from previously 
presented data because some adjustments for unit or item 
nonresponse were made. For example, Census of Publicly Funded 
Forensic Crime Laboratories, 2009 (NCJ 238252, BJS web, August 
2012) reported that 75% of county labs were accredited in 2009. 
This report indicates that 74% of county labs were accredited in 
2009. In the 2009 report, data on accreditation were based on 389 
crime labs (or 98% of the 397 labs responding the 2009 census). 
In this 2014 report, the 2009 data have been adjusted to account 
for nonresponse crime labs and represent 411 crime labs (or the 
total number of labs included in the 2009 CPFFCL). 

Conducting tests of statistical significance
********************************************

BJS conducted tests to determine whether differences in the 
estimates were statistically significant. All differences 
discussed in this report are statistically significant at or 
above the 95% confidence interval. Standard errors were generated 
using SPSS statistical software that estimates variance for 
complex survey designs. The standard errors for the tables and 
figures are presented in appendix tables. These standard error 
estimates may be used to construct confidence intervals around 
percentages in this report. For example, the 95% confidence 
interval around the percentage of crime labs accredited in 2014 
is 88% ± 1.96 × 0.7% (or approximately 87% to 89%) where 88% is 
the point estimate in table 1 and 0.7% is the standard error in 
appendix table 2.

The standard errors may also be used to test the significance of 
the difference between two statistics by pooling the standard 
errors of the two estimates. For example, the standard error of 
the difference between state and federal crime labs accredited in 
2014 would be 2.9% (or the square root of the sum of the squared 
standard errors for each group). The 95% confidence interval 
around the difference would be 1.96 × 2.92% (or 5.72%). Because 
the observed difference of 10% (99% minus 89%) is greater than 
5.72%, the difference would be considered statistically 
significant.

*********************************************************
The Bureau of Justice Statistics of the U.S. Department of 
Justice is the principal federal agency responsible for measuring 
crime, criminal victimization, criminal offenders, victims of 
crime, correlates of crime, and the operation of criminal and 
civil justice systems at the federal, state, tribal, and local 
levels. BJS collects, analyzes, and disseminates reliable and 
valid statistics on crime and justice systems in the United 
States, supports improvements to state and local criminal justice 
information systems, and participates with national and 
international organizations to develop and recommend national 
standards for justice statistics. Jeri M. Mulrow is acting 
director.

This report was written by Andrea M. Burch and Matthew R. Durose 
of BJS and Kelly Walsh and Emily Tiry of Urban Institute.  
Christina Aldada, Samantha Lowry, Eddie Mohr, Elizabeth 
Pelletier, Jennifer Yahner, and Lilly Yu from the Urban Institute 
assisted with data collection and processing activities. 
Anastasios Tsoutis verified the report.

Caitlin Scoville and Jill Thomas edited the report. Barbara Quinn 
and Tina Dorsey produced the report.

November 2016, NCJ 250152
**********************************************************

**************************************************
Office of Justice Programs
Innovation * Partnerships * Safer Neighborhoods
www.ojp.usdoj.gov
**************************************************

**********************
10/31/2016/JER/3:25pm
**********************
