
Office of Justice Programs
Bureau of Justice Statistics

Statistical Tables

Prison Inmates at Midyear 2009-Statistical Tables

June 2010   NCJ 230113
-------------------------------------------------------------

This file is text only without graphics and many of the
tables. A Zip archive of the tables in this report in
spreadsheet format (.csv) and the full report including
tables and graphics in .pdf format are available from:
<http://bjs.ojp.usdoj.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbdetail&iid=2200>.

This report is one in a series. More recent editions may be
available. To view a list of all in the series go to
http://bjs.ojp.usdoj.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbse&sid=38

-------------------------------------------------------------

Heather C. West, Ph.D.
BJS Statistician

As of June 30, 2009, state and federal correctional
authorities had jurisdiction over 1,617,478 prisoners, an
increase of 0.5% (7,719 prisoners) since December 31,
2008.***Footnote Jurisdiction refers to prisoners under the
legal authority of state and federal correctional officials,
regardless of where a prisoner is held.*** Overall, 34 states
and the Federal Bureau of Prisons reported increases in their
prison population during this 6-month period. The Federal
Bureau of Prisons reported the largest increase with a growth
of 5,297 prisoners followed by Georgia (up 1,733),
Pennsylvania (up 1,316), Indiana (up 1,207), North Carolina
(up 1,062), and Florida (up 1,035). Of the 16 states
reporting decreases, California (down 3,644), Texas (down
2,347), and Michigan (down 1,554) reported the largest
decreases. Eighteen states reported changes of less than 100
prisoners such as Nebraska (up 1) and Idaho (down 7). The
statistical tables included in this report detail the
characteristics of the U.S. prison population and provide
data on the total custody population.

Selected characteristics of prisoners under state or federal
jurisdiction:

From December 31, 2009 to June 30, 2009 

*The U.S. prison population increased by 7,719 prisoners
(0.5%), reaching 1,617,478 prisoners (table 1).

*About 70% (5,297 prisoners) of the prison growth occurred at
the federal level. The remaining increase of 2,422 prisoners
occurred at the state level. 

*About 1 in every 198 U.S. residents was imprisoned with a
sentence of more than 1 year, a rate of 504 prisoners per
100,000 U.S. residents (table 10).

*Males were imprisoned at a rate 14 times higher than females
(954 per 100,000 U.S. residents compared to 68 per 100,000
U.S. residents, respectively).

*Approximately 8% (127,688 prisoners) of the prison
population was housed in private facilities (table 11).

*Another 5.1% (82,370 prisoners) of the prison population was
housed in local jails (table 13).

Selected characteristics of inmates held in custody in state
or federal prisons or in local jails:

As of June 30, 2009 

*State and federal prisons and local jails had custody, or
physical guardianship, over 2,297,400 inmates, a decrease of
0.5% since yearend 2008 (table 15). 

*The decrease in the custody population resulted from the
2.3% (17,936 inmates) decline of inmates held in local jails. 

*About 1 in every 134 U.S. residents was held in custody in
state or federal prisons or in local jails, a rate of 748
inmates per 100,000 U.S. residents. 

*Black non-Hispanic males, with an incarceration rate of
4,749 inmates per 100,000 U.S. residents, were incarcerated
at a rate more than 6 times higher than white non-Hispanic
males (708 inmates per 100,000 U.S. residents) and 2.6 times
higher than Hispanic males (1,822 inmates per 100,000 U.S.
residents) (table 18).

*One in every 300 black females was incarcerated compared to
about 1 in every 1,099 white females and 1 in every 704
Hispanic females.

*Non-U.S. citizens made up 4.1% (94,498 inmates) of the state
and federal custody population.

*Another 2,778 inmates in state custody were under age 18.

2009 Statistical Tables

Table 1. Prisoners under the jurisdiction of state or federal
prisons or in the custody of state or federal prisons or in
local jails, December 31, 2000-2008, and June 30, 2008 and
2009

Table 2. Prisoners under the jurisdiction of state or federal
correctional authorities, by jurisdiction, December 31, 2000,
2007, and 2008, and June 30, 2008 and 2009

Table 3. Male prisoners under the jurisdiction of state or
federal correctional authorities, by jurisdiction, December
31, 2000, 2007, and 2008, and June 30, 2008 and 2009

Table 4. Female prisoners under the jurisdiction of state or
federal correctional authorities, by jurisdiction, December
31, 2000, 2007, and 2008, and June 30, 2008 and 2009

Table 5. Sentenced prisoners under the jurisdiction of state
or federal correctional authorities, by jurisdiction,
December 31, 2000, 2007, and 2008, and June 30, 2008 and 2009

Table 6. Number of sentenced male prisoners under the
jurisdiction of state and federal correctional authorities,
December 31, 2000-2008, and June 30, 2008 and 2009

Table 7. Sentenced male prisoners under the jurisdiction of
state or federal correctional authorities, by jurisdiction,
December 31, 2000, 2007, and 2008, and June 30, 2008 and 2009

Table 8. Number of sentenced female prisoners under the
jurisdiction of state or federal correctional authorities,
December 31, 2000-2008, and June 30 2008 and 2009

Table 9. Sentenced female prisoners under the jurisdiction of
state or federal correctional authorities, by jurisdiction,
December 31, 2000, 2007, and 2008, and June 30 2008 and 2009

Table 10. Imprisonment rates of sentenced prisoners under
jurisdiction of state and federal correctional authorities,
by sex and jurisdiction, June 30, 2009

Table 11. Number of state or federal prisoners in private
facilities, December 31, 2000-2008, and June 30, 2008 and
2009

Table 12. Number of state and federal prisoners in private
facilities, by jurisdiction, December 31, 2000, 2007, and
2008, and June 30, 2008 and 2009

Table 13. Number of state or federal prisoners in local
facilities, December 31, 2000-2008, and June 30, 2008 and
2009

Table 14. Number of state and federal prisoners in local
facilities, by jurisdiction, December 31, 2000, 2007, and
2008, and June 30, 2008 and 2009

Table 15. Inmates held in custody in state or federal prisons
or in local jails, December 31, 2000-2008, and June 30, 2008
and 2009

Table 16. Estimated number of inmates held in custody in
state or federal prison or in local jails, by sex, race, and
Hispanic origin, June 30, 2000-2009

Table 17. Estimated number of inmates held in custody in
state or federal prisons or in local jails, by sex, race,
Hispanic origin, and age, June 30, 2009

Table 18. Estimated number of inmates held in custody in
state or federal prisons or in local jails per 100,000 U.S.
residents, by sex, race, and Hispanic origin, June 30,
2000-2009

Table 19. Estimated number of inmates held in custody in
state or federal prison, or in local jails per 100,000 U.S.
residents, by sex, race, Hispanic origin, and age, June 30,
2009

Table 20. Reported number of non-U.S. citizens held in
custody in state or federal prisons, by sex, region, and
jurisdiction, June 30, 2008 and 2009

Table 21. Reported number of inmates under age 18 held in
custody in state prisons, by sex, region, and jurisdiction,
June 30, 2008 and 2009

Methodology

National Prisoner Statistics

Begun in 1926 under a mandate from Congress, the National
Prisoner Statistics (NPS) program collects statistics on
prisoners at midyear and yearend. The Census Bureau serves as
the data collection agent for the Bureau of Justice
Statistics (BJS). BJS depends entirely on voluntary
participation by states' departments of corrections and the
Federal Bureau of Prisons for NPS data.

The NPS distinguishes between inmates in custody and
prisoners under jurisdiction. To have custody of an inmate, a
state or the Federal Bureau of Prisons must hold that inmate
in one of its facilities. To have jurisdiction over a
prisoner, a state or the Federal Bureau of Prisons must have
legal authority over the prisoner. Some states are unable to
provide counts that distinguish between custody and
jurisdiction.

The NPS jurisdiction counts include prisoners serving a
sentence within a jurisdiction's facilities including
prisons, penitentiaries, correctional facilities, halfway
houses, boot camps, farms, training or treatment centers, and
hospitals. They include prisoners who are 

*temporarily absent (less than 30 days), out to court, or on
work release

*housed in privately operated facilities, local jails, other
state or federal facilities

*serving concurrent sentences for more than one correctional
authority.

The NPS custody counts include all inmates held within a
respondent's facilities including inmates housed for other
correctional facilities. The custody counts exclude inmates
held in local jails and in other jurisdictions. With a few
exceptions, the NPS custody counts include inmates held in
private facilities.

Additionally, NPS data include counts of inmates in combined
jail-prison systems in Alaska, Connecticut, Delaware, Hawaii,
Rhode Island, and Vermont. 

States and the Federal Bureau of Prisons have the ability to
update data submitted the previous year. This report provides
updates for midyear and yearend 2008 counts. 

Nevada was not able to provide 2007 data. Estimates were
calculated using ratio estimates. All numbers were reviewed
and approved by the Nevada Department of Corrections.

The District of Columbia (D.C.) became a jail-only
jurisdiction by yearend 2001, when the Federal Bureau of
Prisons assumed responsibility for housing all sentenced
felons from D.C. Selected previously published prisoner
counts and percent population change statistics include D.C.
jail inmates for 2001, the last year of collection. See notes
in tables for additional information. 

Additional information about the NPS data collection
instrument is available on the BJS Website at
<http://bjs.ojp.usdoj.gov>.

Other inmate counts

Data on the number of inmates held in the custody of local
jails are from the BJS Annual Survey of Jails (ASJ). The ASJ
provides data on inmates in custody at midyear. For more
information about the ASJ, see Methodology in Jail Inmates at
Midyear 2009-Statistical Tables, BJS Web, 3 June 2010.

Federal prisoner data used to calculate race distributions
are obtained from BJS's Federal Justice Statistics Program
(FJSP). The FJSP obtains data from the Federal Bureau of
Prisons. These data include individual-level records of
prisoners in federal facilities as of September 30.
Specifically, the FJSP provides counts of sentenced federal
inmates by sex, race, and Hispanic origin.   

Estimating age-specific incarceration rates

Estimates are provided for the number of inmates in the
custody of state and federal prisons and in local jails, by
sex. Further, within sex prisoners are characterized by age,
race (non-Hispanic white and non-Hispanic black), and
Hispanic origin. The detailed race and Hispanic origin
categories exclude estimates of persons identifying two or
more races. 

For 2000 and 2008, estimates were produced separately for
inmates held in the custody of state and federal prisons and
in local jails. These estimates were then combined to obtain
a total estimated population. State estimates were prepared
by combining information about the sex of prisoners from the
NPS with information on self-reported race and Hispanic
origin from the 2004 Survey of Inmates of State Correctional
Facilities.

For the estimates of federal prisoners, the distributions of
FJSP counts of sentenced federal prisoners by sex, age, race,
and Hispanic origin on September 30, 2008 were applied to the
NPS counts of sentenced federal prisoners, by sex, at midyear
2009.

Estimates of the U.S. resident population for July 1, 2009,
by age, sex, race, and Hispanic origin, were generated by
applying the June 30, 2008 age distributions within sex,
race, and Hispanic origin groups to the July 1, 2009
population estimates by sex. The population estimates were
provided by the U.S. Census Bureau. 

Age-specific rates of incarceration for each demographic
group were calculated by dividing the estimated number of
inmates in custody within each age group by the estimated
number of U.S. residents in each age group. That number was
multiplied by 100,000, and then rounded to the nearest whole
number. Sex totals include all inmates and U.S. residents
regardless of race or Hispanic origin. Incarceration rates
for detailed race and Hispanic origin groups exclude persons
identifying two or more races.

Definitions

Average annual change the arithmetic average (mean) annual
change across a specific time period.

Custody the number of inmates held in state or federal
prisons or local jails, regardless of sentence length or the
authority having jurisdiction.

Imprisonment rate the number of prisoners under state or
federal jurisdiction sentenced to more than 1 year, per
100,000 U.S. residents. 

Inmates individuals held in custody in state or federal
prisons or in local jails.

Jail confinement facilities usually administered by a local
law enforcement agency, intended for adults but sometimes
holding juveniles, before or after adjudication. Facilities
include jails and city/county correctional centers, special
jail facilities such as medical treatment or release centers,
halfway houses, work farms, and temporary holding or lockup
facilities that are part of the jail's combined function.
Inmates sentenced to jail facilities usually have a sentence
of 1 year or less. 

Jurisdiction the number of prisoners under the legal
authority of state or federal correctional officials
regardless where the prisoner is held. 

Prisons compared to jail facilities, prisons are longer-term
facilities run by a state or the federal government and
typically holding prisoners with sentences of more than 1
year. However, sentence length may vary by state.
Connecticut, Rhode Island, Vermont, Delaware, Alaska, and 

Hawaii operate integrated systems which combine prisons and
jails.

Prisoners individuals under the legal authority
(jurisdiction) of state and federal correctional officials.

Sentenced prisoner a prisoner sentenced to more than 1 year. 

Total incarceration rate the number of inmates held in the
custody of state or federal prisons or in local jails, per
100,000 U.S. residents. 

Total inmates in custody includes inmates held in any public
facility run by a state or the Federal Bureau of Prisons,
including halfway houses, camps, farms, training/treatment
centers, and hospitals. This number also includes the number
of inmates held in local jails as reported by correctional
authorities in the Annual Survey of Jails. Data for jails
reflect populations on the last working day of June.

NPS jurisdiction notes

Alaska Prisons and jails form one integrated system. All NPS
data include jail and prison populations housed within the
state and outside of the state. Jurisdictional counts exclude
inmates held in local jails that are operated by communities. 
 

Arizona Population counts are based on custody data and
inmates in contracted beds.

Arkansas Jurisdiction counts for 2009 include offenders
serving concurrent sentences in other states and those out on
bond.

California Jurisdiction counts include felons and unsentenced
inmates who are temporarily absent, i.e., housed in local
jails, hospitals, etc. This definition is comparable to the
1998 NPS 1b definition. Custody counts include inmates housed
in contract facilities outside the state. 

Connecticut Prisons and jails form one integrated system. All
NPS data include jail and prison populations.

Colorado Counts include 207 male and 10 female inmates in the
Youthful Offender System, which was established primarily for
violent juvenile offenders. 

Delaware Prisons and jails form one integrated system. All
NPS data include jail and prison populations. 

Federal Custody counts include inmates housed in secure
facilities where the Bureau of Prisons contracted directly
with a private operator or subcontracted with a private
provider at a local government facility. Custody includes
inmates held in non-secure privately-operated community
corrections centers (e.g., halfway houses) and in home
confinement.

Florida The 2009 custody count includes all inmates out to
court. These inmates were previously counted in other state
facilities.

Georgia Counts are based on custody data.

Hawaii Prisons and jails form one integrated system. All
Anapestic include jail and prison populations. Racial counts
are based on the racial distributions in Hawaii's Corrections
Management Information System and inmate counts from each
facility.

Illinois Population counts are based on jurisdiction data.
Counts of inmates with a sentence of more than 1 year include
an undetermined number of inmates with a sentence of less
than 1 year. 

Iowa Population counts are based on custody data. Population
counts for inmates with a sentence of more than 1 year
include an undetermined number of inmates with a sentence of
less than 1 year and unsentenced inmates. Iowa does not
differentiate among these groups in its data system. 

Kansas Population counts for inmates with a sentence of more
than 1 year include a small undetermined number of inmates
with sentences of less than 1 year. 

Louisiana Counts for 2007 are as of December 27, 2007. 

Maryland The exclusive use of an automated data system may
have rendered counts for 2009 not comparable to previous
years' counts.

Massachusetts By law, offenders may be sentenced to terms of
up to 2 years and 6 months in locally-operated jails and
correctional institutions. Such populations are included in
counts and rates for local jails and correctional
institutions. Inmates with sentences of more than 1 year
(4,012) were held in local jails. Jurisdiction and custody
counts include an undetermined number of inmates who were
remanded to court, transferred to the custody of another
state, federal, or locally-operated system, and subsequently
released.

Mississippi Jurisdiction counts include 1,009 males and 134
females with unknown sentence lengths. 

Nevada Due to a system conversion, data for 2007 were
calculated with ratio estimates and are based on 2006
numbers. All estimates were reviewed by individuals at the
Nevada Department of Corrections.

New Jersey Counts of inmates with a sentence of more than 1
year include an undetermined number of inmates with sentences
of just 1 year. The Department of Corrections has no
jurisdiction over inmates with sentences of less than 1 year
or over unsentenced inmates. 

Ohio Counts of inmates with a sentence of more than 1 year
include an undetermined number of inmates with sentences of 1
year or less. 

Oklahoma Population counts for inmates with sentences of less
than 1 year consist mainly of offenders ordered by the court
to the Delayed Sentencing Program for Young Adults pursuant
to 22 O.S. 996 through 996.3. 

Oregon Counts include an undetermined number of inmates with
sentences of 1 year or less. County authorities retain
jurisdiction over the majority of these types of inmates.

Rhode Island Prisons and jails form one integrated system.
All NPS data include jail and prison populations. 

Vermont Prisons and jails form one integrated system. All NPS
data include jail and prison populations. 

Virginia Jurisdiction counts for 2007 reflect populations on
December 28, 2007. 

-------------------------------------------------------------


The Bureau of Justice Statistics is the statistical agency of
the U.S. Department of Justice. Michael D. Sinclair is acting
director.

These Statistical Tables present the first release of
findings from permanent data collection programs. Heather C.
West, Ph.D. wrote this report. William J. Sabol, P.h.D.,
Sheri Simmons, and Tracy Snell verified the report.

Joshua Giunta carried out the data collection and processing
under the supervision of Steve Simoncini, Governments
Division, Census Bureau, U.S. Department of Commerce. 

Catherine Bird and Jill Duncan edited the report, Tina Dorsey
produced the report, and Jayne E. Robinson prepared the
report for final printing under the supervision of Doris J.
James.

June 2010, NCJ 230113

-------------------------------------------------------------

This report in portable document format and in ASCII and its
related statistical data and tables are available at the BJS
World Wide Web Internet site:
<http://bjs.ojp.usdoj.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbdetail&iid=2200>.

-------------------------------------------------------------

Office of Justice Programs
Innovation   Partnerships   Safer Neighborhoods
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov

-------------------------------------------------------------

Revised 6/23/2010/JER/7:21am
                                                  