U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Programs
Bureau of Justice Statistics

Probation and Parole in the United States, 2009

December 2010 NCJ 231680

Lauren E. Glaze and Thomas P. Bonczar
BJS Statisticians

Fan Zhang, BJS Intern

----------------------------------------------------------
This file is text only without graphics and many of the
tables. A Zip archive of the tables in this report in
spreadsheet format (.csv) and the full report including
tables and graphics in .pdf format are available from:
http://bjs.ojp.usdoj.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbdetail&iid=2233

This report is one in a series. More recent editions may be
available. To view a list of all in the series go to
http://bjs.ojp.usdoj.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbse&sid=42
-----------------------------------------------------------
During 2009, the number of offenders under community
supervision declined 0.9%, from 5,064,975 to 5,018,855
(figure 1; appendix table 1). This was the first decline
observed in the community supervision population, including
adults on probation or parole, since the Bureau of Justice
Statistics (BJS) Annual Probation Survey and Annual Parole
Survey began in 1980.1***Footnote 1See Methodology for a
discussion of the probation and parole statistical series
before 1980.*** Probation is a court-ordered period of
correctional supervision in the community, generally as an
alternative to incarceration. In some cases, probation can be
a combined sentence of incarceration followed by a period of
community supervision. Parole is a period of conditional
supervised release in the community following a prison term.
It includes supervision following a discretionary or
mandatory release from prison and other types of post-custody
conditional supervision, such as a term of supervised
release.
-------------------------------------------------------------
Highlights

* During 2009, the number of offenders on probation or
parole--community supervision population--declined (down
0.9%) for the first time since the BJS began its Annual
Probation Survey and Annual Parole Survey in 1980.

* The probation population decreased by 0.9% during 2009 as
probation entries declined (down 2.4%) and the number of
probation exits exceeded entries by 33,900.

* The percentage of probationers who completed the terms of
their supervision or were discharged early increased between
2008 (63%) and 2009 (65%), contributing to the decrease
observed in the probation population.

* During 2009, the total parole population decreased by 0.7%.
While the federal parole population increased by 5,232 during
2009, this increase was offset by a decline of 10,758 in the
state parole population.

* Parole entries decreased (down 1.2%) during 2009 and the
number of parole exits exceeded entries by 5,200, leading to
a decline in the total parole population. 

* The percentage of parolees who completed the terms of their
supervision or were discharged early rose between 2008 (49%)
and 2009 (51%), contributing to the decrease observed in the
total parole population.

* The rate of return to incarceration--based on all parolees
who were at risk of violating the conditions of their
supervision--declined between 2006 (15%) and 2009 (14%).
-----------------------------------------------------------
The decrease in the community supervision population resulted
from decreases in both the probation (down 0.9%) and parole
(down 0.7%) populations during the year. At yearend 2009
about 1 in every 47 adults in the United States were under
community supervision, a decrease from about 1 in every 45
adults observed since 2004.

Most (87%) of the decrease (down 46,120) in the community
supervision population during 2009 was attributed to the
decline in the probation population. The parole population
represented a smaller share (12%) of the decrease in the
community supervision population.***Footnote 2 A small number
(less than 1%) of the community supervision population was
known to be on both probation and parole, and the total
community supervision population was adjusted to account for
offenders with a dual supervision status. For this reason the
amount of the decrease represented by probationers (87%) and
parolees (12%) does not sum to 100%***

Decline in probation population observed during 2009 as exits
from probation exceeded entries 

The probation population decreased by 40,079 probationers
during 2009, from 4,244,046 to 4,203,967 (table 1; appendix
table 2). Twenty-nine states reported decreases in their
probation population in 2009, with a combined total decrease
of 79,801. Washington (down 13,899), California (down
13,023), and Florida (down 11,319) reported decreases of
10,000 or more probationers during the year. These three
states accounted for almost half of the total decrease in the
probation population. The decline in the probation population
during the year in those 29 states was partially offset by a
combined total increase of 39,722 probationers in 21 states,
the District of Columbia, and the federal system.

Large decreases in some states were consistent with recent
legislation passed, as in Washington, and court-ordered
mandates, as in California, to address current budgetary
constraints by reducing community supervision populations.
Washington and California were required to reduce their
community supervision populations, including both the
probation and parole populations, by concentrating resources
primarily on high-risk, violent offenders and reducing the
number of nonviolent, low-risk offenders supervised. 

The number of entries to probation declined for the second
consecutive year. Between 2007 and 2008, entries declined by
23,000 (down 1.0%). The decline in entries was larger between
2008 and 2009 (down 55,700 or 2.4%). The decline in entries
during 2009 contributed to the decrease in the probation
population, as the number of exits from probation (2,347,500)
exceeded the number of entries (2,313,600) for the first time
since the Annual Probation Survey began in 1980 (table
2).***Footnote 3 See Methodology for a discussion on entries
and exits to probation and parole and changes in the number
of offenders in these populations.***

Rate at which probationers completed supervision rose during
2009, consistent with a trend observed since 2006 

The exit rate of the at-risk probation population is defined
as the ratio of the number of probationers who exited
supervision during the year to the number of probationers who
could have exited supervision at any point during the year
(i.e., at-risk probation  population). ***Footnote 4 The
at-risk probation population is defined as the number of
offenders on probation at some point during the year
referenced, which is equivalent to the number under
supervision at the start of the year (on January 1) plus the
number that entered supervision during the year. See table 2
for the calculation of the exit rate for the at-risk
probation population.***  The probation exit rate is a
measure of how quickly the population turns over. A small
increase in the exit rate of the at-risk probation population
was observed between 2006 (34 per 100 probationers at risk of
exiting) and 2009 (36 per 100). 

The small increase in the exit rate was not related to an
increase in the percentage of probationers who were
incarcerated because the percentage of probationers
incarcerated declined between 2006 (18%) and 2009 (16%)
(table 3). The increase in the exit rate between 2006 and
2009 was associated with an increase in the percentage of
probationers who completed the terms of their supervision,
through either completion of their full-term sentence or an
early discharge (58% in 2006; 65% in 2009).

To measure the rate at which all offenders on probation
during the year could be incarcerated, the rate of
incarceration of the at-risk population is defined as the
ratio of the number of probationers who were discharged
during the year as the result of incarceration to the number
of probationers who could have been incarcerated at any point
during the year (i.e., at risk of incarceration).***Footnote
5 See Methodology for a discussion of the at-risk measure of
incarceration that is reported in figure 2 and the
differences between this measure and the outcome measures,
including the completion and incarcerated measures, based on
the cohort exiting probation during each year, that are
reported in table 3.***  Since 2006, the rate of
incarceration, including incarceration for a new offense, a
revocation, or other reasons, of the at-risk probation
population remained relatively stable (6.1% in 2006; 5.8% in
2009) (figure 2).

Felony probation population increased between 2008 and 2009,
reversing a declining trend observed over the first 8 years
of the decade 

Between 2008 and 2009 the number and percentage of
probationers supervised for a felony increased. In 2008 an
estimated 2,111,800 (49%) of probationers were supervised for
a felony (appendix table 5). As the probation population
declined during 2009, the estimated number (2,138,700) of
felons on probation increased and accounted for a larger
portion (51%) of the probation population at yearend 2009.
The increase in the felony probation population observed
between 2008 and 2009 reversed a declining trend observed
between 2000 (52%) and 2008 (49%).

Consistent with the increase in the felony probation
population between 2008 and 2009 was a small decrease in the
percentage of probationers supervised for a misdemeanor (48%
in 2008; 47% in 2009), reversing an increasing trend observed
since 2000 (46%).
 
Another change in the composition of the probation population
between 2008 (29%) and 2009 (26%) was a decrease in the
percentage of drug offenders supervised on probation. Small
increases were observed among property offenders between 2008
(25%) and 2009 (26%) and public-order offenders (17% in 2008;
18% in 2009). The percentage of violent offenders on
probation remained unchanged between 2008 and 2009 (19% for
both years).

Decline in parole population observed in 2009 resulted from a
decrease in state parole

The total parole population decreased (down 5,526) from
824,834 to 819,308 during 2009. The state parole population
decreased (down 10,758) during 2009 and accounted for all of
the decrease in the U.S. parole population (table 4). This
was the second year in a row that the state parole population
declined. The decrease in the state parole population was
partially offset by an increase (up 5,232) in the federal
parole population. This was the second consecutive year that
the federal system reported the largest increase in the
nation. 

In 2009, 19 states reported decreases in their parole
population, accounting for a total decrease of 29,488
parolees. California (down 19,923) and Washington (down
5,205) reported the largest decreases in the nation. These
two states accounted for more than two-thirds of the total
decrease in parolees, with California alone accounting for
half of the total decrease. The decreases in the parole
populations in California and Washington were consistent with
the declines in the probation populations observed in these
two states during the year and the recent court-ordered
mandates and legislative changes discussed in the section
Decline in probation population observed during 2009 as exits
from probation exceeded entries on page 2.
 
More jurisdictions (33), including the federal system,
reported increases in their parole population than decreases
(19) during 2009. However, the combined total decrease (down
29,488) in the 19 jurisdictions that reported declines
exceeded the combined total increase (up 18,730) in the 33
jurisdictions that reported increases, and the parole
population decreased for the first time.

Exits from parole exceeded entries during 2009, resulting in
a decline in the parole population 

The number of entries to parole declined by 7,100 during
2009, and the number of parole exits (579,100) exceeded
entries (573,900), resulting in the decrease in the parole
population during the last year (table 5). The decline in
parole entries during 2009 was consistent with the decrease
observed in the number of prisoners released from state or
federal jurisdiction during the year, including a decrease in
the number of prisoners conditionally released to community
supervision. The decrease in the number of prisoners released
during 2009 was the first decline observed in prison releases
since 2000. (See Prisoners in 2009, BJS Web, December 2010.) 

Parole completion rate rose during 2009, continuing a trend
observed since 2006 

The exit rate of the at-risk parole population is defined as
the ratio of the number of parolees who exited supervision
during the year to the number of parolees who could have
exited supervision at any point during the year (i.e.,
at-risk parole population).***Footnote 6 The at-risk parole
population is defined as the number of offenders on parole at
some point during the year referenced, which is equivalent to
the number under supervision at the start of the year (on
January 1) plus the number that entered supervision during
the year. See table 5 for the calculation of the exit rate
for the at-risk parole population.***  Between 2008 and 2009
the exit rate of theat-risk parole popuation remained stable
(41 per 100 for both years). 

While the parole exit rate remained stable during 2009, the
percentage of parolees who completed supervision through
either completion of their full-term sentence or an early
discharge increased from 49% in 2008 to 51% in 2009 (table
6). The increase in the parole completion rate during 2009
continued a trend observed since 2006 (45%). 

Since 2006 the rate of return to incarceration among all
parolees who were at risk of violating the conditions of
their supervision and being incarcerated declined from 15.4%
in 2006 to 14.0% in 2009 (figure 3). The overall decline in
the rate of return to incarceration among the at-risk parole
population was attributed to small decreases in each of the
types of return to incarceration between 2006 and 2009. The
rate at which parolees were incarcerated as the result of a
revocation (10.4% in 2006; 9.9% in 2009) and for a new
sentence (4.4% in 2006; 3.6% in 2009) decreased by less than
1.0% (not shown). ***Footnote 7 Details do not sum to the
total rate of return to incarceration because parolees were
also returned to incarceration for other reasons in both
years (about 0.7% in 2006; 0.5% in 2009). See Methodology for
a discussion of the at-risk measure of incarceration that is
reported in figure 3 and the differences between this measure
and the outcome measures, including the completion and
incarcerated measures, based on the cohort exiting parole
during each year, that are reported in table 6.***

As the parole population declined during 2009, most of the
characteristics of the parole population remained stable
(appendix table 15). One change observed in the population
during the last year was a small increase in the percentage
of parolees supervised for a violent offense in 2009 (27%)
compared to 2008 (26%). Drug offenders represented a slightly
smaller percentage of the parole population in 2009 (36%)
compared to 2008 (37%), while other offense types remained
relatively unchanged.

Methodology 

The Bureau of Justice Statistics's (BJS) Annual Probation
Survey and Annual Parole Survey began in 1980. The National
Criminal Justice Information and Statistics Service of the
Law Enforcement Assistance Administration, BJS's predecessor
agency, began a statistical series on parole in 1976 and
probation in 1979. 

The two surveys collect data on the total number of adults
supervised in the community on January 1 and December 31 each
year and data on the number of adults who enter and exit
supervision during each year. Both surveys cover all 50
states, the District of Columbia, and the federal system. BJS
depends entirely on the voluntary participation of state
central reporters and separate state, county, and court
agencies for its annual data on probation and parole. 

In 2009 the U.S. Census Bureau served as BJS's collection
agent for the 50 states and the District of Columbia. Data
for the federal system were provided directly to BJS through
the BJS Federal Justice Statistics Program, which obtained
data directly from the Office of Probation and Pretrial
Services, Administrative Office of the United States Courts.

Probation 

The 2009 Annual Probation Survey was sent to 466 respondents:
33 central state reporters; 431 separate state, county, or
court agencies; the District of Columbia; and the federal
system. States with multiple reporters were Alabama (3),
Arizona (2), Colorado (8), Florida (41), Georgia (2), Idaho
(2), Kentucky (3), Michigan (134), Missouri (2), Montana (4),
New Mexico (2), Ohio (187), Oklahoma (3), Pennsylvania (2),
Tennessee (3), Washington (31), and West Virginia (2). One
local probation agency in Washington closed during 2009. 

Parole

The 2009 Annual Parole Survey was sent to 55 respondents: 50
central state reporters, the California Youth Authority; one
municipal agency in Alabama; the state agency in
Pennsylvania, which also provided county data; and the
federal system. States with multiple reporters were Alabama
(2), California (2), and Pennsylvania (2). 

Federal parole (as defined here) includes a term of
supervised release from prison, mandatory release, parole,
military parole, and special parole. Definitional differences
exist between parole reported here and in other BJS data
series. Additional information about the data collection
instruments is available on the BJS Website at
<http://bjs.ojp.usdoj.gov>.

Updating probation and parole population counts each year

Some states update their probation and parole population
counts for different reasons after submitting their data to
BJS. Updated population counts usually include data that were
not entered into the information system before the survey was
submitted or data that were not fully processed by yearend.
For these reasons, the population counts on December 31 for
years ending 2000 to 2008 are based on the January 1 counts
for the next reporting year. Population counts for yearend
2009 are based on December 31, 2009, data.

Changes in reporting methods among probation agencies within
certain jurisdictions from 2000 to 2009 

Ten reporting agencies in separate jurisdictions changed
their methods of reporting probation data between 2000 and
2009. These changes included administrative changes, such as
consolidating databases or implementing new information
systems, resulting in data review and cleanup; reconciling
probationer records; reclassifying offenders, including those
on probation to parole and offenders on dual community
supervision statuses; and including certain probation
populations that were not previously reported.

Combined, changes in population and changes due to new
reporting methods for these 10 jurisdictions accounted for
about 220,100 additional probationers between 2000 and 2009,
representing approximately 58% of the total change (377,800)
in the nation's probation population during this period.
Based on the information provided, BJS could not break out
precisely the amount of change in the probation population
attributable to a change in the population itself versus a
change in reporting methods.

See Explanatory notes for a discussion about the reporting
changes since 2000 in the following ten jurisdictions:
Alabama, Colorado, District of Columbia, Georgia, Maryland,
Massachusetts, New Mexico, New York, Pennsylvania, and
Washington.

Changes in reporting methods among parole agencies within
certain jurisdictions from 2000 to 2009

Reporting agencies in seven jurisdictions changed their
methods of reporting parole data between 2000 and 2009. The
reasons for changing their methods of reporting parole data
were the same as for probation data--administrative changes,
reclassification of offenders, and the addition of certain
parole populations not previously reported, which can result
from new, enhanced information systems that improve the
tracking of all types of parolees. 

Combined, changes in population and changes due to new
reporting methods in these seven states accounted for about
4,900 additional parolees between 2000 and 2009, representing
approximately 5% of the total increase (95,410) in the
nation's parole population during this period. 

See Explanatory notes for a discussion about the reporting
changes since 2000 in the following seven jurisdictions:
Alabama, Alaska, Montana, New Mexico, Pennsylvania, Virginia,
and Washington.

Imputing entries and exits for nonreporting agencies in 2009 

BJS used one of four methods to impute probation entries for
nonreporting agencies, based on the availability of data, and
a single method to impute exits.

The first method was used to estimate entries and exits for
probation agencies that were unable to report these data in
2009 but were able to report these data in 2008. BJS
estimated probation entries in 2009 by using the ratio of
entries in 2008 to the agency's probation population on
January 1, 2008 and applying that ratio to the agency's
January 1, 2009 population. BJS estimated exits from
probation by adding the agency's estimated probation entries
in 2009 to the agency's probation population on January 1,
2009, and subtracting that estimate from the probation
population on December 31, 2009. These methods were used to
estimate probation entries and exits in nonreporting county
and district agencies in Florida, Michigan, Missouri, Ohio,
and Washington.

A second method was used to estimate probation entries for
agencies that were unable to report entries and exits in both
2008 and 2009. The ratio of 2009 entries to the January 1,
2009 population among reporting agencies in the same state
was used to estimate the number of entries for nonreporting
agencies with similar numbers of probationers. To estimate
probation exits for these agencies, BJS used the same
estimation method as described in the previous paragraph.
These methods were used to estimate probation entries and
exits for nonreporting county and district agencies in
Colorado, Florida, Michigan, Ohio, and Washington.

A third method was used to estimate probation entries for one
state agency in West Virginia, which only reported interstate
compact data. BJS estimated the number of entries for this
agency by using the ratio of 2009 entries to the January 1,
2009 probation population among reporting agencies within the
same region (South). To estimate probation exits for this
agency, BJS used the same estimation method as described
above.

Fourth, to estimate entries to and exits from probation and
parole supervision in Pennsylvania counties, BJS used
additional data from Pennsylvania's County Adult Probation
and Parole, Annual Statical Report, 2009, including the
number of combined county probation and parole entries and
exits by county. Using this additional information, the 2009
probation and parole entries and exits in Pennsylvania
counties were estimated in two steps and the methodology was
provided to the Pennsylvania respondent for review. 

Sixty of the sixty-five counties in Pennsylvania were able to
provide combined probation and parole entries and exits to
the Pennsylvania county respondent during 2009. In the first
estimation step, data for the five nonreporting counties were
estimated; the method that was used depended on the
availability of data. 

To estimate the 2009 data for two of the nonreporting
counties, the first method discussed in this section was
applied to either the 2007 or 2008 data provided by those
counties, depending on the availability of data. For the
fourth nonreporting county, which also could not provide 2008
data, exits were estimated based on the ratio of 2007 exits
to this county's December 31, 2007 community supervision
population and was applied to the county's December 31, 2009
population to estimate exits during 2009. Using the ratio of
2007 entries to the county's January 1, 2007 population and
applying it to the county's January 1, 2009 population would
have yielded a negative number of entries given the increase
(52% or 50 additional offenders) in this county's community
supervision population during 2009. To estimate entries in
this county, the county's total community supervision
population on December 31, 2009 was added to the estimated
number of exits, then the county's total community
supervision population on January 1, 2009 was subtracted from
that sum. For the last nonreporting county, entries and exits
were estimated based on data provided by other counties in
Pennsylvania that had a similar number of probationers and
parolees and also had a similar increase in their combined
probation and parole population during 2009. The estimates of
probation and parole entries and exits for these counties
were added to the combined probation and parole entries and
exits for the other 60 counties, yielding a total number of
probation and parole entries and exits for all 65 counties.

In the second estimation step, the total number of probation
and parole entries and exits for all 65 counties were
estimated separately. The Pennsylvania respondent was able to
provide separate January 1, 2009 and December 31, 2009 counts
of county probationers and county parolees. The percentage of
the total combined probation and parole population on January
1, 2009 attributable to probation only was applied to the
total number of combined probation and parole entries in the
65 counties during 2009 to estimate the number of entries to
probation. The residual was used to estimate the number of
entries to parole during 2009. Probation exits were estimated
by adding the estimated 2009 county probation entries to the
January 1, 2009 county probation population and subtracting
the December 31, 2009 county probation population. County
parole exits were estimated using the same method.

Changes in estimating Pennsylvania county and national
entries and exits from 2000 to 2007 

See Methodology in Probation and Parole in the United States,
2008, BJS Web, 8 December 2009, for a discussion of the
changes in estimating probation and parole entries and exits
from 2000 through 2007 that were implemented in 2008. The
estimation method changed in 2008 because the Pennsylvania
county respondent was able to provide BJS with additional
information to impute probation and parole entries and exits
for Pennsylvania counties. Consequently, in 2008, the
national estimates of probation and parole entries and exits
from 2000 to 2007 were re-estimated to account for the change
in the Pennsylvania estimation method and to ensure that the
2000 through 2007 national estimates were comparable with the
2008 estimates. The 2009 national and Pennsylvania county
estimates of probation and parole entries and exits are
comparable to the estimates published in Probation and Parole
in the United States, 2008, BJS Web, 8 December 2009.

Community supervision outcome measures 

Outcome measures based on exiting cohort. Historically, BJS
has reported the percentage of offenders who completed
supervision and the percentage of offenders who were
incarcerated, among all offenders who exited supervision
during the year, as the community supervision outcome
measures. Because these outcome measures are based on the
number of offenders exiting supervision (i.e., the exiting
cohort) within the reference year, they are based on a cohort
that comprises different types of offenders, including those
who completed the terms of their supervision or received an
early discharge; were incarcerated again either for a new
offense, a revocation, or other reasons; died; or were
discharged for other reasons.

The percentage of offenders who completed supervision is
defined as the number of offenders that completed supervision
during the year and were discharged, among all offenders who
were discharged from supervision during the year. The formula
used to calculate this outcome measure is C(t)/D(t), where
D(t) = C(t) + I(t) + O(t). Within this formula, t equals the
year referenced, C(t) equals the number of offenders who were
discharged from supervision during the year after completing
their terms or who received an early discharge, and D(t)
equals the total number of offenders discharged from
supervision during the year. D(t) includes C(t), the number
of offenders who completed supervision; I(t), the number who
were incarcerated during the year; and O(t), the number who
were discharged during the year for other reasons.

The percentage of offenders incarcerated is defined as the
number of offenders who were discharged from supervision
during the year as the result of being incarcerated, among
all offenders who were discharged during the year. The
formula used to calculate this outcome measure is I(t)/D(t),
where D(t) = C(t) + I(t) + O(t). Within this formula, t
equals the reference year; I(t) equals the number of
offenders that were discharged during the year as the result
of an incarceration for a new offense, a revocation, or other
reasons; and D(t) equals the total number of offenders that
were discharged from supervision during the year defined as
in the paragraph above. 

Outcome measure based on at-risk population. The rate of
incarceration (for parolees this is also referred to as the
"rate of return to incarceration") based on the at-risk
offender population is defined as the ratio of the number of
offenders that were discharged from supervision during the
year because they were incarcerated for a new offense, a
revocation, or other reasons, to the number of all offenders
at risk of being incarcerated during the year. The at-risk
population is defined as the number of offenders under
supervision at the start of the year (on January 1) plus all
offenders who entered supervision during the year. All of
these offenders could be incarcerated at any time during the
year; hence, they were at risk of incarceration.The formula
used to calculate this outcome measure is I(t)/(P(t-1) +
E(t)), where t equals the year referenced, P(t-1) equals the
start of the year population, and E(t) equals the number of
offenders that entered supervision during the year. 

There are distinct differences between the rate of
incarceration measure based on the at-risk population and the
discharge-based outcome measures. First, because both the
discharge-based completion and incarcerated outcome measures
are based on the exiting cohort, the two measures include a
population (i.e., denominator) that has different risk
periods. For example, the exiting cohort includes offenders
who exited after completing their supervision, which can only
be achieved after a certain period of time (i.e., after an
offender serves a specified amount of time under supervision
and/or fulfills specific conditions of their supervision), as
well as offenders who were incarcerated during the year,
which can occur at any point while an offender is under
supervision. The at-risk measure of incarceration accounts
for all offenders under supervision during the year (i.e.,
offenders who were under supervision on January 1 plus those
who entered during the year), who are the offenders "at risk"
of being incarcerated; this measure is not limited to only
offenders who were discharged during the year. Second,
specifically in comparison to the discharge-based completion
rate, the at-risk measure of incarceration allows that each
offender can be incarcerated at any time during the year. 

A nonincarceration measure, which can also be interpreted as
a nonfailure measure, based on the at-risk population can be
calculated using the formula 1   [I(t)/(P(t-1) + E(t))],
where I(t)/(P(t-1) + E(t)) is the rate of incarceration among
the at-risk population and subtracted rate from 1. The
nonincarceration rate includes offenders who were still under
supervision at the end of the year (i.e., did not fail as the
result of an incarceration) and offenders who were discharged
during the year for reasons other than incarceration,
including offenders who completed the terms of their
supervision or received an early discharge.

Estimating the national total of offenders under community
supervision incarcerated annually to calculate the national
rate of incarceration among the at-risk population

BJS defines the rate of incarceration for probationers and
parolees as the ratio of the number of offenders who were
discharged from supervision during the year because they were
incarcerated to the number of offenders at-risk of
incarceration. The number at-risk of incarceration is the sum
of the number of offenders on probation or parole at the
start of the year plus the number that entered supervision
during the year. See the section Community supervision
outcome measures, Outcome measure based on at-risk population
above for more details. 

To generate estimates for the numerator of this ratio,
post-stratification weighting methods were used to weight
reporting jurisdictions' data on type of exit (i.e.,
incarceration). The first weight was defined as the ratio of
each jurisdiction's proportionate contribution to the
national total of known reported exits, which included all
types of exits except those reported as unknown type, to the
jurisdiction's contribution to the national total of all
reported exits, which included all types of exits including
those reported as unknown type. This weighted total was then
weighted up to the BJS total of imputed exits; total exits
were estimated for jurisdictions, or any reporting agency
within a jurisdiction, that were not able to report total
exits. See the section Imputing entries and exits for
nonreporting agencies in 2009 for more details.
The second weight was defined as the ratio of each
jurisdiction's weighted total of known reported exits to the
jurisdiction's total imputed exits, which was equal to the
number of total reported exits within the jurisdiction if
total exits were not missing. 

The denominator of the rate of incarceration ratio included
estimates generated by BJS for jurisdictions, or any
reporting agency within a jurisdiction, that were not able to
report total entries during the year. The method used to
generate the estimates is described in this methodology in
the section Imputing entries and exits for nonreporting
agencies in 2009. 

Estimating national change in entries and exits and the
nation's probation and parole populations

Technically, the change in the probation and parole
populations from the beginning of the year to the end of the
year should equal the difference between entries and exits
during the year. However, those numbers may not be equal.
Some probation and parole information systems track the
number of cases that enter and exit community supervision,
not the number of offenders. This means that entries and
exits may include case counts as opposed to counts of
offenders, while the beginning and yearend population counts
represent individuals. Additionally, all the data on entries
and exits may not have been logged into the information
systems or the information systems may not have fully
processed all of the data before the data were submitted to
BJS.

Estimating 2007 and 2008 community supervision and prison
data for nonreporting jurisdictions
 
In 2007 Oklahoma could not provide community supervision
data. Community supervision data for Oklahoma were estimated
by BJS. See Probation and Parole in the United States, 2007--
Statistical Tables, BJS Web, 11 December 2008.Nevada could not 
provide prison data for 2007, so BJS estimated prison data for 
Nevada. See Prisoners in 2007, BJS Web, 11 December 2008. 
Virginia could not provide parole data for January 1, 2008, 
although Virginia did provide parole data for December 31, 2008. 
BJS estimated Virginia's January 1, 2008 parole population. 
See Probation and Parole in the United States, 2008, BJS Web, 
8 December 2009. 

Estimating the adult resident population 

The U.S. Census Bureau provided BJS with preliminary
estimates of the adult resident population in each state on
January 1, 2010.

Other available information

Detailed information for 2009 is available in appendix tables
1 to 22. The 2009 appendix tables are in alphabetical order;
region totals appear at the bottom of the appendix tables.
Specific jurisdictions per region are listed below:

Northeast--Connecticut, Maine, Massachusetts, New Hampshire,
New Jersey, New York, Pennsylvania, Rhode Island, and
Vermont.

Midwest--Illinois, Indiana, Iowa, Kansas, Michigan,
Minnesota, Missouri, Nebraska, North Dakota, Ohio, South
Dakota, Wisconsin.

South--Alabama, Arkansas, Delaware, District of Columbia,
Florida, Georgia, Kentucky, Louisiana, Maryland, Mississippi,
North Carolina, Oklahoma, South Carolina, Tennessee, Texas,
Virginia, and West Virginia.

West--Alaska, Arizona, California, Colorado, Hawaii, Idaho,
Montana, Nevada, New Mexico, Oregon, Utah, Washington, and
Wyoming.

Explanatory notes for probation and parole are also available
and appear after the appendix tables.

Appendix Tables

Community supervision

Appendix Table 1. Adults under community supervision, 2009
Probation

Appendix Table 2. Adults on probation, 2009

Appendix Table 3. Adults entering probation, by type of
sentence, 2009

Appendix Table 4. Adults exiting probation, by type of exit,
2009

Appendix Table 5. Characteristics of adults on probation,
2000, 2008 -2009

Appendix Table 6. Adults on probation, by sex, 2009

Appendix Table 7. Adults on probation, by race and Hispanic
or Latino origin, 2009

Appendix Table 8. Adults on probation, by status of
supervision, 2009

Appendix Table 9. Adults on probation, by type of offense,
2009

Appendix Table 10. Adults on probation, by most serious
offense, 2009

Appendix Table 11. Adults on probation, 2009: number tracked
by a Global Positioning System (GPS), number on parole, or
number incarcerated, Parole

Appendix Table 12. Adults on parole, 2009

Appendix Table 13. Adults entering parole, by type of
sentence, 2009

Appendix Table 14. Adults exiting parole, by type of exit,
2009

Appendix Table 15. Characteristics of adults on parole, 2000,
2008-2009

Appendix Table 16. Adults on parole, by sex, 2009

Appendix Table 17. Adults on parole, by race and Hispanic or
Latino origin, 2009

Appendix Table 18. Adults on parole, by status of
supervision, 2009

Appendix Table 19. Adults on parole, by maximum sentence to
incarceration, 2009

Appendix Table 20. Adults on parole, by most serious offense,
2009

Appendix Table 21. Adults on parole, by type of release from
prison, 2009

Appendix Table 22. Adults on parole, 2009: number tracked by
a Global Positioning System (GPS), number on probation, or
number incarcerated,

Probation: Explanatory notes

Federal--data for the federal system were provided to BJS
through the BJS Federal Justice Statistics Program (FJSP),
which obtained data directly from the Office of Probation and
Pretrial Services, administrative Office of the United States
Courts.

Alabama--has three reporting agencies--one state agency,
representing 90% of Alabama's total probation population, and
two local agencies. Alabama's total probation population on
December 31, 2009 includes an additional 2,483 probationers
supervised for another state through an interstate compact
agreement (appendix table 2).

Reporting changes since 2000--Alabama's state agency changed
its method of reporting probation data beginning with its
January 1, 2006 population by including certain probationers
in the population whose status had been classified as other
than a probationer in prior years. The reporting change
resulted in a difference of about 9,600 additional
probationers in Alabama's total population reported between
December 31, 2005 (38,995) and January 1, 2006 (48,607). The
total change in Alabama's probation population was an
increase of about 9,800 probationers between 2000 and 2009.

Alaska--total probation population on December 31, 2009
excludes an unknown number of probationers supervised by
another state through an interstate compact agreement
(appendix tables 2, 8).

Arizona--has two reporting agencies--one state agency,
representing 97% of Arizona's total probation population, and
one local agency. Arizona's total probation population on
December 31, 2009 includes an additional estimated 1,316
probationers supervised for another state through an
interstate compact agreement (appendix table 2).

Colorado--has eight reporting agencies--one state agency,
representing 87% of Colorado's total probation population,
and seven local agencies.  Due to changes in reporting, 
probation data reported by Colorado's state agency in 2009 
may not be comparable to data reported by this agency in 
previous years (appendix table 2).See Reporting changes 
since 2000 below

Colorado's total probation population on December 31, 2009
excludes 35 probationers supervised by another state through
an interstate compact agreement (appendix tables 2, 8). The
population includes an additional estimated 1,066
probationers supervised for another state through an
interstate compact agreement (appendix table 2).

Reporting changes since 2000--Colorado's state agency changed
its method of reporting probation data beginning with its
January 1, 2009 population. This reporting change resulted
from the reconciliation of probation records, including
converting case records to individual records for some newly
admitted probationers, and eliminating records for some
probationers who had their supervision terminated through a
drug court. The reporting change resulted in a reduction of
about 14,789 probationers in Colorado's total population
reported between December 31, 2008 (88,912) and January 1,
2009 (74,123). The total change in Colorado's probation
population was about 27,700 additional probationers between
2000 and 2009.

Connecticut--total probation population on December 31, 2009
includes an estimated additional 1,023 probationers
supervised for another state through an interstate compact
agreement (appendix table 2).

Delaware--total probation population on December 31, 2009
includes an additional 755 probationers supervised for
another state through an interstate compact agreement
(appendix table 2).

District of Columbia--some of the increase (up 16.2% or 1,249
probationers) in the District of Columbia's probation
population during 2009 was associated with a slowing rate of
discharge. For example, more probationers had their term
extended due to non-compliant behavior, such as not
fulfilling all sentence conditions. This resulted in fewer
probationers discharged compared to the number that entered
supervision during the year, which contributed to the
increase during 2009 (appendix table 2). 

Reporting changes since 2000 District of Columbia changed its
method of reporting probationers beginning with its January
1, 2008 population, because probationers who were on active
supervision and awaiting approval for a transfer through an
interstate compact agreement were excluded from the prior
years' data. The reporting change resulted in a difference of
nearly 1,600 additional probationers between the December 31,
2007 (6,485) and January 1, 2008 (8,073) populations reported
by the District of Columbia. The total change in the District
of Columbia's probation population between 2000 and 2009 was
a decline of about 1,700 probationers.

Florida--has 41 reporting agencies--one state agency,
representing 66% of Florida's total probation population, and
40 local agencies. Florida's total probation population on
December 31, 2009 includes an additional 378 probationers
supervised for another state through an interstate compact
agreement (appendix table 2).

Georgia--as two state reporting agencies. One agency reported
probationers under the jurisdiction of the state,
representing 39% of Georgia's total probation population. The
second agency reported probationers under the jurisdiction of
the counties, including county probationers who were under
supervision for a misdemeanor and supervised by private
probation agencies. The county probation population
represented 61% of Georgia's total probation population. 

Because the agency that reports the county data has the
capacity to report probation cases and not the number of
individuals under supervision, the counts may overstate the
number of individuals under probation supervision in Georgia.
Probationers with multiple sentences could potentially have
one or more cases with one or more private probation agencies
in one jurisdiction and/or one or more private probation
agencies within another jurisdiction. 

Additionally, as part of continued effort to enhance
reporting methods, this Georgia agency changed its method of
reporting probation data in 2009, See Reporting changes since 
2000 below. For this reason, data are notcomparable to the data 
reported by Georgia in prior years (appendix table 2). 

Georgia's total probation population on December 31, 2009
includes an additional unknown number of probationers
supervised for another state through an interstate compact
agreement (appendix table 2).


Reporting changes since 2000--Georgia's state agency that
provides misdemeanant data for probationers supervised by
private agencies changed its reporting methods beginning with
its January 1, 2007 population, when it expanded coverage.
The reporting change resulted in a difference of about 9,600
additional probationers in Georgia's total population
reported between December 31, 2006 (422,790) and January 1,
2007 (432,436). 

The same agency experienced another reporting change
beginning with its January 1, 2008 population when it
excluded probationers under supervision for a minor traffic
citation. This reporting change resulted in a decline of
nearly 56,200 probationers in Georgia's total population
reported between December 31, 2007 (435,361) and January 1,
2008 (379,204). 

In 2009, as part of continued effort to enhance reporting
methods, this state agency experienced another reporting
change for reasons similar to those explained for the 2008
change. The 2009 reporting change resulted in a decline of
7,100 probationers in Georgia's total probation population
reported between December 31, 2008 (397,081) and January 1,
2009 (389,901). The total change in Georgia's probation
population was about 71,300 additional probationers between
2000 and 2009. 

Hawaii--total probation population on December 31, 2009
includes an additional 174 probationers supervised for
another state through an interstate compact agreement
(appendix table 2).

Idaho--has two state reporting agencies. One agency reported
probationers under the jurisdiction of the state,
representing 24% of Idaho's total probation population. The
second agency reported probationers under the jurisdiction of
the counties and under supervision for a misdemeanor. The
county probation population represented 76% of Idaho's total
probation population.

Additionally, this Idaho agency only has the capacity to
report the number of probationers who entered county
supervision for a misdemeanor during 2009. The respondent was
able to provide an estimate of time served on misdemeanor
probation within the counties, which was estimated at one
year or less. With this additional information and through
additional correspondence with the respondent, the December
31, 2009 population was estimated based on the total number
of probationers who entered county supervision for a
misdemeanor during 2008. Exits from county misdemeanant
probation during 2009 were based on the January 1, 2009
population or the number of probationers who entered county
supervision for a misdemeanor during 2008 (appendix table 2).
Idaho's total probation population on December 31, 2009
includes an additional 441 probationers supervised for
another state through an interstate compact agreement
(appendix table 2).

About 55% of the probationers who were under county
supervision for a misdemeanor were on inactive supervision
and were not required to regularly report to a probation
authority in person, by mail, or by telephone (appendix table
8). 

Illinois--total probation population on December 31, 2009
includes an additional unknown number of probationers
supervised for another state through an interstate compact
agreement (appendix table 2).

Indiana--total probation population on December 31, 2009
excludes an unknown number of probationers supervised by
another state through an interstate compact agreement
(appendix table 2, 8).

Iowa--total probation population on December 31, 2009
excludes 744 probationers supervised by another state through
an interstate compact agreement (appendix tables 2, 8).

Kansas--total probation population on December 31, 2009
includes an additional 400 probationers supervised for
another state through an interstate compact agreement
(appendix table 2).

Kentucky--has three reporting agencies--ne state agency,
representing 56% of Kentucky's total probation population,
and two local agencies. Kentucky's total probation population
on December 31, 2009 includes an additional 1,779
probationers supervised for another state through an
interstate compact agreement (appendix table 2).

Louisiana--total probation population on December 31, 2009
includes an additional 1,638 probationers supervised for
another state through an interstate compact agreement
(appendix table 2).

Maine--total probation population on December 31, 2009
includes an additional 233 probationers supervised for
another state through an interstate compact agreement
(appendix table 2).

Maryland--changes in reporting related to the classification
of certain types of offenders and limited access to
information systems occurred during 2009. For these reasons,
probation data may not be comparable to data reported by
Maryland in previous years (appendix tables 4, 7, 8, 9, 10,
and 11). 
 
Reporting changes since 2000--Maryland changed its method of
reporting probationers beginning with its January 1, 2007
population, when it expanded the scope of its probation
population to include certain DWI offenders who had
previously been excluded. The reporting change resulted in a
difference of about 18,400 additional probationers between
the December 31, 2006 (75,698) and January 1, 2007 (94,100)
populations reported by the state. The total change in
Maryland's probation population was approximately 23,000
additional probationers between 2000 and 2009.

Massachusetts--total probation population on December 31,
2009 excludes 1,483 probationers supervised by another state
through an interstate compact agreement (appendix tables 2,
8). 

Reporting changes since 2000--Massachusetts changed its
method of reporting probationers beginning with its January
1, 2003 population when it classified certain types of
offenders, who had been previously excluded from the state's
probation data, as probationers based on new guidelines. The
reporting change resulted in a difference of about 87,300
additional probationers between the December 31, 2002
(44,013) and January 1, 2003 (131,319) populations reported
by Massachusetts. 

The state experienced a similar change in reporting methods
beginning with its January 1, 2004 population. This reporting
change resulted in a difference of approximately 39,300
additional probationers between the December 31, 2003
(127,135) and January 1, 2004 (166,464) populations reported
by the state. The total change in Massachusetts's probation
population between 2000 and 2009 was an increase of about
129,900.

Michigan--has 134 reporting agencies--one state agency,
representing 34% of Michigan's total probation population,
and 133 local agencies. Michigan's total probation population
on December 31, 2009 excludes 171 probationers on warrant
status in addition to an unknown number of probationers on
warrant status (appendix tables 2, 8). The population
includes an additional 1,620 probationers supervised for
another state through an interstate compact agreement
(appendix table 2).

Minnesota--total probation population on December 31, 2009
includes an additional 1,064 probationers supervised for
another state through an interstate compact agreement
(appendix table 2). Minnesota classifies Hispanic or Latino
as an ethnicity rather than a race. There were 6,170 Hispanic
or Latino probationers under supervision on December 31,
2009, but they were reported among the other racial
categories (appendix table 7).

Missouri--has two reporting agencies--one state agency,
representing 99% of Missouri's total probation population,
and one local agency (appendix table 2).

Montana--has four reporting agencies--one state agency,
representing 95% of Montana's total probation population, and
three local agencies (appendix table 2)
.
New Hampshire--total probation population on December 31,
2009 includes an additional 476 probationers supervised for
another state through an interstate compact agreement
(appendix table 2).

New Mexico--has two reporting agencies--one state agency,
representing 74% of New Mexico's total probation population,
and one local agency. New Mexico's total probation population
on December 31, 2009 includes an additional unknown number of
probationers supervised for another state through an
interstate compact agreement (appendix table 2).

Reporting changes since 2000--New Mexico's state agency
changed its method of reporting probation data beginning with
its January 1, 2003 population when its information system
was modified to include certain probationers who had been
previously excluded from its population. The reporting change
resulted in a difference of approximately 4,700 additional
probationers in New Mexico's total population reported
between December 31, 2002 (11,626) and January 1, 2003
(16,287). 

The state agency experienced another reporting change
beginning with its January 1, 2006 population because the
agency's information system did not have the capacity to
report probationers on statuses other than active
supervision. This reporting change resulted in a decline of
about 3,700 in New Mexico's total probation population
reported between December 31, 2005 (18,706) and January 1,
2006 (14,982). 

The state agency changed its method of reporting probationers
again beginning with its January 1, 2007 population, when its
capacity to report data, including probationers on different
types of supervision statuses, was enhanced. The reporting
change resulted in a difference of nearly 1,400 additional
probationers in New Mexico's total population reported
between December 31, 2006 (16,493) and January 1, 2007
(17,878). The total change in New Mexico's probation
population was an increase of about 9,600 between 2000 and
2009.

New York--Reporting changes since 2000--changed its method of
reporting probation data, beginning with its January 1, 2003
population, for two different reasons. First, the state
reconciled the status of certain probationers in its
information system based on new guidelines. Second, the
probation data reported prior to January 1, 2003 were case
counts, not counts of individuals. The reporting change
resulted in a decrease of nearly 65,100 probationers between
the December 31, 2002 (198,042) and January 1, 2003 (132,966)
populations reported by New York. The total change in New
York's probation population was a decrease of about 67,300
between 2000 and 2009.

Ohio--has 187 reporting agencies--one state agency,
representing 7% of Ohio's total probation population, and 186
local agencies. One local probation agency did not provide
data for 2009. The December 31, 2008 probation population
reported by this agency in 2008 was used as an estimate of
this agency's January 1, 2009 and December 31, 2009 probation
populations. 

Ohio's total probation population on December 31, 2009
excludes an estimate of at least 16 probationers supervised
by another state through an interstate compact agreement and
an unspecified number of probationers on an inactive status
(appendix tables 2, 8). Ohio's total probation population on
December 31, 2009 includes an estimate of at least 73
probationers supervised for another state through an
interstate compact agreement (appendix table 2). 

Oklahoma--has three reporting agencies--one state agency,
representing 85% of Oklahoma's total probation population,
and two local agencies (appendix table 2).

Pennsylvania--technically, Pennsylvania has one reporting
agency, which is the state agency. The state agency reports
both state and county data. However, the county data are
reported separately from the state data. The state probation
population represented 3% of Pennsylvania's total probation
population on December 31, 2009, while the county probation
population represented 97% (appendix table 2). 

Reporting changes since 2000--Pennsylvania changed its method
of reporting county probation data, starting with the
December 31, 2004 population, by reconciling the status of
certain offenders who were previously classified as being on
a dual probation and parole status. The reporting change
resulted in a difference of nearly 30,000 additional
probationers in Pennsylvania's total population reported
between January 1, 2004 (137,206) and December 31, 2004
(167,180). The total change in Pennsylvania's probation
population was an increase of approximately 71,100
probationers between 2000 and 2009.

Rhode Island--Rhode Island's information system classifies
Hispanic or Latino as a race rather than an ethnicity;
therefore, parolees reported in Hispanic or Latino may also
be of another race. In addition, parolees reported among
other racial categories may also be Hispanic or Latino. Rhode
Island's information system does not include a racial
category for Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander or two or
more races (appendix table 7). Active includes an unknown
number of probationers in residential/other treatment program
because they could not be reported separately. Inactive
includes an unknown number of probationers who were an
absconder because they could not be reported separately, and
2,397 probationers incarcerated in state or federal prison
(appendix table 8). See incarcerated prison in appendix table
11. 

Tennessee--has three reporting agencies--one state agency,
representing 85% of Tennessee's total probation population,
and two local agencies. The population includes an additional
3,010 probationers supervised for another state through an
interstate compact agreement (appendix table 2).

Texas--total probation population on December 31, 2009
includes an additional 6,039 probationers supervised for
another state through an interstate compact agreement
(appendix table 2).

Vermont--total probation population on December 31, 2009
excludes an estimated 17 probationers supervised by another
state through an interstate compact agreement (appendix
tables 2, 8). The population includes an estimated 22
probationers supervised for another state through an
interstate compact agreement (appendix table 2). Vermont's
information system does not include a racial category for
Hispanic or Latino and does not collect any ethnicity data;
therefore, the number of Hispanic or Latino probationers
could not be reported and whether or not other racial
categories include Hispanic or Latino probationers could not
be determined. Vermont's information system also does not
include a racial category for Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific
Islander or two or more races (appendix table 7).

Virginia--total probation population on December 31, 2009
includes an additional unknown number of probationers
supervised for another state through an interstate compact
agreement (appendix table 2). Location tracked by GPS--total
includes an unknown number of parolees tracked by GPS because
the number of probationers could not be reported separately
(appendix table 11). 

Washington--has 31 reporting agencies--one state agency,
representing 14% of Washington's total probation population,
and 30 local agencies. One local probation agency in
Washington closed during 2009. All of the decrease in
Washington's total probation population (down 12.6% or down
13,899 probationers) during 2009 resulted from a decline in
the state agency's probation population (down 50.9% or down
14,408 probationers). The decrease in the state agency's
probation population was associated with legislation passed
in 2009 that changed sentencing and supervision laws in order
to reduce caseloads to address budgetary constraints. The
legislation resulted in focusing resources primarily on
high-risk, violent offenders; the number of offenders
supervised by the state agency for misdemeanors and
non-violent offenses was reduced significantly (appendix
table 2).

Washington's total probation population on December 31, 2009
excludes 3,096 probationers on warrant status and an
estimated 49 probationers supervised by another state through
an interstate compact agreement (appendix tables 2, 8). The
population includes an additional 10 probationers supervised
for another state through an interstate compact agreement
(appendix table 2). 

Reporting changes since 2000--Washington's state agency
changed its method of reporting probation data beginning with
its January 1, 2004 population when the agency reclassified
certain offenders on supervised release following a prison
term from probationers to parolees. The change resulted in a
decrease of nearly 25,100 in Washington's total probation
population reported between December 31, 2003 (172,814) and
January 1, 2004 (147,741). The total change in Washington's
probation population was a decrease of about 53,300
probationers between 2000 and 2009. 

West Virginia--has two state reporting agencies. One state
agency represented 97% of West Virginia's total probation
population and reported all probationers under the
jurisdiction of the state except some probationers supervised
by another state through an interstate compact agreement.
This agency does not have jurisdiction over those
probationers. The second state agency has jurisdiction over
probationers supervised out of state through an interstate
compact agreement, and this agency only reported those
probationers (appendix table 2). On parole includes
probationers who were also on parole and under home
incarceration (appendix table 11). 

Wisconsin--Asian includes an unknown number of parolees who
were Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander because Native
Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander could not be reported
separately (appendix table 7).

Wyoming--total probation population on December 31, 2009
includes an additional 246 probationers supervised for
another state through an interstate compact
agreement(appendix table 2).

Parole: Explanatory notes

Federal--data for the federal system were provided to BJS
through the BJS Federal Justice Statistics Program (FJSP),
which obtained data directly from the Office of Probation and
Pretrial Services, Administrative Office of the United States
Courts. Federal parole (as defined here) includes a term of
supervised release from prison, mandatory release, parole,
military parole, and special parole. Definitional differences
exist between parole reported here and in other BJS data
series.

Alabama--has two reporting agencies--one state agency,
representing 100% of Alabama's total parole population, and
one local agency. Alabama's total parole population on
December 31, 2009 includes an additional 618 parolees
supervised for another state through an interstate compact
agreement (appendix table 12).

Reporting changes since 2000--Alabama's state agency changed
its method of reporting parole data beginning with the
January 1, 2006 population by including certain offenders
whose status had been classified as other than a parolee in
prior years. The reporting change resulted in a difference of
approximately 500 additional parolees in Alabama's total
parole population reported between December 31, 2005 (7,252)
and January 1, 2006 (7,795). 

The state agency changed its reporting method again beginning
with the January 1, 2007 population when it consolidated data
sources. The change resulted in a decline of about 1,200
parolees in Alabama's total parole population reported
between December 31, 2006 (8,685) and January 1, 2007
(7,508). The total change in Alabama's parole population was
an increase of about 2,900 between 2000 and 2009. 

Alaska--total parole population on December 31, 2009 includes
an additional unknown number of parolees supervised for
another state through an interstate compact agreement
(appendix table 12).

Reporting changes since 2000--Alaska made improvements to its
method of reporting parole data starting with its January 1,
2007 population. The reporting change resulted in a
difference of nearly 500 additional parolees between the
December 31, 2006 (1,044) and January 1, 2007 (1,527)
populations reported by Alaska. The total change in Alaska's
parole population was an increase of about 1,400 parolees
between 2000 and 2009.

Arizona--total parole population on December 31, 2009
includes an additional estimated 521 parolees supervised for
another state through an interstate compact agreement
(appendix table 12).

California--has two reporting agencies one state agency,
representing 99.9% of California's total parole population,
and the California Youth Authority (CYA). California's total
parole population on December 31, 2009 excludes 916 parolees
supervised out of state through an interstate compact
agreement and 15,633 absconders (appendix tables 12, 18). The
population includes an additional 1,466 parolees supervised
for another state through an interstate compact agreement
(appendix table 12). Asian excludes an unknown number of
Filipino parolees because they were classified as Pacific
Islander and therefore reported in Native Hawaiian/Other
Pacific Islander (appendix table 17). Mandatory includes a
small, unknown number of parolees who received a
discretionary release from prison (appendix table 21).

Colorado--total parole population on December 31, 2009
includes an additional 313 parolees supervised by another
state through an interstate compact agreement (appendix table
12). The 2009 reporting methods and classification of types
of entry to parole were enhanced compared to 2005 through
2008; therefore, the 2009 data report for discretionary and
mandatory entries to parole may not be comparable to the 2005
through 2008 data reported (appendix table 13). The 2,150
parolees reported in supervised out of state includes an
unknown number of parolees released to a detainer for other
charges and some who were detained by the U.S. Immigration
and Customs Enforcement (ICE) agency for deportation
(appendix table 18). 

Connecticut--in September of 2007, Connecticut's Governor
mandated immediate changes to the parole hearing policies
used by Connecticut's Board of Pardons and Paroles in
response to a tragic crime that occurred in July of 2007. The
mandated changes resulted in an immediate decrease in the
parole population, but since that time the parole population
increased steadily. The increase (up 23.4% or 545 additional
parolees) in Connecticut's parole population during 2009
resulted from additional staff that have addressed hearing
backlogs and expedited the hearing process (appendix table
12).  More than one year includes parolees with a maximum
sentence to incarceration of more than two years because
Connecticut statute stipulates that parole eligible sentences
are sentences of more than two years (appendix table 19). 

Delaware--total parole population on December 31, 2009
includes an additional 150 parolees supervised for another
state through an interstate compact agreement (appendix table
12).

District of Columbia--some of the increase (up 9.6% or 552
parolees) in the District of Columbia's parole population
during 2009 was associated with a slowing rate of discharge.
For example, more parolees who had their parole term extended
due to non-compliant behavior. This resulted in fewer
parolees discharged compared to the number that entered
supervision during the year, which contributed to the
increase during 2009 (appendix table 12). 

Florida--total parole population on December 31, 2009
includes an additional 27 parolees supervised for another
state through an interstate compact agreement (appendix table
12).

Georgia--all parolees reported in reinstatement were
originally released from prison through a discretionary
release (appendix table 13). Number of parolees reported in
death is an underestimate of the number of parolees who died
while on parole during 2009. Parolees who died are reported
as part of Georgia's parole population until the death
certificate is received; then, the parolee is discharged as
of the day the death occurred (appendix table 14).
Incarcerated-prison includes parole violators who were held
in short-term correctional facilities but still on parole,
some of whom were attending programs (appendix table 22).

Hawaii--total parole population on December 31, 2009 includes
an additional 42 parolees supervised for another state
through an interstate compact agreement (appendix table 12).

Idaho--total parole population on December 31, 2009 includes
an additional 165 parolees supervised for another state
through an interstate compact agreement (appendix table 12).

Indiana--total parole population on December 31, 2009
excludes 464 parolees supervised by another state through an
interstate compact agreement (appendix tables 12, 18).

Iowa--total parole population on December 31, 2009 excludes
269 parolees supervised by another state through an
interstate compact agreement (appendix tables 12, 18).

Kansas--total parole population on December 31, 2009 excludes
212 absconders (appendix tables 12, 18). The Kansas
Sentencing Guidelines Act with its determinate sentencing
structure became effective July 1, 1993. Previously, Kansas
had indeterminate sentencing. As a result, a number of
entries to parole involved offenders with "guidelines" or
"new law" sentences (which have determinate periods of
post-incarceration supervision). In 2007 and previous years,
it was not possible for Kansas to differentiate between
entries to parole of "old law" and "new law" offenders. For
example, releases to post-incarceration supervision (for a
determinate period under new law) were included with regular
parole releases (for an indeterminate period under old law)
in discretionary entries to parole. For these reasons, types
of entries to parole reported by Kansas in 2007 and previous
years may not be comparable to types of entries to parole
reported by Kansas beginning in 2008. 

Other entries include 1,184 parolees who entered supervision
from absconder status after a warrant was cleared and 174
other parolees (appendix table 13). Absconder includes
parolees who could not be located and had a warrant issued
for their arrest. Other exits include parolees who exited
supervision because a warrant had been issued for other
reasons (appendix table 14). More than one year includes a
relatively small but unknown number of parolees who were
sentenced for a felony, but the incarceration portion of
their sentence was one year or less (appendix table 19).

Kentucky--total parole population on December 31, 2009
includes an additional 480 parolees supervised for another
state through an interstate compact agreement (appendix table
12).

Louisiana--total parole population on December 31, 2009
includes an additional 625 parolees supervised for another
state through an interstate compact agreement (appendix table
12).

Maryland--changes in reporting related to the classification
of certain types of offenders and limited access to
information systems occurred during 2009. For these reasons,
parole data may not be comparable to data reported by
Maryland in previous years (appendix tables 13, 14, 18, 19,
20, and 22). 

Massachusetts--total parole population on December 31, 2009
includes an additional 284 parolees supervised for another
state through an interstate compact agreement (appendix table
12).

Michigan--total parole population on December 31, 2009
includes an additional 1,175 parolees supervised for another
state through an interstate compact agreement (appendix table
12). Number of parolees reported in Hispanic or Latino is an
underestimate because Michigan's information system does not
include a category which directly tracks and measures
parolees who are Hispanic or Latino (appendix table 17).
Violent includes an unknown number of parolees supervised for
a weapon offense (appendix table 20). 

Mississippi--the increase (up 85.7% or 2,504 parolees) in
Mississippi's parole population during 2009 resulted from
legislation passed in 2008 which amended parole law to make
all offenders never convicted of a violent crime or crime
with enhanced penalty parole eligible regardless of the
number of prior convictions. The 2008 legislation also made
the sale or manufacture of a controlled substance parole
eligible unless the crime had an enhanced penalty or involved
over one kilogram of marijuana (appendix table 12).

Montana--data reported by Montana in 2009 may not be
comparable to data reported by Montana in previous years due
to changes in reporting (appendix tables 12-14 and 16-22).
See Reporting changes since 2000 below.

Reporting changes since 2000--Montana changed its method of
reporting parole data beginning with the January 1, 2009
population. The state implemented a new, enhanced information
system that improved the tracking of all types of parolees,
some of whom were not reported in previous years. The change
resulted in an additional 177 parolees between the December
31, 2008 (885) and January 1, 2009 (1,062) parole populations
reported by Montana. The total change in Montana's parole
population was an increase of about 400 parolees between 2000
and 2009.  

New Hampshire--total parole population on December 31, 2009
includes an additional 68 parolees supervised for another
state through an interstate compact agreement (appendix table
12).

New Mexico--total parole population on December 31, 2009
includes an additional unknown number of parolees supervised
for another state through an interstate compact agreement
(appendix table 12).

Reporting changes since 2000--New Mexico changed its method
of reporting parole data beginning with its January 1, 2007
population because its information system was enhanced, which
resulted in an increased capacity to report data, including
parolees on different types of supervision statuses. The
reporting change resulted in a difference of almost 600
additional parolees in New Mexico's total parole population
reported between December 31, 2006 (2,922) and January 1,
2007 (3,517). The total change in New Mexico's parole
population was an increase of nearly 1,500 parolees between
2000 and 2009.

New York--other entries include parolees released from prison
at the time of their eligibility without an appearance before
a parole board. New York refers to this type of release as a
presumptive release. Inmates who served sentences for
non-violent offenses and who had no history of violence were
eligible for a presumptive release. New York's presumptive
release law was enacted in 2003, implemented at the end of
2003, and became fully operational during 2004. Other entries
also include parolees who were sentenced directly to parole
supervision with the requirement that they complete a 90-day
drug and alcohol treatment program. New York refers to this
type of entry as judicially sanctioned and it falls under the
Sentencing Reform Act of 1995. Certain drug and property
offenders were eligible for a judicially sanctioned entry to
parole supervision. Other entries also include parolees
released from local jails. In 2006 the New York Division of
Parole resumed the responsibility for supervising selected
inmates released from local jails after serving a sentence of
less than one year. These parolees remain under parole
supervision for one year (appendix table 13). 

Returned to incarceration-to receive treatment includes
select parole violators who were sent to a 30-day or 90-day
treatment program in a state correctional facility in lieu of
a revocation and return to prison. Prior to 2009, these data
were reported in returned to incarceration--other/unknown
(appendix table 14). Special conditional type of release from
prison includes inmates who were released to "medical parole"
because that type of parole permits the release of certain
terminally ill inmates prior to serving their full sentence.
Other type of release from prison includes the same
classifications of parolees who had been reported in the
other entries category (appendix table 21).

North Carolina--total parole population on December 31, 2009
includes offenders under post-release supervision.
Post-release supervision is defined under North Carolina's
Structured Sentencing Act of 1993 as a reintegration program
for serious offenders who served extensive prison terms
(appendix table 12). Post-release offenders were reported in
term of supervised release (appendix table 21).

Ohio--the decrease (down 23.8% or down 4,544 parolees) in
Ohio's parole population during 2009 was related to an Ohio
Supreme Court case from October 2009. The result was a
mandate to discharge certain post-prison persons from parole,
which was first implemented in November 2009 and continued
through February 2010 (appendix table 12).

Pennsylvania--technically has one reporting agency, which is
the state agency. The state agency reports both state and
county parole data. However, these data are reported
separately. The state parole population represented 34% of
Pennsylvania's total parole population on December 31, 2009,
while the county parole population represented 66% (appendix
table 12).

Reporting changes since 2000--Pennsylvania changed its method
of reporting county parole data, starting with its December
31, 2004 population, by reconciling the status of certain
offenders who were previously classified as being on a dual
probation and parole status. The change resulted in a decline
of approximately 25,100 parolees in Pennsylvania's total
population reported between January 1, 2004 (102,244) and
December 31, 2004 (77,175). The total change in
Pennsylvania's parole population was a decrease of nearly
7,200 parolees between 2000 and 2009.

Rhode Island--total parole population on December 31, 2009
excludes 40 parolees supervised by another state through an
interstate compact agreement (appendix tables 12, 18). Rhode
Island's information system classifies Hispanic or Latino as
a race rather than an ethnicity; therefore, parolees reported
as Hispanic or Latino may also be of another race. In
addition parolees reported among other racial categories may
also be Hispanic or Latino. Rhode Island's information system
does not include a racial category for Native Hawaiian/Other
Pacific Islander or two or more races (appendix table 17). 

South Carolina--the decrease (down13.2% or down 245 parolees)
in South Carolina's parole population during 2009 was related
to both the implementation of South Carolina's "no parole"
law (for most violent offenses) passed in 1995, which reduced
the number of inmates eligible for parole, and a decrease in
the percentage of inmates paroled by the Board of Paroles and
Pardons (appendix table 12).
 
Tennessee--increase (up 11.1% or 1,163 parolees) in Tennessee's
parole population during 2009 was associated with both a
Tennessee statute that permitted prisons operating at 90%
capacity or greater to extend parole eligibility to low-risk,
non-violent inmates and a lower revocation rate which
resulted in some parolees remaining under supervision longer
to receive treatment. Total parole population on December 31,
2009 includes an additional 956 parolees supervised for
another state through an interstate compact agreement
(appendix table 12).

Vermont--total parole population on December 31, 2009
includes an additional estimated 47 parolees supervised by
another state through an interstate compact agreement
(appendix tables 12). Vermont's information system does not
include a racial category for Hispanic or Latino and does not
collect any ethnicity data; therefore, the number of Hispanic
or Latino parolees could not be reported and whether or not
other racial categories include Hispanic or Latino parolees
could not be determined. Vermont's information system also
does not include a racial category for Native Hawaiian/Other
Pacific Islander or two or more races (appendix table 17). 

Virginia--total parole population on December 31, 2009
includes an additional unknown number of parolees supervised
for another state through an interstate compact agreement
(appendix table 12). Location tracked by GPS--total includes
an unknown number of probationers tracked by GPS because the
number of parolees could not be reported separately (appendix
table 22). 

Reporting changes since 2000--Virginia changed its method of
reporting parolees starting with its January 1, 2007
population when it expanded the scope of its parole
population based on new guidelines. The change included
post-release offenders who had been excluded from the parole
counts reported by the state in prior years. The reporting
change resulted in a difference of approximately 3,200
additional parolees between the December 31, 2006 (3,978) and
January 1, 2007 (7,201) populations reported by the state. 
In 2008 Virginia consolidated its databases, which led to
subsequent data review and cleanup. This reporting change
resulted in a decrease of an estimated 2,200 parolees between
the December 31, 2007 population (6,850) reported by the
state and the imputed January 1, 2008 population (estimated
at 4,700). The total change in Virginia's parole population
was a decline of nearly 500 parolees between 2000 and 2009.

Washington--the decrease (down 44.4% or down 5,205 parolees)
in Washington's parole population during 2009 was associated
with legislation passed in 2009 that changed sentencing and
supervision laws in order to reduce caseloads to address
budgetary constraints. The legislation resulted in focusing
resources primarily on high-risk, violent offenders; the
number of offenders supervised for misdemeanors and
non-violent offenses was reduced significantly (appendix
table 12).

Reporting changes since 2000 Washington changed its method of
reporting parole data starting with its January 1, 2004
population, when it reclassified certain offenders on
supervised release following a prison term from a probation
status to a parole status. The change in the state's parole
population was a difference of 24,800 additional parolees
between the December 31, 2003 (105) and January 1, 2004
(24,905) populations reported by the state. The total change
in Washington's parole population was an increase of about
6,400 parolees between 2000 and 2009.

Wisconsin--Asian includes an unknown number of parolees who
were Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander because Native
Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander could not be reported
separately (appendix table 17). A change in reporting the
number of parolees tracked by GPS occurred during 2009;
therefore, data may not be comparable to data reported by
Wisconsin in 2008. Incarcerated--prison only includes
parolees incarcerated in a state prison in Wisconsin; the
count does not include parolees, if any, incarcerated in a
federal prison (appendix table 22). 

-------------------------------------------------------
The Bureau of Justice Statistics is the statistical agency of
the U.S. Department of Justice. James P. Lynch is director.

BJS Bulletins present the first release of findings from
permanent data collection programs.
Lauren E. Glaze, Thomas P. Bonczar, and Fan Zhang wrote this
report. Lauren E. Glaze, Thomas P. Bonczar, and Fan Zhang
analyzed the data and prepared the graphs and tables. Laura
M. Maruschak, William J. Sabol, and Todd D. Minton provided
statistical verification. Sheri R. Simmons provided
statistical review. 

Jorgelina A. Arroyo carried out the data collection and
processing under the supervision of Nicole S. Adolph,
Governments Division, Census Bureau, U.S. Department of
Commerce. Ryan D. Driscoll provided technical assistance
under the supervision of Duane H. Cavanaugh.  Janean Darden
and Angel Johnson assisted in the data collection.

Brian R. Higgins (Lockheed Martin) and Jill Thomas edited the
report. Tina Dorsey produced the report and Jayne E. Robinson
prepared the report for final printing under the supervision
of Doris J. James.
December 2010, NCJ 231674

---------------------------------------------------------

This report in portable document format and in ASCII and its
related statistical data and tables are available at the BJS
website:
<http://bjs.ojp.usdoj.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbdetail&iid=2233>.
----------------------------------------------------------
Office of Justice Programs
Innovation * Partnerships * Safer Neighborhoods
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov
---------------------------------------------------------
12/9/2010/JER 10:18 am(new changes)    