U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Programs
Bureau of Justice Statistics

-------------------------------------------------------
This file is text only without graphics and many of the
tables. A Zip archive of the tables in this report in
spreadsheet format (.csv) and the full report including
tables and graphics in .pdf format are available on BJS
website at: http://www.bjs.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbdetail&iid=5415

This report is one in a series. More recent editions 
may be available. To view a list of all in the series 
go to http://bjs.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbse&sid=42

-------------------------------------------------------

Bulletin	

Probation and Parole in the United States, 2014

Danielle Kaeble, Laura M. Maruschak, and Thomas P. Bonczar, 
BJS Statisticians

At yearend 2014, an estimated 4,708,100 adults were under 
community supervision—a decrease of about 45,300 offenders or 1% 
from yearend 2013 (figure 1). ***Footnote 1 The community 
supervision population excludes parolees who were on probation to 
avoid double counting offenders. See table 5 and Methodology.*** 
About 1 in 52 adults in the United States was under community 
supervision at yearend 2014. This population includes adults on 
probation, parole, or any other post-prison supervision, with 
probationers accounting for the majority (82%) of adults under 
community supervision. (See BJS definition of probation and 
parole.)

The small decline (down 1%) observed in the adult community 
corrections population was due to the drop in the probation 
population. The probation population declined from an estimated 
3,910,600 offenders at yearend 2013 to 3,864,100 at yearend 2014, 
falling by about 46,500 offenders. The decline in the adult 
community corrections population was slightly offset by a small 
increase in the parole population, which grew from about 855,200 
offenders at yearend 2013 to 856,900 at yearend 2014.

****************************************************
************
HIGHLIGHTS
************

* At yearend 2014, an estimated 4,708,100 adults were under 
community supervision—down by about 45,300 offenders from yearend 
2013.

* Approximately 1 in 52 adults in the United States was under 
community supervision at yearend 2014.

* Between yearend 2013 and 2014, the adult probation population 
declined by about 46,500 offenders (down 1.2%), falling to an 
estimated 3,864,100 offenders at yearend 2014.

* Entries onto probation decreased about 1.3% during 2014, and 
exits declined about 1.0% to an estimated 2,130,700.

* The adult parole population increased by about 1,600 offenders 
(up 0.2%) between yearend 2013 and 2014, to an estimated 856,900 
offenders at yearend 2014.

* Both entries and exits to parole decreased about 1.5% in 2014.

* The reincarceration rate among parolees at risk of violating 
their conditions of supervision remained stable at about 9% in 
2013 and 2014.
*****************************************************

Data in this report were collected through the Bureau of Justice 
Statistics’ (BJS) Annual Probation Survey and Annual Parole 
Survey. Both surveys collect data from U.S. probation and parole 
agencies on yearend counts, movements (i.e., entries and exits), 
characteristics, and outcomes of supervision. For this report, an 
adult is any person subject to the jurisdiction of an adult court 
or correctional agency. Reporting methods for some probation and 
parole agencies have changed over time (see Methodology). 
Appendix tables 3, 4, 5, 6, and 7 present additional 2014 data by 
jurisdiction.

**************************************
Community supervision population 
experienced a small decline in 2014
**************************************

By yearend 2014, about 4.7 million offenders were under community 
supervision, a decrease of about 45,300 offenders from yearend 
2013 (table 1). During the same period, the probation population 
decreased by about 46,500 persons. The decline in the probation 
population, partially offset by the slight increase of an 
estimated 1,600 parolees in 2014, accounted for all of the 
decline in the community supervision population.

Although the decline in the community supervision population in 
2014 was small (down 1%), it was part of a longer trend. In each 
year from 2008 to 2014, declines have ranged from 0.5% to 2.6%. 
Overall, the population under community supervision has declined 
8% over the past 7 years. The probation population has declined 
for 7 consecutive years. The overall decrease in the probation 
population was 10% from 4.3 million at yearend 2007 to an 
estimated 3.9 million at yearend 2014. While the number of 
offenders on probation declined from 2007 to 2014, the parole 
population increased by 3.7% from an estimated 826,100 at yearend 
2007 to about 856,900 at yearend 2014.

*****************************************************

***************************************
BJS definition of probation and parole
***************************************

Probation is a court-ordered period of correctional supervision 
in the community, generally as an alternative to incarceration. 
In some cases, probation can be a combined sentence of 
incarceration followed by a period of community supervision.
Parole is a period of conditional supervised release in the 
community following a prison term. It includes parolees released 
through discretionary or mandatory supervised release from 
prison, those released through other types of post-custody 
conditional supervision, and those sentenced to a term of 
supervised release.
*****************************************************

**************************************
Rates of adults under community 
supervision continued to decline 
for both probation and parole in 2014
**************************************

The rate of adults under community supervision fell from an 
estimated 1,947 offenders per 100,000 U.S. adult residents at 
yearend 2013 to 1,910 offenders per 100,000 at yearend 2014 
(table 2). The probation rate declined from 1,602 offenders per 
100,000 U.S. adult residents at yearend 2013 to 1,568 offenders 
per 100,000 at yearend 2014. Due to the growth in the U.S. adult 
resident population, the parole rate declined from 350 offenders 
per 100,000 U.S. adult residents in 2013 to 348 per 100,000 in 
2014 despite the increase in the number of parolees. Overall, 
community supervision, probation, and parole rates were down 
from the peak rates observed at yearend 2007.

**************************************
Probation entries and exits 
decreased in 2014
**************************************

While the number of entries to and exits from probation have 
changed over time, they have generally moved in the same 
direction in a given year. After peaking in 2007, entries began 
a steady decline, while exits continued to increase, peaking in 
2009. In 2009, exits exceeded entries and continued to do so 
through 2014.

From 2013 to 2014, probation entries declined 1.3% from an 
estimated 2,094,100 entries to 2,067,100 (figure 2). During the 
same period, exits declined by 600 from an estimated 2,131,300 
exits to 2,130,700. These declines in both entries and exits led 
to the overall decline in movements on and off probation, from 
4,225,400 during 2013 to 4,197,800 during 2014. (See Methodology 
for a discussion of estimating change in population counts.)

**************************************
Exit rate for probationers increased 
slightly after 2 years of decreases, 
returning to the rate observed each 
year from 2008 to 2011
**************************************

The rate at which probationers exit supervision—the number that 
exit probation divided by the average of the probation population 
at the beginning and end of the year—provides a measure of how 
quickly the population turns over. Following a decline in the 
exit rate between 2011 and 2012, the rate increased in 2013 to 54 
exits per 100 probationers and again in 2014 to 55 per 100, the 
rate that was observed each year from 2008 to 2011 (table 3). In 
2014, the mean length of stay on probation was 21.9 months.

The completion rate—turnover due to completing the term of 
supervision either through a full-term completion or early 
discharge—was 35 exits per 100 probationers during 2014. The same 
rate was observed in 2008 and was slightly lower than the 36 
exits per 100 probationers that held constant from 2009 to 2013. 
In 2014, the rate of exiting due to an incarceration was 8 exits 
per 100 probationers, the same rate observed in 2012 and 2013.

**************************************
Incarceration rate among at-risk 
probationers remained stable
**************************************

The incarceration rate among probationers at risk of violating 
their conditions of supervision—including incarceration for a new 
offense, a revocation, and other reasons—in 2014 (5.0%) was 
similar to the rate reported in 2013 (5.4%) (figure 3). Since 
2000, the incarceration rate has remained relatively stable, 
ranging from 4.5% to 6.1%. The incarceration rate is defined as 
the ratio of the number of probationers who were discharged and 
incarcerated during the year to the number of probationers who 
were at risk of incarceration at any point during the year. The 
probation population at risk of incarceration includes the 
population at the beginning of the year and all probation entries 
during the year.

**************************************
Probation population characteristics 
changed slightly since 2000
**************************************

At yearend 2014, a quarter (25%) of probationers were female, 
compared to 22% of probationers in 2000 (table 4). At yearend 
2014, more than half (54%) of probationers were non-Hispanic 
white, 30% were non-Hispanic black, and 13% were Hispanic or 
Latino--a similar distribution for race and Hispanic origin 
observed in 2000.

The percentage of probationers supervised for a felony offense 
increased from 52% in 2000 to 56% in 2014. The percentage of 
probationers on active status has decreased slightly since 2000, 
falling from 76% in 2000 to 73% in 2014. However, probationers on 
active status increased in 2014 from 69% in 2013. Active 
probationers are defined as those required to regularly contact a 
probation authority in person, by mail, by telephone, or 
electronically.

**************************************
U.S. parole population experienced 
small fluctuations since yearend 2011
**************************************

The total parole population has changed little since yearend 
2011, ranging from a high of 857,800 offenders on parole in 2012 
to a low of 854,600 at yearend 2011. At yearend 2014, an 
estimated 856,900 offenders were on parole, up from 855,200 at 
yearend 2013. The state parole population accounted for the 
entire increase (up about 3,600 offenders), while the federal 
parole population decreased (down about 2,000 offenders). The 
0.2% increase in the parole population at yearend 2014 compared 
to yearend 2013 marks the third consecutive yearend change that 
was less than 0.5%.

**************************************
Parole entries and exits declined in 
2014; entries continued to exceed exits
**************************************

Between 2013 and 2014, parole entries declined 6,600 from an 
estimated 466,800 to 460,200, and exits declined 7,700 from 
459,600 to 451,900 (figure 4). The 1.4% decline in entries to 
parole from yearend 2013 to yearend 2014 was consistent with the 
1% decrease in the number of prison releases during the same 
period. (For more information, see Prisoners in 2014, NCJ 248955, 
BJS web, September 2015.) Exits from parole declined 1.7% from 
2013 to 2014. Both entries and exits have declined in the past 
five years, resulting in a decrease in the overall movement of 
the parole population. In 2014, parolees entered or exited 
supervision 912,100 times, down from 926,400 in 2013.

**************************************
Parole exit rate decreased for the 
fifth consecutive year
**************************************

The parole exit rate fell to 53 exits per 100 parolees in 2014, 
continuing a downward trend first observed in 2010 (table 5). 
During the same period, the mean length of stay on parole 
increased from 17.9 months in 2010 to 22.7 months in 2014. The 
exit rate due to completion of term of supervision or early 
discharge was 33 exits per 100 parolees in 2014, unchanged since 
2011 and only slightly lower than the rate observed in 2010 (35 
per 100 parolees). In 2014, the rate of return to incarceration 
remained unchanged from 2013 at 14 exits per 100 parolees, but 
was down overall from 22 per 100 in 2010. The largest decline in 
the rate occurred between 2011 and 2012. The decline observed in 
the exit rate in 2012 was largely due to the decline in the 
number of parolees being returned to incarceration in California.

**************************************
Reincarceration rate among parolees 
remained stable since 2012
**************************************

An estimated 9.0% of all parolees who were at risk of 
reincarceration during 2014 were incarcerated, similar to the 
rate in 2013 (9.3%) (figure 5). Overall, this rate has declined 
from 2000 to 2014. The incarceration rate is defined as the ratio 
of the number of parolees who were discharged during the year as 
the result of incarceration to the number of parolees who were at 
risk of incarceration at any point during the year. The parole 
population at risk of incarceration is defined as the sum of the 
population at the beginning of the year and all parole entries 
during the year. In 2014, 2.8% of parolees who were at risk of 
reincarceration were incarcerated for a new sentence, which was 
unchanged from 2013. The rate at which parolees were 
reincarcerated as a result of revocation was 5.2% in 2014, 
compared to 5.6% in 2013.

**************************************
Percent of Hispanic parolees 
continues to drop in 2014
**************************************

In 2014, 16% of the parole population was Hispanic or Latino, 
compared to 17% in 2013 and 21% in 2000 (table 6). Forty-three 
percent of parolees were white, up from 38% in 2000. Males 
continued to make up 88% of the adult parole population--the same 
percentage reported in 2000 and 2013.

The percentage of parolees sentenced to a maximum term of 
incarceration of less than 1 year grew from 3% in 2000 to 6% in 
2014. In 2014, about the same percentage of offenders were being 
supervised for either a violent offense (31%) or a drug crime 
(31%).

************
Methodology
************

The Bureau of Justice Statistics’ (BJS) Annual Probation Survey 
and Annual Parole Survey, which began in 1980, collect data from 
probation and parole agencies in the United States that supervise 
adults. In these data, adults are persons subject to the 
jurisdiction of an adult court or correctional agency. Juveniles 
sentenced as adults in a criminal court are considered adults. 
Juveniles under the jurisdiction of a juvenile court or juvenile 
correctional agency are excluded from these data. The National 
Criminal Justice Information and Statistics Service of the Law 
Enforcement Assistance Administration, BJS’s predecessor agency, 
began a statistical series on parole in 1976 and on probation in 
1979.

The two surveys collect data on the number of adults supervised 
in the community on January 1 and December 31 each year, the 
number of entries and exits to supervision during the reporting 
year, and characteristics of the population at yearend. See 
appendix tables for detailed data.

Both surveys cover all 50 states, the District of Columbia, and 
the federal system. BJS depends on the voluntary participation of 
state central reporters and separate state, county, and court 
agencies for these data.

During 2014, Westat (Rockville, MD) served as BJS’s collection 
agent for the 50 states and the District of Columbia. Data for 
the federal system were provided directly to BJS from the Office 
of Probation and Pretrial Services, Administrative Office of the 
United States Courts, through BJS’s Federal Justice Statistics 
Program.

************
Probation
************

The 2014 Annual Probation Survey was sent to 467 respondents. 
Following the closure of one local probation agency in Arizona, 
the addition of one agency and the elimination of four in 
Michigan, the closure of one agency in Ohio, and the elimination 
of one agency in Washington, there were a total of 461 agencies 
on the agency frame for the 2014 Annual Probation Survey. (See 
Probation: Explanatory notes for more information.) 

Respondents included 35 central state reporters; 426 separate 
state, county, or court agencies, including the state probation 
agency in Pennsylvania, which also provided data for 65 counties 
in Pennsylvania; the District of Columbia; and the federal 
system. States with multiple reporters were Alabama (3), Colorado 
(8), Florida (41), Georgia (2), Idaho (2), Kentucky (3), Michigan 
(131), Missouri (2), Montana (4), New Mexico (2), Ohio (186), 
Oklahoma (3), Pennsylvania (2), Tennessee (3), and Washington 
(32). 

Of the 461 agencies on the agency frame, 1 locality in Alabama, 1 
in Colorado, 6 in Florida, 14 in Michigan, 1 in Montana, 17 in 
Ohio, and 5 in Washington did not provide data for the 2014 
collection. For these localities, the agency’s most recent 
December 31 population was used to estimate the populations on 
January 1 and December 31, 2014.

************
Parole
************

The 2014 Annual Parole Survey was sent to 53 respondents: 50 
central state reporters, including the state parole agency in 
Pennsylvania, which also provided one separate summary record for 
the state’s 65 counties; the District of Columbia; and the 
federal system. Data for the federal system were provided 
directly to the BJS Federal Justice Statistics Program, which 
obtained data from the Office of Probation and Pretrial Services, 
Administrative Office of the United States Courts. In this 
report, federal parole includes a term of supervised release from 
prison, mandatory release, parole, military parole, and special 
parole. A term of supervised release is ordered at the time of 
sentencing by a federal judge, and it is served after release 
from a federal prison sentence. 

Additional information about the data collection instruments is 
available on the BJS website at www.bjs.gov.

**************************************
Adjustments to account for offenders 
with dual community correctional status
**************************************

Some offenders on probation or parole may have had dual community 
correctional statuses because they were serving separate 
probation and parole sentences concurrently. With the 2007 data, 
BJS began collecting information on the number of parolees who 
were also on probation at yearend. To avoid double counting, the 
total community supervision populations from 2008 through 2014 
reported in figure 1 (and the 2014 counts in appendix table 3) 
have been adjusted based on available information by excluding 
the total number of parolees who were also on probation. As a 
result, the probation and parole counts from 2008 through 2014 do 
not sum to the total community supervision population within the 
same year.

All of the estimates for parolees with dual community 
correctional statuses were based on data reported by parole 
agencies that were able to provide the information for the 
reporting year (table 7). Some probation and parole agencies were 
not able to provide these data. Therefore, the total number of 
parolees also on probation from 2008 through 2014 may be 
underestimated, which may result in overestimations in the total 
population under community supervision.

**************************************
Reporting changes in the number 
of adults on probation and parole, 
2000–2014
**************************************

In each collection year, respondents are asked to provide both 
the January 1 and December 31 population counts. At times, the 
January 1 count may differ from the December 31 count of the 
prior year. The difference reported may have resulted from 
administrative changes, such as implementing new information 
systems, leading to data review and cleanup; reconciling 
probationer records; reclassifying offenders, including those on 
probation to parole and offenders on dual community supervision 
statuses; and including certain probation populations not 
previously reported (e.g., supervised for an offense of driving 
while intoxicated or under the influence, some probationers who 
had absconded, and some on an inactive status). The discrepancy 
between the yearend 2013 and the beginning year 2014 probation 
counts resulted in an increase of 19,163 probationers (table 8). 
The discrepancy between the yearend and beginning year parole 
population count resulted in a decrease of 15,681 parolees from 
December 31, 2013 to January 1, 2014 (table 9).

**************************************
Estimating change in population counts
**************************************

Technically, the change in the probation and parole populations 
from the beginning of the year to the end of the year should 
equal the difference between entries and exits during the year. 
However, those numbers may not be equal. Some probation and 
parole information systems track the number of cases that enter 
and exit community supervision, not the number of offenders. This 
means that entries and exits may include case counts as opposed 
to counts of offenders, while the beginning and yearend 
population counts represent individuals. Additionally, all of the 
data on entries and exits may not have been logged into the 
information systems, or the information systems may not have 
fully processed all of the data before the data were submitted to 
BJS.

At the national level, 7,851 probationers were the difference 
between the change in the probation population measured by the 
difference between January 1 and December 31, 2014, populations 
and the difference between probation entries and exits during 
2014. For parole, 5,927 parolees were the difference between the 
change in the parole population measured by the difference 
between January 1 and December 31, 2014, populations and the 
difference between parole entries and exits during 2014.

Estimates of annual change reported in appendix tables 3, 4, and 
5 were calculated as the difference between the January 1 and 
December 31 populations within the reporting year.

As previously discussed, jurisdiction counts reported for January 
1 may differ from the December 31 counts reported in the previous 
year. As a result, the direction of change based on yearend data 
could be in the opposite direction of the within-year change.

In figures 1, 2, and 3, change was calculated as the difference 
between the December 31 populations for each year. The method of 
reporting annual change used in this report was based on between-
year differences in the December 31 populations and differs from 
how change was reported in prior years’ reports. Annual change in 
prior years’ reports was calculated as the difference between the 
January 1 and December 31 populations within the reporting year.

**************************************
Imputing for nonreporting agencies 
during 2014
**************************************

BJS used the methods described below to impute missing probation 
and parole data for key items, including the January 1, 2014, 
population, entries, exits, and the December 31, 2014, 
population.

**************************************
Imputing the January 1, 2014, 
probation population
**************************************

When the January 1, 2014, probation population was missing, the 
December 31, 2013, probation population value was carried over. 
This method was used to estimate the January 1, 2014, probation 
population in nonreporting counties and district agencies in 
Alabama, Colorado, Florida, Michigan, Montana, Ohio, and 
Washington.

**************************************
Imputing the December 31, 2014, 
probation population
**************************************

When the December 31, 2014, probation population was missing 
along with either the total entries or total exits, the missing 
value was imputed by estimating the net difference between the 
December 31, 2014, population and the January 1, 2014, population 
based on the ratio of the 2013 net difference between the 
December 31, 2013, population and the January 1, 2013, population 
to the January 1, 2013, population, and then adding the estimated 
difference to the January 1, 2014, population. This method was 
used to estimate the December 31, 2014, probation population in 
nonreporting counties and district agencies in Alabama, Colorado, 
Florida, Michigan, Montana, Ohio, and Washington.

**************************************
Imputing probation entries
**************************************

Based on the availability of data, BJS used three methods of 
ratio estimation to impute probation entries for agencies not 
reporting these data. The first method was used to estimate 
entries for probation agencies that were unable to report these 
data in 2014 but were able to report in 2013. BJS estimated 
probation entries in 2014 by using the ratio of entries in 2013 
to the agency’s probation population on January 1, 2013, and 
applying that ratio to the agency’s January 1, 2014, population. 
This method was used to estimate probation entries in 
nonreporting counties and district agencies in Alabama, Colorado, 
Florida, Michigan, Montana, Ohio, Washington, and Wisconsin.

The second method was used to estimate 2014 probation entries for 
agencies that did not report entries both in 2013 and 2014. The 
ratio of 2013 entries to the January 1, 2013, population among 
reporting agencies of similar size within the state was used to 
estimate the number of entries for nonreporting agencies. This 
method was used to estimate probation entries and exits for 
nonreporting counties and district agencies in Florida, Michigan, 
Ohio, and Washington.

The third method was used to estimate probation entries by using 
the ratio of 2013 imputed entries to the January 1, 2013, 
probation population and applying that ratio to the agency’s 
January 1, 2014, population. This method was used to estimate 
probation entries and exits for nonreporting agencies in Alabama, 
Colorado, New Mexico, and Rhode Island.

**************************************
Imputing parole entries
**************************************

To estimate parole entries for parole agencies that were unable 
to report these data in 2014 but were able to report in 2013, BJS 
calculated the ratio of entries in 2013 to the agency’s parole 
population on January 1, 2013, and applied that ratio to the 
agency’s January 1, 2014, population. This method was used to 
estimate parole entries in California and Wisconsin.

**************************************
Imputing probation and parole exits
**************************************

A single method was used to estimate probation and parole exits. 
For both probation and parole, BJS added the agency’s estimated 
entries in 2014 to the agency’s population on January 1, 2014, 
and subtracted that estimate from the population on December 31, 
2014. For probation, this method was used in Alabama, Colorado, 
Florida, Michigan, Montana, New Mexico, Ohio, Rhode Island, and 
Washington. For parole, this method was used in California and 
Wisconsin.

**************************************
Calculating mean length of stay
**************************************

Mean length of stay is calculated as the inverse of the exit 
rate. Patterson and Preston (2007) provide tests of various 
methods for estimating expected length of stay and report the 
results of simulations showing that under assumptions of a 
stationary population with a small growth rate, the inverse of 
the exit rate performs well relative to a life-table approach to 
estimating mean time served***Footnote 2 See Patterson, E.J., and 
Preston, S.H. (2007). Estimating mean length of stay in prison: 
methods and applications. Journal of Quantitative Criminology, 
24, 33–49.*** Based on the small growth rates in the probation 
and parole populations in recent years, the inverse of the exit 
rate suffices to provide an estimate of mean stay on probation or 
parole in recent years.

**************************************
Community supervision outcome measures
**************************************

The percentage of probationers and the percentage of parolees who 
completed supervision are defined as the number of probationers 
or parolees who completed supervision during the year and were 
discharged, among all probationers or parolees who were 
discharged from supervision during the year. The formula used to 
calculate this outcome measure is C(t)/D(t), where D(t) = C(t) + 
I(t) + O(t). In this formula, t equals the year referenced, C(t) 
equals the number of probationers or parolees who were discharged 
from supervision during the year after completing their terms or 
who received an early discharge, and D(t) equals the total number 
who were discharged from supervision during the year. D(t) 
includes C(t), the number of offenders who completed supervision; 
I(t), the number who were incarcerated during the year; and O(t), 
the number who were discharged during the year for other reasons.

The percentage of probationers and the percentage of parolees 
incarcerated were calculated using the same formula, except the 
numerator is the number of probationers or parolees who were 
discharged from supervision during the year as the result of 
being incarcerated.

The rate of incarceration (for parolees, this is also referred to 
as the rate of return to incarceration or the rate of 
reincarceration) based on the at-risk probation or parole 
population is defined as the ratio of the number of probationers 
or parolees who were discharged from supervision during the year 
(because they were incarcerated for a new offense, a revocation, 
or other reasons) to the number of all probationers or parolees 
at risk of being incarcerated during the year. The at-risk 
population is the number of probationers or parolees under 
supervision at the start of the year (on January 1) plus the 
number who entered supervision during the year. This group of 
probationers or parolees could be incarcerated at any time during 
the year; therefore, they were at risk of incarceration. The 
formula used to calculate this outcome measure is I(t)/(P(t-1) + 
E(t)), where t equals the year referenced, P(t-1) equals the 
start of the year population, and E(t) equals the number of 
probationers or parolees who entered supervision during the year.

The at-risk measure of incarceration accounts for all 
probationers or parolees under supervision during the year (i.e., 
probationers or parolees who were under supervision on January 1 
plus those who entered during the year) who are the probationers 
or parolees at risk of being incarcerated. This measure is not 
limited to those who are discharged during the year and permits 
each probationer or parolee to be incarcerated at any time during 
the year.

**************************************
Change in the Annual Parole Survey
**************************************

In 2008, the Annual Parole Survey included a new type of entry-
to-parole category—term of supervised release—to better classify 
the large majority of entries to parole reported by the federal 
system. It is a fixed period of release to the community that 
follows a fixed period of incarceration based on a determinate 
sentencing statute. Both are determined by a judge at the time of 
sentencing. Accordingly, some states began reporting term of 
supervised releases in 2008. For details about the estimating 
methods used to analyze national trends for all types of entry to 
parole, see Probation and Parole in the United States, 2010 (NCJ 
236019, BJS web, November 2011).

**************************************
Types of federal offenders under 
community supervision
**************************************

Since the Sentencing Reform Act of 1984 was enacted on November 
1, 1987, offenders sentenced to federal prison are no longer 
eligible for parole, but are required to serve a term of 
supervised release following release from prison. Those sentenced 
to prison prior to November 1, 1987, continue to be eligible for 
parole, as do persons violating laws of the District of Columbia, 
military offenders, and foreign treaty transfer offenders (see 
http://www.uscourts.gov/news/TheThirdBranch/11-05-
01/Parole_in_the_Federal_Probation_System.aspx).

The Sentencing Reform Act also required the adoption and use of 
sentencing guidelines, which also took effect on November 1, 
1987. Many offenses for which probation had been the typical 
sentence prior to this date, particularly property and regulatory 
offenses, subsequently resulted in sentences to prison. Changes 
in how federal offenders are supervised in the community were 
first described in the BJS report Federal Offenders under 
Community Supervision, 1987-96 (NCJ 168636, August 1998), and 
updated in Federal Criminal Case Processing, 2002: With Trends 
1982-2002, Reconciled Data (NCJ 207447, January 2005).

**************************************
Probation: Explanatory notes
**************************************

Federal-- Reporting changes from 2013 to 2014: data are not 
comparable to those reported in previous years, when data for the 
federal system included offenders under supervision in the U.S. 
states, and those under supervision in the federal territories of 
Puerto Rico, Guam, the Northern Mariana Islands, and the Virgin 
Islands. An estimated 281 adults were on probation supervision in 
the federal territories on January 1, 2014. They have been 
excluded from the federal probation population described in this 
report. Data processing procedures also changed between 2013 and 
2014. Together, these changes resulted in a decrease of 1,558 
probationers on January 1, 2014 (19,118) compared to December 31, 
2013 (20,676).

Alabama--Reporting changes from 2013 and 2014: data are not 
comparable to those reported in previous years. Starting on 
January 1, 2014, the state agency in Alabama began reporting data 
only for those offenders on probation at a single point in time, 
as opposed to all those who were on probation at the beginning of 
the year plus all those who had been placed on probation during 
the year. This change resulted in a decrease of 11,103 
probationers on January 1, 2014 (50,698) compared to December 31, 
2013 (61,801).

Nonreporting agencies in 2014: one local agency did not report 
data. The most recently available December 31 population count 
was used to estimate January 1, 2014, and December 31, 2014, 
populations. See Imputing entries and exits for nonreporting 
agencies in 2014.

Colorado--Nonreporting agency in 2014: one local agency did not 
report data. The most recently available December 31 population 
count was used to estimate January 1, 2014, and December 31, 
2014, populations. See Imputing entries and exits for 
nonreporting agencies in 2014.

Florida--Nonreporting agencies in 2014: six local agencies did 
not report data. The most recently available December 31 
population count was used to estimate January 1, 2014, and 
December 31, 2014, populations. See Imputing entries and exits 
for nonreporting agencies in 2014.

Georgia--Probation counts may overstate the number of offenders 
under probation supervision because the agency that reports 
county data has the capacity to report probation cases and not 
the number of individuals under supervision. Probationers with 
multiple sentences could potentially have one or more cases with 
one or more private probation agencies in one jurisdiction and 
one or more private probation agencies across jurisdictions. A 
large decrease in the number of misdemeanant probation cases 
during 2014 occurred as the result of a 2014 ruling by the 
Supreme Court of Georgia that prevented private probation 
agencies from “tolling,” or extending, the probation sentences of 
absconders—i.e., private probation agencies may not stop a 
probationer’s time from running while the probationer is in 
absconder status. Many probationers previously on warrant status 
have received unsuccessful exits from probation.

Maryland--Reporting changes from 2013 to 2014: data reported by 
Maryland for 2014 are not comparable to those reported for 
previous years because of a change in the state’s computing 
systems and extensive data cleaning. Also Maryland was unable to 
report on the number of individuals under supervision for 2014, 
as opposed to cases. The state also expanded the scope of its 
probation population to include certain DWI offenders who had 
been excluded for 2013. These changes resulted in an increase of 
40,588 probationers on January 1, 2014 (81,304), compared to 
December 31, 2013 (40,716).

Michigan--Reporting changes from 2013 to 2014: data are not 
comparable to those reported in previous years because one local 
probation agency that had been providing duplicate information 
was eliminated. This change resulted in a decrease of 225 
probationers on January 1, 2014, compared to December 31, 2013. 
One local agency was added in 2014 following the reconfiguration 
of several local agencies. However, this did not change the 
number of probationers reported on January 1, 2014, compared to 
December 31, 2013.

Nonreporting agencies in 2014: 14 local agencies did not report 
data. The most recently available December 31 population count 
was used to estimate January 1, 2014, and December 31, 2014, 
populations. See Imputing entries and exits for nonreporting 
agencies in 2014.

Montana--Nonreporting agencies in 2014: one local agency did not 
report data. The most recently available December 31 population 
count was used to estimate January 1, 2014, and December 31, 
2014, populations. See Imputing entries and exits for 
nonreporting agencies in 2014.

Ohio--Nonreporting agencies in 2014: 17 local agencies did not 
report data. The most recently available December 31 population 
count was used to estimate January 1, 2014, and December 31, 
2014, populations. See Imputing entries and exits for 
nonreporting agencies in 2014.

Closed agencies in 2014: two agencies merged. Therefore, one was 
removed from the roster because its cases are now part of one 
agency.

Washington--Nonreporting agencies in 2014: five local agencies 
did not report data. The most recently available December 31 
population count was used to estimate January 1, 2014, and 
December 31, 2014, populations. Forms continued to be sent to one 
agency that had closed in 2009, and this agency was removed from 
the population frame. See Imputing entries and exits for 
nonreporting agencies in 2014.

Reporting changes from 2013 to 2014: data are not comparable to 
those reported in previous years as a result of a change in 
methods used by the state probation agency. These changes 
resulted in a decrease of 1,820 probationers on January 1, 2014 
(9,500), compared to December 31, 2013 (11,320). The December 31, 
2014, probation population excludes 8,471 offenders on December 
31, 2014, who could not be classified as either on probation or 
parole. Of these, 3,522 were actively detained inmates. The 
January 1, 2014, probation population also excludes an 
undetermined number of offenders who could not be classified as 
either on probation or parole.

West Virginia--Reporting changes from 2013 to 2014: data are not 
comparable to those reported in previous years because a new 
statewide electronic data system was implemented. This change 
resulted in a decrease of 1,291 probationers on January 1, 2014 
(7,174), compared to December 31, 2013 (8,465).

Wisconsin--The state probation agency, reporting data for the 
entire state’s probation population, was able to report only the 
number of offenders on probation on January 1, 2014, and December 
31, 2014, and the number of Wisconsin probationers who were 
supervised by other states. Based on information provided by 
Wisconsin for 2013, BJS imputed the total number of entries and 
exits to and from probation supervision in Wisconsin for 2014 
(see Imputing entries and exits for nonreporting agencies in 
2014). BJS also imputed characteristics of Wisconsin’s 2014 
yearend probation population for the purposes of preparing 
national estimates. The characteristics of Wisconsin’s yearend 
2014 probation population that were imputed for inclusion in 
national estimates were sex, race and Hispanic origin, type of 
sentence (felony or misdemeanant offense), status of supervision, 
number of probationers who were also on parole, and number of 
probationers who were also in a state or federal prison.

**************************************
Parole: Explanatory notes
**************************************

Federal--Reporting changes from 2013 to 2014: data are not 
comparable to those reported in previous years, when data for the 
federal system included those offenders under parole supervision 
in the U.S. states, and those under supervision in the federal 
territories of Puerto Rico, Guam, the Northern Mariana Islands, 
and the Virgin Islands. An estimated 2,149 adults were on parole 
in the federal territories on January 1, 2014, which have been 
excluded from the federal parole population in this report. 
Between 2013 and 2014, a change in data processing procedures 
also occurred. Together, these changes resulted in a decrease of 
1,961 parolees on January 1, 2014 (109,265), compared to December 
31, 2013 (111,226).

Alabama--Reporting changes from 2013 to 2014: data are not 
comparable to those reported in previous years. Starting on 
January 1, 2014, Alabama began reporting only those offenders on 
parole at a specific time, as opposed to all those who were on 
parole at the beginning of the year plus all those who had been 
placed on parole during the year. This change resulted in a 
decrease of 213 parolees on January 1, 2014 (7884), compared to 
December 31, 2013 (8,097).

California--The state agency was not able to report entries and 
exits due to a high-level data conversion project. California’s 
total parole population as reported by BJS includes 34,285 
persons on January 1, 2014, and 34,836 persons on December 31, 
2014, who were under post-release community supervision. These 
persons account for 18,037 parolees entering and 17,486 parolees 
exiting supervision during 2014. In addition, California’s total 
parole population includes 9,679 persons on January 1, 2014, and 
11,739 persons on December 31, 2014, who were under mandatory 
supervision. These persons account for 3,120 parolees entering 
and 1,060 parolees exiting supervision during the year. Detailed 
information on the types of entries and exits that occurred were 
not available for these populations. California’s post-release 
community supervision and mandatory supervision populations were 
imputed by BJS based on information obtained from the Chief 
Probation Officers of California website 
(http://www.cpoc.org/realignment). For more information on 
California’s public safety realignment, and the inclusion of 
California’s post-release community supervision and mandatory 
supervision populations, see Probation and Parole in the United 
States, 2013 (NCJ 248029, BJS web, October 2014).

Kentucky--Reporting change from 2013 to 2014: data are not 
comparable to those reported in previous years as a result of 
data cleaning to remove cases which had been closed at some time 
before January 1, 2014. This change resulted in a decrease of 903 
parolees on January 1, 2014 (14,019), compared to December 31, 
2013 (14,922).

Maryland--Reporting changes from 2013 to 2014: data reported by 
Maryland for 2014 are not comparable to those reported for 
previous years because of a change to its computing systems and 
extensive data cleaning. Maryland was unable to report on the 
number of individuals under supervision for 2014, as opposed to 
cases. These changes resulted in an increase of 6,841 parolees on 
January 1, 2014 (12,464), compared to December 31, 2013 (5,623).

Washington--Reporting changes from 2013 to 2014: data are not 
comparable to those reported in previous years as a result of a 
change in methods. These changes resulted in a decrease of 6,408 
parolees on January 1, 2014 (9,500), compared to December 31, 
2013 (15,908). The December 31, 2014, parole population excludes 
8,471 offenders on December 31, 2014, who could not be classified 
as either on probation or parole. Of these, 3,522 were actively 
detained inmates. The January 1, 2014, parole population also 
excludes an undetermined number of offenders who could not be 
classified as either on probation or parole.

Wisconsin--The state parole agency was able to report only the 
number of offenders on parole on January 1, 2014, and December 
31, 2014, and the number of Wisconsin parolees who were 
supervised by other states. Based on information provided by 
Wisconsin for 2013, BJS imputed the total number of entries and 
exits to/from parole supervision in Wisconsin for 2014 (see 
Imputing probation and parole entries exits). BJS also imputed 
characteristics of Wisconsin’s 2014 yearend parole population for 
the purposes of preparing national estimates. The characteristics 
of Wisconsin’s yearend 2014 parole population that were imputed 
by BJS to include in national estimates were sex, race and 
Hispanic origin, sentence length, sentence type, supervision 
status, the number of parolees who were also on probation, and 
the number of parolees who were also in a state or federal 
prison.

*****************************************************
The Bureau of Justice Statistics of the U.S. Department of 
Justice is the principal federal agency responsible for measuring 
crime, criminal victimization, criminal offenders, victims of 
crime, correlates of crime, and the operation of criminal and 
civil justice systems at the federal, state, tribal, and local 
levels. BJS collects, analyzes, and disseminates reliable and 
valid statistics on crime and justice systems in the United 
States, supports improvements to state and local criminal justice 
information systems, and participates with national and 
international organizations to develop and recommend national 
standards for justice statistics. William J. Sabol is director.

This report was written by Danielle Kaeble, Laura M. Maruschak, 
and Thomas P. Bonczar. Jennifer Bronson verified the report.
Lynne McConnell and Jill Thomas edited the report. Barbara Quinn 
produced the report.

November 2015, NCJ 249057

*****************************************************

*****************************************************
Office of Justice Programs
Innovation * Partnerships * Safer Neighborhoods
www.ojp.usdoj.gov
*****************************************************

******************************
10/29/2015/JER/10:10pm
******************************
