U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Programs
Bureau of Justice Statistics
Bulletin

Probation and Parole in the United States, 2006

December 2007,  NCJ 220218
-----------------------------------------------------------

-----------------------------------------------------------
This file is text only without graphics and many of the
tables. A Zip archive of the tables in this report in 
spreadsheet format (.csv) and the full report including 
tables and graphics in .pdf format are available from:
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/abstract/ppus06.htm

------------------------------------------------------------

------------------------------------------------------------

This report is one in a series. More recent editions may be
available. To view a list of all in the series go to
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/pubalp2.htm#probation

------------------------------------------------------------

Lauren E. Glaze
and Thomas P. Bonczar
BJS Statisticians

------------------------------------------------------------

The number of adult men and women in the United States who
were being supervised on probation or parole at the end of
2006 reached 5,035,225, up from 3,757,282 on December 31,
1995. These data were collected in the Bureau of Justice
Statistics' (BJS) 2006 Annual Probation Survey and 2006
Annual Parole Survey.

Probationers are criminal offenders who have been sentenced
to a period of correctional supervision in the community in
lieu of incarceration. Parole is a period of conditional
supervised release following a prison term.

In 2006 the combined probation and parole populations grew by
1.8% or 87,852 persons. The growth in 2006 was slower than
the average annual increase of 2.2% since 1995. Over the past
11 years, the total population under community supervision
increased by over 1 million offenders, based on comparable
reporting agencies. It excludes 236,014 probationers under
the supervision of agencies added since 1995. (See
Methodology.)

More than 8 in 10 offenders under community supervision were
on probation at yearend 2006

About 84% of the community supervision population was on
probation at yearend 2006. Since 1995 (82%) the proportion of
offenders on probation increased as a percentage of the total
community supervision population.
 
During 2006 the probation population grew by 1.7% which
represented an increase of 70,266 probationers. This was the
largest growth since 2002 when the population increased 2.3%
or 92,336 probationers. 

Probation population grew by 923,100 persons since 1995

The probation population increased from 3,077,861 in 1995 to
4,237,023 in 2006 (figure 1). Based on comparable reporting
agencies from 1995 to 2006, the probation population grew by
923,100 persons or 30%.
 
Between 1995 and 2006 the number entering probation
supervision exceeded the number exiting and the probation
population continued to grow. Entries increased from 1.6
million in 1995 to 2.3 million in 2006. Exits rose from 1.5
million to 2.2 million during this same 11-year period. Both
entries and exits increased an average of 3.4% annually
between 1995 and 2006.

Nearly a quarter of probationers who entered supervision
during 2006 received a probation sentence combined with
incarceration

Seventy percent of the estimated 2.3 million probationers who
entered supervision during 2006 were sentenced to probation
without a term of incarceration. Nearly a quarter of
probationers received a combined probation and incarceration
sentence.

Indiana reported detailed data for type of entry in 2006, but
not in 2000. Based on comparable reporting methods in 2000
and 2006, almost 8 in 10 probationers entered supervision
without incarceration while 1 in 6 received a sentence to
probation combined with incarceration in both years.

Nearly 1 in 5 probationers who exited from supervision in
2006 were incarcerated 

Since 2000 the total estimated number of probationers exiting
supervision annually increased from 2,095,200 to 2,201,800 in
2006 (table 1). During this same time, the percentage of
probationers who completed their full-term sentence or were
discharged early declined, from 60% in 2000 to 57% in 2006.

Eighteen percent of probationers who exited supervision
during 2006 were incarcerated. Nine percent were incarcerated
due to a rule violation and 4% were incarcerated because of
new offense.

-------------------------------------------------------------

Over 7.2 million persons on probation or parole or
incarcerated in jail or prison at yearend 2006

During 2006 the total Federal, State, and local adult
correctional population -- incarcerated or in the community 
-- grew by 159,500 persons to over 7.2 million. The growth of
2.3% during the year was about the same as the average annual
increase in the correctional population since 1995 (2.5%).
About 3.2% of the U.S. adult population, or 1 in every 31
adults, were incarcerated or on probation or parole at
yearend 2006.

Since 1995 the jail population was the fastest growing
correctional population, with an average annual increase of
3.8%, followed by prison (3.0%), probation (2.4%), and parole
(1.5%). Based on data from comparable reporting agencies,
between 1995 and 2006 the correctional population increased
by over 1.6 million offenders or 31%. Probationers accounted
for more than half (57% or 923,100 offenders) of the growth.
As a percentage of the correctional population, offenders
under community supervision accounted for 69% of the total in
2006, while those incarcerated accounted for 31%. These
percentages were almost unchanged from 1995 (70% and 30%,
respectively).

-------------------------------------------------------------

5 States accounted for over half of the growth in the
probation population during 2006

Five States had an absolute increase of 4,500 or more in
their probation population during 2006. California
experienced the largest increase (13,400), followed by
Minnesota (8,400), Alabama (7,200), Colorado (6,600), and
Pennsylvania (4,700). These same 5 States accounted for 57%
of the growth in the population during the year.
          
Majority of probationers were male and white

At yearend 2006, 76% of probationers were male, down from 79%
in 1995 (table 2). Since 1995 women have accounted for a
larger percentage of the probation population (21% in 1995
compared to 24% in 2006).

The racial composition of the probation population has
remained nearly stable since 1995. In both 1995 (53%) and
2006 (55%) the majority of probationers were white.
Twenty-nine percent were black in 2006, nearly unchanged from
31% in 1995. Hispanic probationers comprised 13% of the
population in 2006; 14% in 1995.

More than 7 in 10 probationers were non-violent offenders 

Nearly three-quarters (73%) of probationers under supervision
on December 31, 2006 were supervised for a non-violent
offense, including more than a quarter for a drug law
violation and a sixth for driving while intoxicated. Sixteen
percent of probationers were convicted of a violent offense,
including 3% for sexual assault, 4% for domestic violence,
and 9% for assault other than domestic violence and sexual
assault. Eleven percent of probationers were supervised for
other unspecified offenses.

Parole population grew by 17,586 during 2006

At yearend 2006 a total of 798,202 adult men and women were
on parole or mandatory conditional release following a prison
term (table 3). The population grew by 17,586 parolees during
the year or 2.3%. This was greater than the average annual
increase of 1.5% since 1995.

At yearend 2006, 352 persons per 100,000 adult residents were
under parole supervision. This represented 1 in every 284
adults in the United States. Arkansas had the highest rate of
parole supervision at yearend 2006 (863 per 100,000),
surpassing Pennsylvania (791 per 100,000) which had the
highest rate of parole supervision since 1997. Maine had the
lowest rate of parole supervision in 2006 (3 per 100,000).

Parole population increased in 36 States

The Federal System, 36 States, and the District of Columbia
had more adults on parole at the end of 2006 than at the
beginning of the year. Double-digit increases were reported
in 14 States, led by North Dakota (up 23%) and Rhode Island
(up 21%).

A total of 13 States had a decrease in their parole
population during 2006. Double-digit decreases were found in
Oklahoma (down 29%), Virginia (down 12%), and South Carolina
(down 11%).

Parole entries outpaced exits during 2006

The State parole population reached 708,764 at yearend 2006,
an increase of 15,000 parolees (or 2.2%). This was greater
than the 10,200 average annual increase (1.5%) that occurred
between 2000 and 2006.

During 2006 entries to State parole supervision (3.0%)
outpaced exits (2.4%). However, between 2000 and 2006 entries
(1.9%) and exits from State parole (1.8%) grew at about the
same pace each year on average.

Mandatory releases from prison made up half of all entries to
parole supervision during 2006  

Of the 536,200 parolees who entered parole supervision during
2006, more than half entered through a mandatory release from
prison. Since 2000 (54%) mandatory releases to parole have
decreased slightly. 

Thirty-five percent of parolees who entered supervision in
2006 received a discretionary release from prison by a parole
board decision. Discretionary releases to parole have
decreased since 2000 (37%).
 
Between 2000 and 2006 reinstatements to parole increased as a
percentage of all entries (6% and 9%, respectively).

Percentage of parolees who completed their full-term sentence
or exited parole early has remained stable since 2000

Forty-four percent of the estimated 519,200 parolees who
exited supervision during 2006 completed their full-term
parole sentence or were released from supervision early.
Since 2000 this proportion has remained stable (43% in 2000).

In both 2000 and 2006, about 4 in 10 parolees exited
supervision because they were returned to incarceration for a
new offense or a technical violation. In the same two years,
about 1 in 10 parolees exited supervision because they had
absconded. Another 2% who exited in 2000 and 2006 had their
parole sentence terminated unsatisfactorily. 

Since 1995 the percentage of female and white parolees has
increased

At yearend 2006 about 1 out of every 8 adults on parole was a
woman (96,200) (table 4). Women represented a greater
percentage of the parole population in 2006 (12%), compared
to 1995 (10%).

The percentage of parolees who were black dropped to 39% in
2006, continuing a decline from 45% in 1995. Whites
constituted 41% of the parole population in 2006, up from 34%
in 1995. Almost 1 in 5 parolees were Hispanic (146,200).
About 2% of parolees were of other races (12,500).

Nearly 4 in 10 parolees served a sentence for a drug offense

About 94% of all parolees at yearend 2006 had been sentenced
to 1 year or more in Federal or State prison. The largest
percentage of parolees had been convicted of a drug offense
(37%, down from 40% in 2002). Data on type of offense were
first collected in 2002.

At yearend 2006 about one in four parolees had been convicted 
of a violent offense or a property offense. In 2006, 6% of 
parolees had been convicted of a public order offense and 6% 
of another type of offense which was not classified.

1 in 6 persons under parole supervision during 2006 were
returned to incarceration

Of the 1,151,203 adult parolees at-risk of re-incarceration
during 2006 in the 46 jurisdictions that provided
information, 16% (179,259) were re-incarcerated (table 5).
Offenders at risk of re-incarceration were defined as adults
on parole on January 1, 2006, and those released to parole
supervision during the year. In the 46 jurisdictions that
provided information, a total of 665,321 parolees were under
supervision on January 1, 2006, and 485,882 were released to
parole supervision during the year. An unknown number of the
165,642 parolees at-risk in 7 other jurisdictions during 2006
were re-incarcerated.

More than 2 in 5 parolees known to have been returned to
incarceration during 2006 were in California (78,721). New
York (11,548) and Texas (10,661) each returned more than
10,000 parolees to incarceration. California, New York, and
Texas together accounted for more than half of all adult
parolees re-incarcerated during 2006 (56%).

6 States returned 20% or more of their at-risk 
population to incarceration

Utah and California each returned to prison or jail more than
a quarter (28%) of their offenders who were under parole
supervision at some time during 2006. The offenders were
returned either as a result of a technical violation of their
conditions of supervision or as a result of a new offense.
Colorado and Missouri each returned 24% of their at-risk
population during 2006; Kentucky and Minnesota each returned
21%. Of the States that provided information, four reported
having returned less than 5% of their at-risk population to
incarceration during 2006, including North Carolina and Maine
(each 3%), Idaho (less than 0.5%), and Virginia (0%).

Rates of return to incarceration have remained stable since
1998

From 1998 to 2006, the percentage of offenders under parole
supervision who were known to have been returned to
incarceration remained relatively stable(figure 2). Data on
type of exit from parole collected prior to 1998 are not
consistent with 2006.

The percentage of the at-risk population returned to
incarceration as the result of a revocation also remained
stable (11% in each year). In 2006 approximately 5% of the
at-risk population had been returned to incarceration for a
new offense, unchanged from 1998 (5%).

Methodology

Beginning in 1980 the Annual Probation Survey and Annual
Parole Survey collected data on the total number of persons
supervised in the community on January 1 and December 31 of
each year and on counts of the number persons entering and
exiting supervision during the year. These surveys cover the
Federal System, all 50 States, and the District of Columbia.
BJS depends entirely upon the voluntary participation of the
State central reporters and the separate State, county, and
court agencies for the annual probation and parole data. 

In 2006 the U.S. Census Bureau served as the Bureau of
Justice Statistics' (BJS) collection agent, except for the
Federal system. Data for the Federal system were provided
directly to BJS through the BJS Federal Justice Statistics
Program which obtained data from the Office of Probation and
Pretrial Services, Administrative Office of the United States
Courts.

Because many States update their population counts, the
January 1, 2006, numbers may differ from those previously
published for December 31, 2005.

Probation

The 2006 Annual Probation Survey was sent to 463 respondents
-- the Federal System, 33 central State reporters, the
District of Columbia, and 428 separate State, county, or
court agencies. States with multiple reporters were Alabama
(3), Arizona (2), Colorado (8), Florida (41), Georgia (5),
Idaho (2), Kentucky (3), Michigan (128), Missouri (2),
Montana (4), New Mexico (2), Ohio (185), Oklahoma (3),
Pennsylvania (2), Tennessee (3), Washington (33), and West
Virginia (2).

Since 1995 the survey coverage has been expanded to include
175 additional local agencies in Ohio (131), Florida (27),
Washington (11), Montana (3), Kentucky (2), and Idaho (1).
The majority of agencies (161) were added in 1999. At yearend
2006, 236,014 probationers were under the supervision of the
175 local agencies added since 1995.

Parole 

The 2006 Annual Parole Survey was sent to 54 respondents,
including 52 central reporters, the California Youth
Authority, and 1 municipal agency. States with multiple
reporters were Alabama (2) and California (2). One State,
Illinois, did not provide data. See Imputing entries and
exits for non-reporting agencies for more details.

Federal parole as defined here includes supervised release,
parole, military parole, special parole, and mandatory
release.
 
Imputing entries and exits for non-reporting agencies

Entries were imputed for non-reporting agencies using one of
four methods, depending on data availability. The first
method estimated entries to probation by applying the ratio
of entries to the January 1 population in a recent year to
the January 1, 2006, population for the same agency. Exits
were estimated by adding the estimated entries to the January
1, 2006, population and subtracting the December 31, 2006,
population. This method was used to estimate probation
entries and exits for non-reporting agencies in Arizona,
Colorado, Florida (four agencies), Georgia, Illinois,
Kentucky, Michigan (the State agency), Montana, New Mexico,
and Pennsylvania counties. This method was also used to
estimate parole entries and exits for Pennsylvania counties.

A second method was used for Illinois which did not report on
its parole population for 2006. Both the ratio of entries to
the January 1 population and the ratio of exits to the
January 1 population were estimated for 2006 from parole data
provided by Illinois for 2005. These ratios were applied to
the number on parole in Illinois on January 1, 2006, (estimated
from the count on December 31, 2005). The December 31, 2006,
parole population was estimated by adding the estimated
number of entries and subtracting the estimated number of
exits from the January 1, 2006, parole population.

The third method estimated entries to probation supervision
for county and district agencies which did not report entries
and exits but which provided an estimate of their December
31, 2006, probation population. The ratio of entries to the
January 1, 2006, population among reporting agencies in the
same State was used to estimate the number of entries for
non-reporting agencies having similar numbers of
probationers. Exits from probation supervision were estimated
in the same manner as in the first method (above). This
method was used to estimate probation entries and exits for
non-reporting agencies in Florida (four agencies), Michigan
(localities), Ohio, and Washington.

The fourth method was used to estimate entries for one
State-level agency. The number of entries for a West Virginia
agency was estimated using the ratio of entries to January 1,
2006, population among reporting agencies within the same
region. Exits for the non-reporting agency in West Virginia
were estimated in the same manner as in the first method
(above). 

Estimating the adult resident population

Estimates of the adult resident population in each State on
January 1, 2007, were generated by applying the July 1, 2006,
ratio of persons 18 years or older to the January 1, 2007,
resident population estimates within each State. The January
1, 2007, total resident population estimates were provided to
BJS by the U.S. Census Bureau.

-------------------------------------------------------------

This report in portable document format (includes an appendix
table) and in ASCII and its related statistical data are
available at the BJS World Wide Web Internet site:
<http://www. ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/abstract/ppus06.htm>

-----------------------------------------------------------
The Bureau of Justice Statistics is the statistical agency of
the U.S. Department of Justice. Jeffrey L. Sedgwick is the
director.

BJS Bulletins present the first release of findings from
permanent data collection programs.

This Bulletin was written by Lauren E. Glaze and Thomas P.
Bonczar. William J. Sabol and Heather Couture provided
statistical verification. Christopher J. Mumola provided 
statistical review. Tina Dorsey edited the report,
under the supervision of Doris J. James. Jayne E. Robinson
prepared the report for final printing.

December 2007, NCJ 220218
---------------------------------------------------
---------------------------------------------------

End of file
11/28/2007 JR



