U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Programs
Bureau of Justice Statistics

-----------------------------------------------------
This report is one in series. More recent 
editions may be available. To view a list 
of all reports in the series go to 
http://www.bjs.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbse&sid=42

This file is text only without graphics and many of the
tables. A Zip archive of the tables in this report in
spreadsheet format (.csv) and the full report including
tables and graphics in .pdf format are available on BJS
website at:http://bjs.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbdetail&iid=4538
--------------------------------------------------------

Probation and Parole in the United States, 2011

Laura M. Maruschak, BJS Statistician
and Erika Parks, BJS Intern

November 2012, NCJ 239686

During 2011, for the third consecutive year, the number of 
adults under community supervision declined. At yearend 2011, 
there were about 4,814,200 adults under community 
supervision, down 1.5% or 71,300 offenders from the beginning 
of the year (figure 1). The community supervision population 
includes adults on probation, parole, or any other post-
prison supervision (see text box on page 2 for definitions of 
probation and parole).

The drop in the probation population drove the decline in the 
total number of adults under community supervision. In 2011, 
the probation population fell 2%,from an estimated 4,053,100 
to 3,971,300. While the parole population increased 1.6% 
during 2011, the increase was not enough to offset the 
overall decrease in the community supervision population. At 
yearend 2011, 1 in 50 adults in the U.S. were under community 
supervision. 

Data in this report were collected through the Bureau of 
Justice Statistics’ (BJS) Annual Probation Survey and Annual 
Parole Survey. Both surveys began in 1980 and collect data 
from U.S. probation and parole agencies that supervise 
adults. (See text box at the bottom of the page.) In these 
data, an adult is any person subject to the jurisdiction of 
an adult trial court or corrections agency. Juveniles 
prosecuted as adults in a criminal court are considered 
adults. Respondents are asked to report the number of adults 
on probation or parole at the beginning and end of each 
reporting year, the number entering and exiting supervision 
during the reporting year, characteristics of the populations 
at yearend, and other information. The reporting methods for 
some probation and parole agencies have changed over time 
(see Methodology). See appendix tables for additional 2011 
data by jurisdiction. 
*************************************************

***************
HIGHLIGHTS
***************
The number of adults under community supervision declined by 
about 71,300 during 2011, down to 4,814,200 at yearend.

* A 2% decline in the probation population along with a 1.6% 
increase in the parole population accounted for the overall 
change in the community supervision population.

* At yearend 2011, for the first time since 2002, the U.S. 
probation population fell below 4 million.

* During 2011, about 4.3 million adults moved onto or off 
probation; probation entries (2,109,500) declined for the 
fourth consecutive year while probation exits (2,189,100) 
declined for the second consecutive year. 

* Two-thirds (66%) of probationers completed their term of 
supervision or were discharged early during 2011, about the 
same percentage as in 2009 and 2010 (65% in both years). 

* The rate of incarceration among probationers at risk for 
violating their conditions of supervision in 2011 (5.5%) was 
consistent with the rate in 2000 (5.5%).

* Nearly 853,900 adults were on parole at yearend 2011; about 
1.1 million adults moved onto or off parole during the year.

* Both parole entries (down 3.4%) and exits (down 5.3%) 
declined between 2010 and 2011.

* During 2011, the state parole population grew 1.1%, from 
about 736,800 to 744,700, while the federal population grew 
5.1%, from 103,800 to 109,100.

* Slightly more than half (52%) of parolees completed their 
term of supervision or were discharged early in 2011, 
unchanged from 2010.

* Among parolees at risk for violating their conditions of 
supervision, about 12% were reincarcerated during 2011, down 
from more than 15% in 2006.
**************************************************

**************************************************
Community supervision population in 2011 fell below 
the 2003 level
**************************************************

The number of U.S. adults under community supervision 
(4,814,200) declined during 2011(appendix table 1). This 
represents the third consecutive within-year decrease in this 
population. In 2011, the population fell below the level not 
observed since 2003 (4,847,500).

This downward trend in the community supervision population 
is relatively recent. The U.S. saw increasing numbers of 
adults under community supervision from 1980 through 2008. 
During that period, growth rates fluctuated from a high of 
10.9% in 1983 to a low of 0.5% in 2004. The number of adults 
under community supervision declined for the first time in 
2009 and continued to decline through 2011. 

During 2011, the probation population declined by about 
81,800, falling below 4 million (figure 2; appendix table 2). 
This level was last observed in 2002 (3,995,200) and marked 
the third consecutive within-year decline in the population. 
Since probationers accounted for about 82% of the adults 
under community supervision, the trend observed among the 
community supervision population was largely driven by the 
trend in the probation population. Between 1980 and 2008, the 
growth of the probation population fluctuated from a high of 
10.7% in 1983 to a low of 0.5% in 2004 and 2005. In 2009, the 
probation population declined for the first time since BJS 
began tracking this population in 1980.

During 2011, the parole population grew by about 13,300 to 
nearly 853,900, a 1.6% increase from the beginning of the 
year(figure 3; appendix table 4). This increase slightly 
offset the decline in the community supervision population 
caused by the decreased probation population. (See text box 
for discussion of the California Public Safety Realignment.) 
The change in the number of adults under community 
supervision observed between the beginning of the year and 
yearend 2011 was slightly different from the cumulative 
change in probationers and parolees over the same period 
because community supervision numbers were adjusted to 
account for parolees who were also serving a sentence of 
probation (see Methodology for discussion of adjustments).
**************************************************
--------------------------------------
BJS definition of probation and parole
---------------------------------------

Probation is a court-ordered period of correctional 
supervision in the community, generally as an alternative to 
incarceration. In some cases, probation can be a combined 
sentence of incarceration followed by a period of community 
supervision.

Parole is a period of conditional supervised release in the 
community following a prison term. It includes parolees 
released through discretionary or mandatory supervised 
release from prison, those released through other types of 
post-custody conditional supervision, and those sentenced to 
a term of supervised release.

**************************************************
------------------------------------
California Public Safety Realignment
-------------------------------------

On May 23, 2011, the U.S. Supreme Court upheld the ruling by 
a lower three-judge court that the State of California must 
reduce its prison population to 137.5% of design capacity 
(equivalent to approximately 110,000 prisoners) within two 
years to alleviate the overcrowding that was ruled a 
violation of the Eighth Amendment of the U.S. Constitution. 
In response, the California State Legislature and Governor 
enacted two laws, AB 109 and AB 117, to reduce the number of 
inmates housed in state prisons starting October 1, 2011. The 
policy, termed Public Safety Realignment (PSR), will reduce 
the prison population through normal attrition of the 
existing population and will place new offenders who have not 
been convicted of a violent or sex offense or are not 
considered “serious” as defined by California’s Penal Code §§ 
667.5(c) and 1192.7(c) under the jurisdiction of the counties 
for incarceration in local jail facilities. Inmates not 
convicted of violent, serious, or sexual offenses who are 
released from prison or local jails after October 1, 2011, 
will be placed under a county-directed post-release community 
supervision program (PRCS) instead of the state’s parole 
system.
 
As BJS continues to collect data on incarcerated and 
community supervision populations, we will continue to report 
trends. For BJS counting purposes, we have included the 
reported 12,339 persons released to PRCS between October 1, 
2011, and December 31, 2011, in California’s 2011 parole 
numbers.

**************************************************
Rate of adults under community supervision was below 
the 2000 level for the third consecutive year
*******************************************************

The community supervision rate declined to 2,015 probationers 
or parolees per 100,000 U.S. adult residents at yearend 2011, 
down from 2,067 per 100,000 at yearend 2010. For the third 
consecutive year, the rate was below the 2000 level (2,162 
per 100,000) (table 1). The supervision rate of probationers 
followed a similar trend. At yearend 2011, 1,662 offenders 
per 100,000 U.S. adult residents were on probation, down from 
1,715 per 100,000 at yearend 2010. The probation supervision 
rate in 2009 (1,796 offenders per 100,000 U.S. adult 
residents) also fell below the 2000 rate (1,818 per 100,000) 
and remained below that level in 2010 and 2011.

The trend in the supervision rate of parolees was unlike the 
trends in the community supervision and probation rates. 
While community supervision and probation rates have 
declined, parole supervision rates increased from 353 per 
100,000 U.S. adult residents at yearend 2009 to 357 per 
100,000 at yearend 2010. 

**************************************************
Five states accounted for more than half of the 
decline in the probation population
**************************************************

The probation population declined by nearly 81,800 
probationers during 2011 to reach an estimated 3,971,300 at 
yearend (appendix table 2). Thirty-two states reported a 
cumulative 112,700 fewer probationers and 20 jurisdictions, 
including the District of Columbia and the federal system, 
reported a cumulative 30,900 more probationers at yearend 
2011 than at the beginning of the year.

Among the states with declining probation populations, 
California, Texas, Michigan, Florida, and Georgia accounted 
for 56% of the total decrease. California (down 28,600) alone 
accounted for a quarter of the total decline. 

Maryland (up 8,200) and Alabama (up 7,600) reported the 
largest increases in the probation population during 2011. 
These two states accounted for about half (51%) of the total 
increase in the probation population among those states 
reporting increases.

**************************************************
Entries to probation down for the fourth consecutive 
year; exits down for the second consecutive year
**************************************************

During 2011, movement both onto and off probation declined 
(table 2). Between 2010 and 2011, entries to probation 
declined 3.7% (from about 2,190,200 to 2,109,500 offenders) 
and exits declined 3.2% (from an estimated 2,261,300 to 
2,189,100 offenders). Overall, about 4.3 million adults moved 
onto and off probation during 2011, compared to more than 4.4 
million during 2010. 

As entries onto and exits from probation diverge, changes in 
the probation population are larger. When exits and entries 
converge, the changes are smaller. After a period of 
convergence in 2008 and 2009, entries and exits once again 
diverged. While both entries and exits declined, entries onto 
probation declined at a faster rate than exits, resulting in 
a larger decline in the probation population in 2011.

***********************************************
Exit rate for probationers unchanged since 2008
***********************************************

The rate at which probationers exit supervision—the number 
that exit probation divided by the average of the probation 
population at the beginning and end of the year—provides an 
indication of how quickly the population turns over and an 
indirect measure of the average time an offender can expect 
to serve on probation. The turnover in the probation 
population over the past four years has remained relatively 
stable. During 2011, 55 probationers per 100 exited 
supervision, unchanged since 2008 (table 3). Mean length of 
stay on probation has remained stable at about 22 months 
since 2008.

Turnover due to completing the term of supervision, either 
through full-term completion or early discharge, has remained 
steady at 36 per 100 probationers since 2009.

This finding was consistent with the stability observed in 
the percentage of probationers who were discharged after 
completing the terms of their supervision. Of the estimated 
2,189,100 probationers who exited probation, the percentage 
that completed their supervision or were discharged early 
increased between 2008 and 2011. During 2011, 66% of 
probationers who exited supervision were discharged after 
completing the term of their supervision or receiving an 
early discharge, up slightly from 65% in both 2009 and 2010 
(table 4). The increase observed between 2008 and 2009 
occurred as overall exits increased over that same period. 

***************************************************
Rate of incarceration among probationers decreased 
slightly during 2011
***************************************************

The rate of incarceration among probationers at risk of 
failing during the year decreased slightly from 2010 to 2011 
(figure 4). In 2011, 5.5% of probationers at risk of failing 
were incarcerated, the same level as 2000, but down from 5.7% 
in 2010. The rate at which all adults on probation during the 
year can be incarcerated is defined as the ratio of the 
number of probationers who are discharged during the year as 
the result of incarceration to the number of probationers who 
could have been incarcerated at any point during the year. 
The number who could have been incarcerated equals the sum of 
the start of the year population plus entries onto probation. 
This pool is defined as those at risk of incarceration. The 
rate of incarceration among probationers, including 
incarceration for a new offense, a revocation, or other 
reasons, has remained relatively stable since 2000, 
fluctuating between a low of 4.5% in 2001 and a high of 6.1% 
in 2006.

***************************************************
Most characteristics of probationers in 2011 were 
unchanged from 2010
***************************************************

Most characteristics of adult probationers in 2011 remained 
stable when compared to those in 2010 (appendix table 3). 
Males made up three-quarters (75%) of the adult probation 
population. Over half (54%) of probationers were white non-
Hispanic, and nearly a third (31%) were black non-Hispanic. 
Nearly three-quarters (72%) were on active status and about 
1 in 5 (18%) were being supervised for a violent offense. 
Fifty-three percent of probationers were being supervised for 
a felony offense in 2011, compared to 50% in 2010. 

***************************************************
U.S. parole population increased during 2011
***************************************************

After a decline in the parole population during 2009, the 
population during 2011 increased for the second consecutive 
year. During 2011, the parole population increased by nearly 
13,300 offenders, from about 840,600 at the beginning of the 
year to 853,900 at yearend (appendix table 4). After two 
consecutive years of decline, the state parole population 
increased by 1.1% during 2011. The federal parole population 
increased 5.1% over the same period.

Among jurisdictions reporting an increase in their parole 
population during 2011, California (up about 5,900), the 
federal system (up 5,300), and Texas (up 1,800) accounted for 
more than half (56%) of the increase. Overall, 28 states and 
the federal system reported within-year increases totaling 
about 13,000 additional parolees at yearend 2011. 

At yearend 2011, twenty-two states and the District of 
Columbia reported about 9,800 fewer persons on parole than at 
the beginning of the year. Four states, Michigan (down 
1,900), New York (down 1,300), Pennsylvania (down 1,300), and 
Massachusetts (down 900) reported 55% of the decline in the 
parole population among those states reporting declines.

***************************************************
Entries and exits to parole both declined; exits 
declined at a faster rate
***************************************************

During 2011, nearly 1.1 million persons moved onto and off 
parole. About 545,800 adults entered parole and about 532,500 
exited parole. While both the number of adults entering 
parole and exiting parole declined during 2011, the number of 
entries exceeded the number of exits for the second 
consecutive year (table 5). The decline in entries to parole 
from 2008 to 2011 was consistent with the decrease observed 
in the total number of prisoners released from state 
jurisdiction during this period, coupled with a decline in 
the number of prisoners conditionally released to community 
supervision. (See Prisoners in 2011, BJS website, NCJ 239808, 
forthcoming.) However, the decline in the rate of exits (down 
5.3%) exceeded that of the rate of entries (down 3.4%), 
resulting in the increase in the parole population.

***************************************************
Mandatory releases made up a smaller portion of 
entries to parole
***************************************************

About 46% of parolees who entered supervision during 2011 
entered through mandatory release from prison, down from 51% 
in 2010 (figure 5). This marked the third consecutive year of 
declines in mandatory releases. While the proportion of all 
types of entries to parole fluctuated slightly, mandatory 
release remained the most common type of release.

While mandatory releases to parole decreased, other types of 
releases to parole increased. Parolees entering through 
discretionary release by a parole board accounted for the 
largest increase, from 28% in 2010 to 31% in 2011. Parolees 
who had their parole reinstated accounted for a slightly 
larger share of parole entries during 2011 (10%) compared to 
2010 (9%). Those who entered through a term of supervised 
release (10% in 2011 compared to 9% in 2010) also increased. 
A term of supervised release is a release type designated by 
the federal system and is similar to that of mandatory 
release in the state systems. If mandatory and term of 
supervised release were combined into one category, the 
decline in those entering parole through mandatory release 
would be slightly offset by the increase in those entering 
through a term of supervised release.

***************************************************
Parole turnover rate declined for second 
consecutive year 
***************************************************

Following a period of increase, the parole turnover rate 
declined for the second consecutive year. The rate fell from 
67 exits per 100 parolees in 2010 to 63 per 100 parolees in 
2011 (table 6). This decline resulted in an increase in mean 
length of stay on parole, from 17.9 months in 2010 to 19.1 
months in 2011.

Contributing to the decline in the overall turnover of the 
parole population was both the decline in the rate of 
parolees that exited supervision and returned to 
incarceration between 2010 (22 per 100 parolees) and 2011 (20 
per 100 parolees) and in the rate of parolees that completed 
the terms of their supervision or received an early discharge 
between 2010 (35 per 100 parolees) and 2011 (33 per 100 
parolees).

Of the estimated 532,500 parolees that exited parole 
supervision during 2011, 52% completed the terms of their 
supervision or received early discharge, unchanged from 2010 
(table 7). The percent of parolees that returned to 
incarceration continued to decline from 33% in 2010 to 32% in 
2011.

***************************************************
Rate of reincarceration among parolees declined 
for the fifth straight year in 2011
***************************************************

During 2011, an estimated 12% of all parolees who were at 
risk of reincarceration were incarcerated (figure 6). This 
was down from 13% reincarcerated in 2010, and 16% during 
2000. The rate at which all offenders on parole during the 
year could be incarcerated is defined as the ratio of the 
number of parolees who were discharged during the year as a 
result of incarceration to the number of parolees who could 
have been incarcerated at any point during the year. The 
number who could have been incarcerated equals the sum of the 
start of the year population plus entries onto parole during 
the year. This pool is defined as those at risk of 
incarceration. 

Contributing to the overall decline in the rate of 
reincarceration was a corresponding decrease in the rate at 
which parolees returned to incarceration as the result of a 
revocation between 2000 (12%) and 2011 (8%). In 2011, 3% of 
parolees returned to incarceration for a new offense, a rate 
that has remained relatively stable since 2000.

***************************************************
Most characteristics of parolees in 2011 were 
unchanged from 2010
***************************************************

In 2011, most characteristics of adult parolees remained 
stable when compared to those in 2010 (appendix table 6). 
Males continued to make up about 9 in 10 (89%) of the adult 
parole population. About 4 in 10 parolees were white non-
Hispanic (41%) or black non-Hispanic (39%), and about 2 in 10 
(18%) were Hispanic. Among parolees, 81% were on active 
supervision and 96% had a maximum sentence of one year or 
more. More than a quarter (28%) were being supervised for a 
violent offense. 

***************
Methodology
***************

The Bureau of Justice Statistics’ (BJS) Annual Probation 
Survey and Annual Parole Survey began in 1980 and collect 
data from probation and parole agencies in the U.S. that 
supervise adults. In these data, adults are persons subject 
to the jurisdiction of an adult court or correctional agency. 
Juveniles prosecuted as adults in a criminal court are 
considered adults. Juveniles under the jurisdiction of a 
juvenile court or correctional agency are excluded from these 
data. The National Criminal Justice Information and 
Statistics Service of the Law Enforcement Assistance 
Administration, BJS’s predecessor agency, began a statistical 
series on parole in 1976 and on probation in 1979.

The two surveys collect data on the total number of adults 
supervised in the community on January 1 and December 31 each 
year, the number of adults who enter and exit supervision 
during the reporting year, and characteristics of the 
population at yearend. See appendix tables for detailed data.

Both surveys cover all 50 states, the District of Columbia, 
and the federal system. BJS depends on the voluntary 
participation of state central reporters and separate state, 
county, and court agencies for these data.

In 2011, Westat Inc., served as BJS’s collection agent for 
the 50 states and the District of Columbia. Data for the 
federal system were provided directly to BJS from the Office 
of Probation and Pretrial Services, Administrative Office of 
the United States Courts through the Federal Justice 
Statistics Program (FJSP).

**********
Probation
********** 

The 2011 Annual Probation Survey was sent to 469 respondents: 
33 central state reporters; 436 separate state, county, or 
court agencies, including the state probation agency in 
Pennsylvania, which also provided data for 65 counties in 
Pennsylvania; the District of Columbia; and the federal 
system. The states with multiple reporters were Alabama (3), 
Arizona (2), Colorado (8), Florida (41), Georgia (2), Idaho 
(2), Kentucky (3), Michigan (136), Missouri (2), Montana (4), 
New Mexico (2), Ohio (187), Oklahoma (3), Tennessee (3), 
Washington (32), and West Virginia (2).
 
One locality in Colorado, two in Florida, seven in Michigan, 
thirteen in Ohio, two in Washington, and the central reporter 
in New Mexico did not provide data for the 2011 collection. 
For these localities, the agency’s most recent December 31 
population was used to estimate the January 1 and December 
31, 2011, populations.
 
*********
Parole
*********

The 2011 Annual Parole Survey was sent to 55 respondents: 50 
central state reporters, the California Youth Authority; one 
municipal agency in Alabama; the state parole agency in 
Pennsylvania, which also provided data for 65 counties in 
Pennsylvania; the District of Columbia; and the federal 
system. States with multiple reporters were Alabama (2) and 
California (2).
 
Illinois did not provide data. The December 31, 2010, 
population count was used to estimate the January 1, 2011, 
population. Data on the number of parolees at midyear 2011 
were used as an estimate for the December 31, 2011, 
population.

Federal parole (as defined here) includes a term of 
supervised release from prison, mandatory release, parole, 
military parole, and special parole. A term of supervised 
release is ordered at the time of sentencing by a federal 
judge, and it is served after release from a federal prison 
sentence. Definitional differences exist between parole 
reported here and in other BJS statistical series.
Additional information about the data collection instruments 
is available on the BJS website at http://www.bjs.gov.

***************************************************
Adjustments to account for offenders with dual 
community correctional status
***************************************************

Some offenders on probation or parole may have had dual 
community correctional statuses because they were serving 
separate probation and parole sentences concurrently. With 
the 2007 data, BJS began collecting data on the number of 
parolees who were also on probation at yearend. The total 
community supervision populations from 2008 through 2011 
reported in figure 1 (and the 2011 counts in appendix table 
1) have been adjusted based on available information by 
excluding the total number of parolees who were also on 
probation to avoid double counting. As a result, the 
probation and parole counts for 2008 through 2011 will not 
sum to the total community supervision population within the 
same year. 

All of the estimates for parolees with dual community 
correctional statuses are based on data reported by parole 
agencies that were able to provide the information for the 
reporting year (table 8). Because some probation and parole 
agencies were not able to provide these data, the total 
number of parolees also on probation from 2008 to 2011 may be 
underestimates.

***************************************************
Changes in reporting methods within certain jurisdictions, 
2000-2011
***************************************************
----------
Probation
----------

Eighteen reporting agencies in separate jurisdictions changed 
their methods of reporting probation data between 2000 and 
2011. These changes included administrative changes, such as 
implementing new information systems, resulting in data 
review and cleanup; reconciling probationer records; 
reclassifying offenders, including those on probation to 
parole and offenders on dual community supervision statuses; 
and including certain probation populations not previously 
reported (e.g., supervised for an offense of driving while 
intoxicated or under the influence, some probationers who had 
absconded, and some on an inactive status). These changes 
resulted in a decline of about 61,000 probationers between 
2000 and 2011. 

See Probation: Explanatory notes for a discussion about the 
2011 reporting changes in Idaho and Iowa. See Probation: 
Explanatory notes in Probation and Parole in the United 
States, 2010, BJS website, NCJ 236019, November 2011, for a 
discussion about the reporting changes that occurred between 
2000 and 2010.

----------
Parole
----------

Reporting agencies in eleven jurisdictions changed their 
methods of reporting parole data between 2000 and 2011. The 
reasons for changing their methods of reporting parole data 
were the same as for probation data—administrative changes, 
reclassification of offenders, and the addition of certain 
parole populations not previously reported, which can result 
from new, enhanced information systems that improve the 
tracking of all types of parolees. These changes resulted in 
an increase of about 23,500 parolees between 2000 and 2011.

See Parole: Explanatory notes for a description of the 2011 
reporting changes in Iowa. See Parole: Explanatory notes in 
Probation and Parole in the United States, 2010, BJS website, 
NCJ 236019, November 2011, for a description of the reporting 
changes that occurred between 2000 and 2010.

Reporting agencies in ten jurisdictions changed their methods 
of reporting parole data between 2000 and 2010. In 2011, no 
agency reported a change in reporting parole data. See 
Parole: Explanatory notes in Probation and Parole in the 
United States, 2010, BJS website, NCJ 236019, November 2011, 
for a discussion about the reporting changes that occurred 
between 2000 and 2010 and the impact on the trend in the 
national parole population between 2000 and 2010.

***************************************************
Probation coverage expanded beginning in 1998 
through 1999
***************************************************

The number of probation agencies included in the survey 
expanded in 1998 and continued to expand through 1999 to 
include misdemeanor probation agencies in a few states that 
fell within the scope of this survey. See Probation and 
Parole in the United States, 2010, BJS website, NCJ 236019, 
November 2011, for a discussion of this expansion.

***************************************************
Estimating annual change in population counts
***************************************************

Technically, the change in the probation and parole 
populations from the beginning of the year to the end of the 
year should equal the difference between entries and exits 
during the year. However, those numbers may not be equal. 
Some probation and parole information systems track the 
number of cases that enter and exit community supervision, 
not the number of offenders. This means that entries and 
exits may include case counts as opposed to counts of 
offenders, while the beginning and yearend population counts 
represent individuals. Additionally, all the data on entries 
and exits may not have been logged into the information 
systems or the information systems may not have fully 
processed all of the data before the data were submitted to 
BJS.

At the national level, 46 parolees were the difference 
between the change in the parole population measured by the 
difference between January 1 and December 31, 2011, 
populations and the difference between parole entries and 
exits during 2011. For probation at the national level, 2,196 
probationers were the difference between the change in the 
probation population measured by the difference between 
January 1 and December 31, 2011, populations and the 
difference between probation entries and exits during 2011.

Estimates of annual change reported in figures 1 through 3 
and appendix tables 1, 2, and 4, were calculated as the 
difference between the January 1 and December 31 populations 
within the reporting year. Estimates of annual change 
reported in tables 2 and 5 were calculated as the difference 
between entries and exits within the reporting year, with a 
focus on the impact of entries and exits on annual change in 
populations.

*************************************************** 
Imputing entries and exits for nonreporting 
agencies, 2011
***************************************************

BJS used three methods of ratio estimation, based on the 
availability of data, to impute probation entries for 
agencies not reporting these data. We used a single method to 
impute probation exits, a single method to impute entries to 
parole, and a single method to impute exits to parole.

The first method was used to estimate entries and exits for 
probation agencies that were unable to report these data in 
2011, but were able to report these data in 2010. We 
estimated probation entries in 2011 by using the ratio of 
entries in 2010 to the agency’s probation population on 
January 1, 2010, and applying that ratio to the agency’s 
January 1, 2011, population. We estimated exits from 
probation by adding the agency’s estimated probation entries 
in 2011 to the agency’s probation population on January 1, 
2011, and subtracting that estimate from the probation 
population on December 31, 2011. These methods were used to 
estimate probation entries and exits in nonreporting county 
and district agencies in Arizona, Colorado, Florida, 
Michigan, New Mexico, Ohio, Rhode Island, and Washington.

A second method was used to estimate probation entries for 
agencies that were unable to report entries and exits in both 
2009 and 2010. The ratio of 2010 entries to the January 1, 
2010, population among reporting agencies in the same state 
was used to estimate the number of entries for nonreporting 
agencies with similar numbers of probationers. To estimate 
probation exits for these agencies, we used the same 
estimation method as described in the previous paragraph. 
These methods were used to estimate probation entries and 
exits for nonreporting county and district agencies in 
Colorado, Florida, Michigan, Ohio, and Washington.

A third method was used to estimate probation entries for one 
state agency in West Virginia, which only reported interstate 
compact data. We estimated the number of entries for this 
agency by using the ratio of 2010 imputed entries to the 
January 1, 2010, probation population and applying that ratio 
to the agency’s January 1, 2011, population. To estimate 
probation exits for this agency, we used the same estimation 
method as described above.

***********************************
Calculating mean length of stay
************************************

Mean length of stay is calculated as the inverse of the exit 
rate. Patterson and Preston (2007) provide tests of various 
methods for estimating expected length of stay and report the 
results of simulations that show that under assumptions of a 
stationary population with a small growth rate, the inverse 
of the exit rate performs well relative to a life-table 
approach to estimating mean time served.1 Based on the small 
growth rates in the probation and parole populations in 
recent years, the inverse of the exit rate suffices to 
provide an estimate of mean stay on probation or parole in 
recent years.

******************************************
Community supervision outcome measures
******************************************

The percentage of probationers and the percentage of parolees 
who completed supervision are defined as the number of 
probationers or parolees that completed supervision during 
the year and were discharged, among all probationers or 
parolees who were discharged from supervision during the 
year. The formula used to calculate this outcome measure is 
C(t)/D(t), where D(t) = C(t) + I(t) + O(t). In this formula, 
t equals the year referenced, C(t) equals the number of 
probationers or parolees who were discharged from supervision 
during the year after completing their terms or who received 
an early discharge, and D(t) equals the total number who were 
discharged from supervision during the year. D(t) includes 
C(t), the number of offenders who completed supervision; 
I(t), the number who were incarcerated during the year; and 
O(t), the number who were discharged during the year for 
other reasons.

The percentage of probationers and the percentage of parolees 
incarcerated are calculated using the formula in the previous 
paragraph except the numerator is the number of probationers 
or parolees who were discharged from supervision during the 
year as the result of being incarcerated.

The rate of incarceration (for parolees this is also referred 
to as the rate of return to incarceration or the rate of 
reincarceration) based on the at-risk probation or parole 
population is defined as the ratio of the number of 
probationers or parolees who were discharged from supervision 
during the year because they were incarcerated for a new 
offense, a revocation, or other reasons, to the number of all 
probationers or parolees at risk of being incarcerated during 
the year. The at-risk population is defined as the number of 
probationers or parolees under supervision at the start of 
the year (on January 1) plus the number who entered 
supervision during the year. This pool of probationers or 
parolees could be incarcerated at any time during the year; 
hence, they were at risk of incarceration. The formula used 
to calculate this outcome measure is I(t)/(P(t-1) + E(t)), 
where t equals the year referenced, P(t-1) equals the start 
of the year population, and E(t) equals the number of 
probationers or parolees who entered supervision during the 
year.

The at-risk measure of incarceration accounts for all 
probationers or parolees under supervision during the year 
(i.e., probationers or parolees who were under supervision on 
January 1 plus those who entered during the year) who are the 
probationers or parolees at risk of being incarcerated. This 
measure is not limited to those who are discharged during the 
year and permits each probationer or parolee to be 
incarcerated at any time during the year.

*********************************
Change in Annual Parole Survey 
*********************************

In 2008, the Annual Parole Survey included a new category for 
type of entry to parole that is labeled “term of supervised 
release” (TSR). It is defined as a fixed period of release to 
the community that follows a fixed period of incarceration 
based on a determinate sentencing statue; both are determined 
by a judge at the time of sentencing. As a consequence, some 
states began reporting term of supervised releases in 2008. 
The new category was added to better classify the large 
majority of entries to parole reported by the federal system. 
See Probation and Parole in the United States, 2010, BJS 
website, NCJ 236019, November 2011, for detail on estimation 
methods to analyze national trends for all types of entry to 
parole. 

******************************
Probation: Explanatory notes
******************************

Colorado—Nonreporting agencies in 2011—one local agency did 
not report data. This agency’s December 31, 2010, population 
count was used to estimate January 1, 2011, and December 31, 
2011, populations. See Imputing entries and exits for 
nonreporting agencies in 2011 for additional information on 
imputing entries and exits for nonreporting agencies.

Florida—Nonreporting agencies in 2011—two local agencies did 
not report data. The most recent available December 31 
population count was used to estimate January 1, 2011, and 
December 31, 2011, populations. See Imputing entries and 
exits for nonreporting agencies in 2011 for additional 
information on imputing entries and exits for nonreporting 
agencies.

Georgia—Probation counts may overstate the number of 
individuals under probation supervision because the agency 
that reports the county data has the capacity to report 
probation cases and not the number of individuals under 
supervision. Probationers with multiple sentences could 
potentially have one or more cases with one or more private 
probation agencies in one jurisdiction and/or one or more 
private probation agencies within jurisdictions. 

Idaho—Reporting changes between 2010 and 2011—data reported 
by Idaho for 2011 are not comparable to those reported in 
prior years. Idaho changed its method of reporting starting 
with the January 1, 2011, population because of changes made 
by the agency that reported probationers under the 
jurisdiction of the state. Reporting methods changed in 2011 
to reflect more accurately the number of felons and 
misdemeanants on probation. Counts in prior years over-
reported the number of felons. The total change in Idaho’s 
probation population was a decrease of 13,721 probationers on 
January 1, 2011 (39,172) compared to the population reported 
on December 31, 2010 (52,893).

Iowa—Reporting changes between 2010 and 2011—data reported by 
Iowa for 2011 are not comparable to those reported in prior 
years. Iowa changed its method of reporting starting with the 
January 1, 2011, population as the result of changes made by 
the agency that reported probationers under the jurisdiction 
of the state. Prior to 2011, Iowa did not include absconders 
in its probation population count. Beginning January 1, 2011, 
absconders were included in its counts, resulting in an 
increase of 6,625 probationers on January 1, 2011 (29,004) 
compared to December 31, 2010 (22,379).

Michigan—Nonreporting agencies in 2011—seven local agencies 
did not report data. The most recent available December 31 
population count was used to estimate January 1, 2011, and 
December 31, 2011, populations. See Imputing entries and 
exits for nonreporting agencies in 2011 for additional 
information on imputing entries and exits for nonreporting 
agencies.

New Mexico—Nonreporting agencies in 2011—the state reporting 
agency did not provide data. The December 31, 2010, 
population count was used to estimate the January 1, 2011, 
and December 31, 2011 populations. See Imputing entries and 
exits for nonreporting agencies in 2011 for additional 
information on imputing entries and exits for nonreporting 
agencies.

Ohio—Nonreporting agencies in 2011—13 local agencies did not 
report data. The most recent available December 31 population 
count was used to estimate January 1, 2011, and December 31, 
2011, populations. See Imputing entries and exits for 
nonreporting agencies in 2011 for additional information on 
imputing entries and exits for nonreporting agencies.

Washington—Nonreporting agencies in 2011—two local agencies 
did not report data. The most recent available December 31 
population count was used to estimate January 1, 2011, and 
December 31, 2011, populations. See Imputing entries and 
exits for nonreporting agencies in 2011 for additional 
information on imputing entries and exits for nonreporting 
agencies.

*****************************
Parole: Explanatory notes
*****************************

California—California’s total parole population on December 
31, 2011, included 12,339 persons who were released to post 
community supervision as a result of California’s public 
safety realignment. See text box on page 3 for more detailed 
information.

Illinois—Nonreporting agency in 2011—the state reporting 
agency did not provide data. The December 31, 2010, 
population count was used to estimate the January 1, 2011, 
population. Data on the number of parolees at midyear 2011 
were used as an estimate for the December 31, 2011, 
population. See Imputing entries and exits for nonreporting 
agencies in 2011 for additional information on imputing 
entries and exits for nonreporting agencies.

Iowa—Reporting change between 2010 and 2011—data reported by 
Iowa for 2011 are not comparable to those reported in prior 
years. Iowa changed its method of reporting starting with the 
January 1, 2011, population as the result of changes made by 
the agency that reported parolees under the jurisdiction of 
the state. Prior to 2011, Iowa did not include absconders in 
its parole population count. Beginning January 1, 2011, 
absconders were included in its counts, resulting in an 
increase of 983 parolees on January 1, 2011 (4,180) compared 
to December 31, 2010 (3,197).

******************
Appendix tables 
******************

---------------------
Community supervision
---------------------

Appendix Table 1. Adults under community supervision, 2011

------------
Probation
------------

Appendix Table 2. Adults on probation, 2011

Appendix Table 3. Characteristics of adults on probation, 
2000, 2010–2011

--------- 
Parole
---------

Appendix Table 4. Adults on parole, 2011\

Appendix Table 5. Adults entering parole, by type of entry, 
2011

Appendix Table 6. Characteristics of adults on parole, 2000, 
2010–2011

******************************************************

The Bureau of Justice Statistics is the statistical agency of 
the U.S. Department of Justice. James P. Lynch is director.

This report was written by Laura M. Maruschak and Erika 
Parks. Thomas P. Bonczar and Sheri Simmons verified the 
report.

Vanessa Curto and Jill Thomas edited the report, and Barbara 
Quinn produced the report under the supervision of Doris J. 
James.

November 2012, NCJ 239686

******************************************************

******************************************************
Office of Justice Programs * Innovation * Partnerships 
* Safer Neighborhoods * http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov
******************************************************
______________________
11/26/12/JER/11:50pm
______________________
******************************************************

