U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Programs
Bureau of Justice Statistics

-------------------------------------------------------
This file is text only without graphics and many of the
tables. A Zip archive of the tables in this report in
spreadsheet format (.csv) and the full report including
tables and graphics in .pdf format are available on BJS
website at: 
http://www.bjs.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbdetail&iid=4844

This report is one in a series. More recent editions 
may be available. To view a list of all in the series 
go to http://bjs.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbse&sid=42
-------------------------------------------------------

*******************
Bulletin
*******************

Probation and Parole in the United States, 2012

Laura M. Maruschak and Thomas P. Bonczar, BJS Statisticians

During 2012, the number of adults under community 
supervision declined for the fourth consecutive year. At 
yearend 2012, an estimated 4,781,300 adults were under 
community supervision, down 40,500 offenders from the 
beginning of the year (figure 1). About 1 in 50 adults in 
the United States was under community supervision at yearend 
2012. The community supervision population includes adults 
on probation, parole, or any other post-prison supervision. 
(See BJS definition of probation and parole.)

The decline in the total number of adults under community 
supervision is attributed to the drop in the probation 
population as probationers accounted for the majority (82%) 
of adults under community supervision. The decline of 38,300 
offenders in the probation population (from an estimated 
3,981,000 to 3,942,800) accounted for about 95% of the 
decline in the overall community supervision population. The 
parole population declined by about 500 offenders during 
2012, falling from an estimated 851,700 to 851,200.

*************************************************

**************
HIGHLIGHTS
**************

* The number of adults under community supervision declined 
by about 40,500 during 2012, down to 4,781,300 offenders at 
yearend 2012.

* Both the probation (down 38,300) and parole (down 500) 
populations declined during 2012.

* During 2012, an estimated 4.1 million adults moved onto or 
off probation.

* Probation entries (2,048,300) declined for the fifth 
consecutive year, while probation exits (2,089,800) declined 
for the third consecutive year. 

* Sixty-eight percent of probationers completed their term 
of supervision or were discharged early during 2012, up from 
66% in 2011.
 
* The rate of incarceration among probationers at risk for 
violating their conditions of supervision during 2012 (5.1%) 
dropped below the rate observed in 2008 (6.0%).

* The adult parole population at yearend 2012 fell to about 
851,200, with nearly 1 million adults moving onto or off 
parole during the year.

* Both parole entries (down 9.1%) and exits (down 6.8%) 
declined between 2011 and 2012.

* During 2012, the state parole population fell about 0.6%, 
from an estimated 744,700 to 740,400, while the federal 
parole population grew 3.5%, from 106,955 to 110,739.

* Fifty-eight percent of parolees completed their term of 
supervision or were discharged early in 2012, up from 52% in 
2011.

* The reincarceration rate among parolees at risk for 
violating their conditions of supervision continued to 
decline, dropping to 9% during 2012 from about 12% in 2011.
*************************************************

Data in this report were collected through the Bureau of 
Justice Statistics’ (BJS) Annual Probation Survey and Annual 
Parole Survey. Both surveys began in 1980 and collect data 
from U.S. probation and parole agencies that supervise 
adults. For this report, an adult is any person subject to 
the jurisdiction of an adult trial court or corrections 
agency. Juveniles prosecuted as adults in a criminal court 
are considered adults. Respondents are asked to report the 
number of adults on probation or parole at the beginning and 
end of each reporting year, the number entering and exiting 
supervision during the reporting year, characteristics of 
the populations at yearend, and other information. The 
reporting methods for some probation and parole agencies 
have changed over time (see Methodology). Appendix tables 
present additional 2012 data by jurisdiction.

*************************************
Community supervision population 
declined for the fourth consecutive 
year in 2012, driven by the decline 
in probationers
*************************************

The number of U.S. adults under community supervision 
declined by about 40,500 in 2012, falling below 4.8 million 
(appendix table 1). This represents the fourth consecutive 
within-year decline in the community supervision population. 
Since probationers accounted for 82% of the adults under 
community supervision, the trend observed among the 
community supervision population was largely driven by the 
trend in the probation population.
 
The number of adults under community supervision increased 
every year from 1980 to 2008, during which time the within-
year growth rates ranged from 0.5% to 10.9%. The number of 
adults under community supervision declined for the first 
time in 2009 and continued to decline each year through 
2012. (See Probation and Parole in the United States, 2011, 
NCJ 239686, BJS web, November 2012, for trend data beginning 
in 1980.)

The change in the number of adults under community 
supervision observed between beginning of the year and 
yearend 2012 was slightly different from the cumulative 
change in probationers and parolees over the same period, 
because community supervision numbers were adjusted to 
account for parolees who were also serving a probation 
sentence. (See Methodology for discussion of adjustments.)

During 2012, the probation population declined by about 
38,300, falling to an estimated 3,942,800 (figure 2; 
appendix table 2). This marked the fourth consecutive 
within-year decline in the probation population.

************************************************************

************************
BJS definition of 
probation and parole
************************

Probation is a court-ordered period of correctional 
supervision in the community, generally as an alternative to 
incarceration. In some cases, probation can be a combined 
sentence of incarceration followed by a period of community 
supervision.

Parole is a period of conditional supervised release in the 
community following a prison term. It includes parolees 
released through discretionary or mandatory supervised 
release from prison, those released through other types of 
post-custody conditional supervision, and those sentenced to 
a term of supervised release.
************************************************************

The parole population declined by about 500 offenders during 
2012, dropping to about 851,200 (figure 3; appendix table 
4). This slight decline in the parole population was largely 
the result of the decline in the California parole 
population. Without California’s decline in the parole 
population, the U.S. parole population would have increased.

*********************************** 
Rate of adults under community 
supervision continued to 
decline during 2012
***********************************

Consistent with the decline in the number of adults under 
community supervision, the community supervision rate also 
declined at yearend 2012, down to 1,981 persons per 100,000 
U.S. adult residents from 2,015 at yearend 2011 (table 1). 
The supervision rate of probationers was similar at yearend 
2012, dropping to 1,633 persons per 100,000 U.S. adult 
residents from 1,662 per 100,000 at yearend 2011.

Community supervision and probation rates declined each year 
from 2007 to 2012, while parole rates fluctuated. From 2011 
to 2012, the parole supervision rate declined from 357 to 
353 persons on parole per 100,000 U.S. adult residents.

**************************************
Four states accounted for half of the 
decline in the probation population
**************************************

During 2012, the probation population declined by about 
38,300 probationers, reaching an estimated 3,942,800 at 
yearend (appendix table 2). Thirty-three jurisdictions, 
including the District of Columbia and the federal system, 
reported an estimated 63,700 fewer probationers, and 19 
states reported an estimated 25,400 increase in probationers 
at yearend 2012 than at the beginning of the year.

Among jurisdictions with declining probation populations, 
Georgia, Michigan, New York, and North Carolina accounted 
for 51% of the total decrease. Georgia (down 15,156) 
accounted for nearly a quarter of the total decline. 

Four states--Washington, Ohio, Tennessee, and Idaho--
reported the largest increases in probation population 
during 2012. These four states accounted for about half 
(51%) of the total increase in the probation population 
among states reporting increases.
************************************************************

******************
California Public 
Safety Realignment
*******************

As mandated by laws enacted on October 1, 2011, to alleviate 
overcrowding in prisons, California continued placing new 
nonviolent, nonserious, nonsex offenders under county 
jurisdiction for incarceration in local jail facilities 
during 2012. In addition, inmates serving time in prison not 
convicted of violent, serious, or sexual offenses continued 
to be released to a county-directed post-release community 
supervision (PRCS) program instead of to the state’s parole 
system. For counting purposes, BJS has included data on 
counts and movements of offenders under PRCS to data 
reported for offenders on state parole.

Since enactment of the law, the number of inmates released 
and placed under PRCS has increased. During 2012, the number 
of offenders on PRCS increased from 12,979 at the beginning 
of the year to 32,948 at yearend (figure 4). The increase 
observed in the PRCS population is consistent with the 
decline observed in California’s prison population. (See 
Prisoners in 2012 - Advance Counts, NCJ 242467, BJS web, 
July 2012.) During 2012, the number of offenders under state 
parole declined from 98,724 to 56,339 offenders. The large 
decline (42,385 offenders) in the state parole population 
offset the increase (19,969 offenders) in the population on 
PRCS, resulting in an overall decline of 22,416 in the 
combined parole population. During the same time, the 
national parole population declined by about 500 offenders. 
Excluding the overall observed decline of parolees in 
California, the national parole population would have 
increased by about 21,900 offenders.

While California’s probation population has been declining, 
the decline during 2012 was smaller than declines in the 
previous 4 years (table 2). From 2008 to 2011, California’s 
probation population declined between about 3% and 10%. 
During 2012, the population declined by less than 0.1% or 
189 offenders. Over the past 2 years, the number of persons 
entering probation in California increased. Following a 
period of decline from 2008 to 2010, probation entries 
increased more than 1% from 2010 to 2011 and increased about 
7% from 2011 to 2012.

************************************************************

Entries to probation declined for the fifth consecutive 
year; exits declined for the third consecutive year
During 2012, movement both onto and off probation declined 
(figure 5). Between 2011 and 2012, entries to probation 
declined 2.9%, from about 2,109,500 to 2,048,300 offenders, 
and exits declined 4.5%, from about 2,189,100 to 2,089,800 
offenders. Overall, about 4.1 million adults moved onto and 
off probation during 2012, compared to nearly 4.3 million 
during 2011.
 
During 2009, the number of exits from probation exceeded the 
number of entries for the first time since data collection 
began. While both probation entries and exits continued to 
decline from 2009 to 2011, the difference between the two 
grew larger, resulting in larger declines in the population. 
Probation exits still exceeded entries during 2012; however, 
the difference was smaller, resulting in a smaller decline 
in the population.

****************************
Exit rate for probationers 
declined during 2012
****************************

The rate at which probationers exit supervision—the number 
that exit probation divided by the average of the probation 
population at the beginning and end of the year—provides a 
measure of how quickly the population turns over and an 
indirect measure of the average time an offender can expect 
to serve on probation. During 2012, 53 probationers per 100 
exited supervision, down for the first time since remaining 
stable at the 2008 rate of 55 per 100 (table 3). Turnover 
due to completing the term of supervision, either through 
full-term completion or early discharge, remained stable at 
36 per 100 probationers. Due to the decline in the exit 
rate, the mean length of stay on probation increased to 
nearly 23 months after remaining stable at about 22 months 
from 2008 to 2011.

During 2012, 68% of the 2,089,800 probationers who exited 
supervision were discharged after completing their term of 
supervision or receiving an early discharge, up slightly 
from 66% in 2011 (table 4).

**************************************
Rate of incarceration among probationers 
decreased during 2012
**************************************

The rate of incarceration among probationers—including 
incarceration for a new offense, a revocation, or other 
reasons—has been gradually declining over the past 4 years 
from the rate of 6.0% in 2008 (figure 6). During 2012, 5.1% 
of probationers at risk of failing were incarcerated, 
compared to 5.5% in 2011. The rate at which all adults on 
probation during the year can be incarcerated is defined as 
the ratio of the number of probationers who are discharged 
during the year as the result of incarceration to the number 
of probationers who could have been incarcerated at any 
point during the year. The number who could have been 
incarcerated equals the sum of the start of the year 
population plus entries onto probation. This pool is defined 
as those at risk of incarceration.
 
**************************************
Most characteristics of probationers 
have remained stable since 2000
**************************************

The characteristics of adult probationers during 2012 have 
remained relatively unchanged since 2000 (appendix table 3). 
In 2000 and 2012, more than half (54%) of probationers were 
non-Hispanic white and about a third (30% in 2012 and 31% in 
2000) were non-Hispanic black. Fifty-three percent of 
probationers were being supervised for a felony offense in 
2012 compared to 54% in 2000, and 72% were on active status 
in 2012, compared to 76% in 2000. During 2012, males made up 
about 76% of the adult probation population, compared to 78% 
in 2000.

**************************************
U.S. parole population decreased 
slightly during 2012
**************************************

The parole population declined slightly in 2012 after 2 
consecutive years of within-year increases. During 2012, the 
parole population decreased by about 500 offenders, from an 
estimated 851,700 at the beginning of the year to 851,200 at 
yearend (appendix table 4). The federal parole population 
increased 3.5% over the same period, from 106,955 at the 
beginning of the year to 110,739 at yearend. (See Offenders 
under federal community supervision.)

Among jurisdictions reporting an increase in their parole 
population during 2012, Pennsylvania (up 6,770), Texas (up 
6,292), and the federal system (up 3,784) accounted for more 
than half (55%) of the increase. Overall, 25 states and the 
federal system reported within-year increases, totaling 
about 30,800 additional parolees at yearend 2012. 

At yearend 2012, 24 states and the District of Columbia 
reported an estimated 31,300 fewer persons on parole than at 
the beginning of the year. The decline in California’s 
parole population accounted for 72% of the decline among 
states reporting declines.

***********************************************************

************************
Offenders under federal 
community supervision
************************

Federal offenders serve three distinct forms of community 
supervision, including probation, parole (i.e., mandatory 
release, military parole, and special parole), and a term of 
supervised release after having served a term in prison. The 
federal community supervision data are based on federal 
fiscal year data ending September 30, which is a different 
reference period from findings elsewhere in this report. 
(See Methodology for more detail on types of federal 
offenders under community supervision and the source of 
these data.)

**************************************
Most federal offenders under community 
supervision were serving a term of 
supervised release
**************************************

Over the 25-year period from 1987 to 2012, the number of 
offenders on community supervision experienced an average 
annual increase of 2.5%, from 71,400 at midyear 1987 to an 
estimated 132,600 on September 30, 2012 (figure 7). During 
this same period, the number of offenders on post-
incarceration supervision increased from 17,900 (consisting 
entirely of parolees) to an estimated 110,400 (including 
1,600 parolees and 108,800 on supervised release). Federal 
offenders on probation decreased from 53,500 at midyear 1987 
to an estimated 22,100 on September 30, 2012.

**************************************
Males were a larger share of the 
population serving a term of 
supervised release
**************************************

The number of females serving a term of federal supervised 
release increased by more than a third, from an estimated 
11,600 on September 30, 2000, to 15,700 on September 30, 
2010 (the latest date for which information is available). 
However, the percentage of females serving a term of 
supervised release decreased from 18% to 15% (see appendix 
table 7). This occurred as the number of males on supervised 
release increased by nearly two-thirds, from an estimated 
52,400 in 2000 to 86,100 in 2010. Nearly all federal 
parolees at fiscal yearend 2010 were male (97%), as both the 
number and percentage of females on parole decreased from 
2000 to 2010.

The percentage of females on federal probation increased 
from 31% in 2000 to 36% in 2010, as both the number of 
females and males serving a sentence of federal probation 
decreased.

**************************************
Felony drug offenders serving a term 
of supervised release increased more 
rapidly compared to other offenders 
**************************************

Felony drug offenders continued to makeup the largest share 
of federal offenders under community supervision, increasing 
from 40% of the total population in 2000 to 46% in 2010 (see 
appendix table 8). This increase was due to a 61% increase 
in drug offenders who were serving a term of supervised 
release, from an estimated 34,100 in 2000 to 54,900 in 2010. 
The increase in drug offenders on supervised release offset 
the decrease in federal felony drug offenders on probation 
and parole, from an estimated 5,700 in 2000 to 3,300 in 
2010.
***********************************************************

**************************************
Entries and exits to parole both 
declined; entries declined at 
a faster rate
**************************************

During 2012, nearly 1 million persons moved onto and off 
parole. About 496,100 adults entered parole, while the same 
estimated number exited parole (figure 8). The decline in 
entries to parole from 2008 to 2012 was consistent with the 
decrease observed in the total number of prisoners released 
from state jurisdiction during this period, coupled with a 
decline in the number of prisoners conditionally released to 
community supervision. (See Prisoners in 2012 - Advance 
Counts, NCJ 242467, BJS web, July 2013.) From 2011 to 2012, 
the decline in entries (9.1%) exceeded the decline in exits 
(6.8%).

**************************************
Parolees entering through discretionary 
release surpassed those entering through 
mandatory release
**************************************

More than a third (35%) of parolees who entered supervision 
during 2012 entered through mandatory release from prison, 
continuing the decline that began in 2008, when more than 
half (54%) entered through mandatory release (figure 9). 
This marks the fourth consecutive year of decline in 
mandatory releases. During 2012, parolees entering through a 
discretionary release (41%) surpassed those entering through 
a mandatory release, becoming the most common type of entry 
to parole. Parolees who had their parole reinstated 
accounted for a larger share of parole entries during 2012 
(13%) than during 2011 (10%). One in 10 entered through a 
term of supervised release, which was unchanged from 2011. A 
term of supervised release is a release type designated by 
the federal system and is similar to that of mandatory 
release. If mandatory and supervised release were combined 
into one category, the decline in those entering parole 
through mandatory release would be slightly offset by the 
increase in those entering through a term of supervised 
release.

**************************************
Parole turnover rate declined for 
third consecutive year
**************************************

The parole turnover rate fell from 63 exits per 100 parolees 
in 2011 to 58 per 100 parolees in 2012, continuing a 
declining trend since 2010 (table 5). This decline resulted 
in an increase in the mean length of stay on parole, from 
19.1 months in 2011 to 20.6 months in 2012.

The decline in the overall turnover of the parole population 
was driven by the decline in the rate of parolees who exited 
supervision and returned to incarceration between 2011 and 
2012 (20 per 100 parolees compared to 15 per 100 parolees). 
This decline was offset slightly by the increase in the rate 
of parolees who completed their term of supervision or 
received an early discharge between 2011 and 2012 (33 per 
100 parolees compared to 34 per 100 parolees).
 
Among the estimated 496,100 parolees who exited supervision 
in 2012, 58% completed their term of supervision or received 
an early discharge, up from 52% in 2011 (table 6). A quarter 
(25%) of parolees returned to incarceration in 2012, 
compared to about a third (32%) in 2011.

**************************************
Since 2006, the rate of reincarceration 
among parolees steadily declined
**************************************

During 2012, an estimated 9% of all parolees who were at 
risk of reincarceration were incarcerated (figure 10). This 
is down from 12% reincarcerated in 2011. The decline 
observed was largely due to the decline in the number of 
parolees being returned to incarceration in California. The 
rate at which all adults on parole during the year could be 
incarcerated is defined as the ratio of the number of 
parolees who were discharged during the year as a result of 
incarceration to the number of probationers who could have 
been incarcerated at any point during the year. The number 
who could have been incarcerated equals the sum of the start 
of the year population plus entries onto parole during the 
year. This pool is defined as those at risk of 
incarceration. 

While the rates at which parolees returned to incarceration 
with either a new sentence or as a result of revocation 
declined from 2008 to 2012, the rate of parolees who 
returned with a new sentence decreased more slowly (from 
about 4% in 2008 to 3% in 2012) than the rate of those who 
returned as a result of revocation (from about 10% in 2008 
to 5% in 2012).

**************************************
Most characteristics of parolees were 
unchanged during 2012
**************************************

During 2012, most characteristics of adult parolees remained 
stable when compared to those in 2011. Males continued to 
make up about 9 in 10 (89%) of the adult parole population 
(appendix table 6). About 4 in 10 parolees were non-Hispanic 
white (41%) or non-Hispanic black (40%), and about 2 in 10 
(17%) were Hispanic. Among parolees, 82% were on active 
supervision, and 95% had a maximum sentence of one year or 
more. Nearly 3 in 10 (29%) were being supervised for a 
violent offense.

************
Methodology
************
 
The Bureau of Justice Statistics’ (BJS) Annual Probation 
Survey and Annual Parole Survey began in 1980 and collect 
data from probation and parole agencies in the United States 
that supervise adults. In these data, adults are persons 
subject to the jurisdiction of an adult court or 
correctional agency. Juveniles prosecuted as adults in a 
criminal court are considered adults. Juveniles under the 
jurisdiction of a juvenile court or correctional agency are 
excluded from these data. The National Criminal Justice 
Information and Statistics Service of the Law Enforcement 
Assistance Administration, BJS’s predecessor agency, began a 
statistical series on parole in 1976 and on probation in 
1979.

The two surveys collect data on the total number of adults 
supervised in the community on January 1 and December 31 
each year, the number of adults who enter and exit 
supervision during the reporting year, and characteristics 
of the population at yearend. See appendix tables for 
detailed data.

Both surveys cover all 50 states, the District of Columbia, 
and the federal system. BJS depends on the voluntary 
participation of state central reporters and separate state, 
county, and court agencies for these data.

During 2012, Westat (Rockville, MD) served as BJS’s 
collection agent for the 50 states and the District of 
Columbia. Data for the federal system were provided directly 
to BJS from the Office of Probation and Pretrial Services, 
Administrative Office of the United States Courts (AOUSC) 
through the Federal Justice Statistics Program (FJSP).

Probation
***********
 
The 2012 Annual Probation Survey was sent to 468 
respondents: 33 central state reporters; 435 separate state, 
county, or court agencies, including the state probation 
agency in Pennsylvania, which also provided data for 65 
counties in Pennsylvania; the District of Columbia; and the 
federal system. The states with multiple reporters were 
Alabama (3), Arizona (2), Colorado (8), Florida (41), 
Georgia (2), Idaho (2), Kentucky (3), Michigan (134), 
Missouri (2), Montana (4), New Mexico (2), Ohio (187), 
Oklahoma (3), Tennessee (3), Washington (33), and West 
Virginia (2).

Three localities in Florida, one in Kentucky, nine in 
Michigan, 16 in Ohio, and three in Washington did not 
provide data for the 2012 collection. For these localities, 
the agency’s most recent December 31 population was used to 
estimate the January 1 and December 31, 2012, populations. 

Parole
*******

The 2012 Annual Parole Survey was sent to 55 respondents: 50 
central state reporters, including the California Youth 
Authority; one municipal agency in Alabama; the state parole 
agency in Pennsylvania, which also provided data for 65 
counties in Pennsylvania; the District of Columbia; and the 
federal system. States with multiple reporters were Alabama 
(2) and California (2).

One respondent in California did not provide data. The 
December 31, 2011, population count was used to estimate the 
January 1, 2012, and December 31, 2012, populations.

In this report, federal parole includes a term of supervised 
release from prison, mandatory release, parole, military 
parole, and special parole. A term of supervised release is 
ordered at the time of sentencing by a federal judge, and it 
is served after release from a federal prison sentence. 
Definitional differences exist between parole reported here 
and in other BJS statistical series.

Additional information about the data collection instruments 
is available on the BJS website at www.bjs.gov.

Adjustments to account for offenders 
with dual community correctional status
**************************************

Some offenders on probation or parole may have had dual 
community correctional statuses because they were serving 
separate probation and parole sentences concurrently. With 
the 2007 data, BJS began collecting information on the 
number of parolees who were also on probation at yearend. 
The total community supervision populations from 2008 
through 2012 reported in figure 1 (and the 2012 counts in 
appendix table 1), have been adjusted based on available 
information by excluding the total number of parolees who 
were also on probation to avoid double counting. As a 
result, the probation and parole counts from 2008 through 
2012 do not sum to the total community supervision 
population within the same year.

All of the estimates for parolees with dual community 
correctional statuses are based on data reported by parole 
agencies that were able to provide the information for the 
reporting year (table 7). Because some probation and parole 
agencies were not able to provide these data, the total 
number of parolees also on probation from 2008 through 2012 
may be underestimates.

Reporting changes in the number of 
adults on probation and parole, 
2000–2012
**************************************

In a given data collection year, respondents are asked to 
provide both the January 1 and December 31 population 
counts. At times, the January 1 count differs greatly from 
the December 31 count of the prior year. The difference 
reported may result from administrative changes, such as 
implementing new information systems, resulting in data 
review and cleanup; reconciling probationer records; 
reclassifying offenders, including those on probation to 
parole and offenders on dual community supervision statuses; 
and including certain probation populations not previously 
reported (e.g., supervised for an offense of driving while 
intoxicated or under the influence, some probationers who 
had absconded, and some on an inactive status). The 
cumulative discrepancies between the yearend and beginning 
year (for the year prior) between 2000 and 2012 in the 
probation population counts resulted in an overall decline 
of about 139,600 probationers (table 8). Discrepancies 
between the yearend and beginning year parole population 
count resulted in an increase of about 22,800 parolees 
between 2000 and 2012 (table 9).

Probation coverage expanded beginning 
in 1998 through 1999
**************************************

The number of probation agencies included in the survey 
expanded in 1998 and continued to expand through 1999 to 
include misdemeanor probation agencies in a few states that 
fell within the scope of this survey. See Probation and 
Parole in the United States, 2010, NCJ 236019, BJS web, 
November 2011, for a discussion of this expansion.

Estimating change in population counts
**************************************

Technically, the change in the probation and parole 
populations from the beginning of the year to the end of the 
year should equal the difference between entries and exits 
during the year. However, those numbers may not be equal. 
Some probation and parole information systems track the 
number of cases that enter and exit community supervision, 
not the number of offenders. This means that entries and 
exits may include case counts as opposed to counts of 
offenders, while the beginning and yearend population counts 
represent individuals. Additionally, all of the data on 
entries and exits may not have been logged into the 
information systems or the information systems may not have 
fully processed all of the data before the data were 
submitted to BJS.

Estimates of annual change reported in appendix tables 1, 2, 
and 4 were calculated as the difference between the January 
1 and December 31 populations within the reporting year. At 
the national level, 504 parolees were the difference between 
the change in the parole population measured by the 
difference between January 1 and December 31, 2012, 
populations and the difference between parole entries and 
exits during 2012. For probation at the national level, 
3,186 probationers were the difference between the change in 
the probation population measured by the difference between 
January 1 and December 31, 2012, populations and the 
difference between probation entries and exits during 2012.

In figures 1, 2, and 3, the annual percent change was based 
on the difference between the January 1 and December 31 
populations within the reporting year, while change 
calculated using the yearend populations in these figures 
would be the difference between December 31 populations in 
each given year. As previously discussed, jurisdiction 
counts reported for January 1 may be different from December 
31 counts reported in the previous year. As a result, the 
direction of change based on yearend data could be in the 
opposite direction of the annual percent change. This 
occurred between 2007 and 2008. The apparent decrease 
observed in the community supervision and probation rate 
between 2007 and 2008 was due to a change in scope for two 
jurisdictions. While a comparison of yearend to yearend 
yields a decline, the annual percent change actually 
increased. See Probation and Parole in the United States, 
2010, BJS web, NCJ 236019, November 2011, for a description 
of changes in reporting methods.

Imputing entries and exits for 
nonreporting agencies during 2012
**********************************

Based on the availability of data, BJS used three methods 
of ratio estimation to impute probation entries for agencies 
not reporting these data. We used a single method to impute 
probation exits, a single method to impute entries to 
parole, and a single method to impute exits to parole. 

Imputing probation entries
***************************

The first method was used to estimate entries for probation 
agencies that were unable to report these data in 2012, but 
able to report in 2011. We estimated probation entries in 
2012 by using the ratio of entries in 2011 to the agency’s 
probation population on January 1, 2011, and applying that 
ratio to the agency’s January 1, 2012, population. This 
method was used to estimate probation entries in 
nonreporting counties and district agencies in Florida, 
Kentucky, Michigan, Ohio, and Washington. 

The second method was used to estimate 2012 probation 
entries for agencies that did not report entries in both 
2011 and 2012. The ratio of 2011 entries to the January 1, 
2011, population among reporting agencies of similar size 
within the state was used to estimate the number of entries 
for nonreporting agencies. This method was used to estimate 
probation entries and exits for nonreporting counties and 
district agencies in Florida, Michigan, Ohio, and 
Washington.

The third method was used to estimate probation entries by 
using the ratio of 2011 imputed entries to the January 1, 
2011, probation population and applying that ratio to the 
agency’s January 1, 2012, population. This method was used 
to estimate probation entries and exits for nonreporting 
agencies in Colorado, New Mexico, Rhode Island, and West 
Virginia.

Imputing parole entries
************************

To estimate parole entries for parole agencies that were 
unable to report these data in 2012 but were able to report 
in 2011, we calculated the ratio of entries in 2011 to the 
agency’s parole population on January 1, 2011, and applied 
that ratio to the agency’s January 1, 2012, population. This 
method was used to estimate in California.

Imputing probation and parole exits
************************************

A single method was used to estimate probation and parole 
exits. For both probation and parole, BJS added the agency’s 
estimated entries in 2012 to the agency’s population on 
January 1, 2012, and subtracted that estimate from the 
population on December 31, 2012. For probation, this method 
was used in Colorado, Florida, Kentucky, Michigan, New 
Mexico, Ohio, Rhode Island, Washington, and West Virginia. 
For parole, this method was used in California.

Calculating mean length of stay
********************************

Mean length of stay is calculated as the inverse of the exit 
rate. Patterson and Preston (2007) provide tests of various 
methods for estimating expected length of stay and report 
the results of simulations showing that under assumptions 
of a stationary population with a small growth rate, the 
inverse of the exit rate performs well relative to a life-
table approach to estimating mean time served.*** Footnote 
1 1See Patterson, E.J., & Preston, S.H. (2007). Estimating 
Mean Length of Stay in Prison: Methods and Applications. 
Journal of Quantitative Criminology, 24:33–49.***Based on 
the small growth rates in the probation and parole 
populations in recent years, the inverse of the exit rate 
suffices to provide an estimate of mean stay on probation 
or parole in recent years.

Community supervision outcome measures
***************************************

The percentage of probationers and the percentage of 
parolees who completed supervision are defined as the number 
of probationers or parolees that completed supervision 
during the year and were discharged, among all probationers 
or parolees who were discharged from supervision during the 
year. The formula used to calculate this outcome measure is 
C(t)/D(t), where D(t) = C(t) + I(t) + O(t). In this formula, 
t equals the year referenced, C(t) equals the number of 
probationers or parolees who were discharged from 
supervision during the year after completing their terms or 
who received an early discharge, and D(t) equals the total 
number who were discharged from supervision during the year. 
D(t) includes C(t), the number of offenders who completed 
supervision; I(t), the number who were incarcerated during 
the year; and O(t), the number who were discharged during 
the year for other reasons.

The percentage of probationers and the percentage of 
parolees incarcerated are calculated using the formula in 
the previous paragraph, except the numerator is the number 
of probationers or parolees who were discharged from 
supervision during the year as the result of being 
incarcerated.

The rate of incarceration (for parolees this is also 
referred to as the rate of return to incarceration or the 
rate of reincarceration) based on the at-risk probation or 
parole population is defined as the ratio of the number of 
probationers or parolees who were discharged from 
supervision during the year because they were incarcerated 
for a new offense, a revocation, or other reasons, to the 
number of all probationers or parolees at risk of being 
incarcerated during the year. The at-risk population is 
defined as the number of probationers or parolees under 
supervision at the start of the year (on January 1) plus the 
number who entered supervision during the year. This pool of 
probationers or parolees could be incarcerated at any time 
during the year; therefore, they were at risk of 
incarceration. The formula used to calculate this outcome 
measure is I(t)/(P(t-1) + E(t)), where t equals the year 
referenced, P(t-1) equals the start of the year population, 
and E(t) equals the number of probationers or parolees who 
entered supervision during the year.

The at-risk measure of incarceration accounts for all 
probationers or parolees under supervision during the year 
(i.e., probationers or parolees who were under supervision 
on January 1 plus those who entered during the year) who are 
the probationers or parolees at risk of being incarcerated. 
This measure is not limited to those who are discharged 
during the year and permits each probationer or parolee to 
be incarcerated at any time during the year.

Change in the Annual Parole Survey 
**********************************

In 2008, the Annual Parole Survey included a new category 
for type of entry to parole that is labeled “term of 
supervised release” (TSR). It is defined as a fixed period 
of release to the community that follows a fixed period of 
incarceration based on a determinate sentencing statue; both 
are determined by a judge at the time of sentencing. As a 
consequence, some states began reporting term of supervised 
releases in 2008. The new category was added to better 
classify the large majority of entries to parole reported by 
the federal system. See Probation and Parole in the United 
States, 2010, NCJ 236019, BJS web, November 2011, for detail 
on estimation methods to analyze national trends for all 
types of entry to parole.
 
Types of federal offenders under community supervision
Since the Sentencing Reform Act of 1984 was enacted on 
November 1, 1987, offenders sentenced to federal prison are 
no longer eligible for parole, but are required to serve a 
term of supervised release following release from prison. 
Those sentenced to prison prior to November 1, 1987, 
continue to be eligible for parole, as do persons violating 
laws of the District of Columbia, military offenders, and 
foreign treaty transfer offenders (see 
http://www.uscourts.gov/news/TheThirdBranch/11-05-
01/Parole_in_the_Federal_Probation_System.aspx). Federal 
offenders under supervision in the District of Columbia are 
reported separately in this report. Unlike other parts of 
this report where all forms of federal post-prison 
supervision are grouped together under the generic term 
“parole,” the data in this box separate federal offenders 
who were serving a term of supervised release from the types 
of federal post-prison supervision which are more precisely 
described as parole.

The Sentencing Reform Act also requires the adoption and use 
of sentencing guidelines, which also took effect on November 
1, 1987. Many offenses for which probation had been the 
typical sentence prior to this date, particularly property 
and regulatory offenses, subsequently resulted in sentences 
to prison. Changes in how federal offenders are supervised 
in the community were first described in the BJS report 
Federal Offenders under Community Supervision, 1987–96 (NCJ 
168636, August 1998), and updated in Federal Criminal Case 
Processing, 2002: With trends 1982-2002, Reconciled Data 
(NCJ 207447, January 2005). 

Source of data
*****************

The source of data for the federal population from 1987 to 
2010, as reported in the box on page 7 is BJS’s Federal 
Justice Statistics Program (FJSP) database, compiled from 
source files provided by the Administrative Office of the 
United States Courts (AOUSC). Data for 2011 and 2012, which 
appear in Figure 6: Number of offenders under federal 
supervision, by type of supervision, 1987–2012, were 
estimated by averaging counts for June 30 and December 30, 
obtained directly from the AOUSC website on October 30, 2013 
(http://www.uscourts.gov/Statistics/StatisticalTablesForTheF
ederalJudiciary.aspx), table E-2.

Unlike the federal data presented elsewhere in this report, 
which are for the calendar year ending December 31, the data 
presented in this box are based on the federal fiscal year 
ending September 30 (or, as noted, for June 30), permitting 
analysis of the two major types of federal post-prison 
supervision to begin in 1987. Calendar year data for federal 
offenders with a term of supervised release, as distinct 
from those on other types of post-prison supervision, 
including parole (includes military parole and special 
parole) and mandatory release, were not collected by the 
Annual Parole Survey until 2008, though some estimates from 
1998 to 2007 are possible. Comparison of the federal fiscal 
year data in this box with data collected by the Annual 
Probation Survey and Annual Parole Survey for years in which 
there is overlap showed a very close correspondence, with 
differences attributable to the variations between federal 
fiscal year and calendar year reference periods.
 
Use of the federal fiscal year data also allowed for an 
analysis of type of supervision by sex and by type of 
offense, neither of which are available from the Annual 
Parole Survey.
 
The number of offenders by sex for September 30, 2000, 
reported in Appendix table 7: Federal offenders under 
supervision, by sex, 2000, 2005, and 2010, were estimated by 
applying the percentages of males and females, as reported 
in BJS’s Compendium of Federal Justice Statistics, 2000, 
table 7.2 (NCJ 194067), to updated counts of the number of 
persons under supervision obtained from BJS’s Federal 
Criminal Case Processing, 2002: With trends 1982–2002, 
Reconciled Data, 2004, figure 4 (NCJ 207447).

The number of offenders by type of offense for September 30, 
2000, reported in Appendix table 8: Federal offenders under 
supervision, by type of offense, 2000, 2005, and 2010, were 
estimated, by recalculating the percentage of the total 
represented by each type of offense, as reported in BJS’s 
Compendium of Federal Justice Statistics, 2000, table 7.1 
(NCJ 194067), and applying these revised percentages to 
updated counts of the number of persons under supervision 
obtained from BJS’s Federal Criminal Case Processing, 2002: 
With trends 1982–2002, Reconciled Data, 2004, figure 4 (NCJ 
207447).

Probation: Explanatory notes
*****************************

Florida--Nonreporting agencies in 2012--three local agencies 
did not report data. The most recently available December 31 
population count was used to estimate January 1, 2012, and 
December 31, 2012, populations. See Imputing entries and 
exits for nonreporting agencies in 2012 for additional 
information on imputing entries and exits for nonreporting 
agencies.

Georgia--Probation counts may overstate the number of 
persons under probation supervision because the agency that 
reports county data has the capacity to report probation 
cases and not the number of persons under supervision. 
Probationers with multiple sentences could potentially have 
one or more cases with one or more private probation 
agencies in one jurisdiction and/or one or more private 
probation agencies within jurisdictions. 

Kentucky--Nonreporting agencies in 2012--one local agency 
did not report data. This agency’s December 31, 2011, 
population count was used to estimate January 1, 2012, and 
December 31, 2012, populations. See Imputing entries and 
exits for nonreporting agencies in 2012 for additional 
information on imputing entries and exits for nonreporting 
agencies.

Michigan--Nonreporting agencies in 2012--nine local agencies 
did not report data. The most recently available December 31 
population count was used to estimate January 1, 2012, and 
December 31, 2012, populations. See Imputing entries and 
exits for nonreporting agencies in 2012 for additional 
information on imputing entries and exits for nonreporting 
agencies.

Ohio--Nonreporting agencies in 2012--16 local agencies did 
not report data. The most recently available December 31 
population count was used to estimate January 1, 2012, and 
December 31, 2012, populations. See Imputing entries and 
exits for nonreporting agencies in 2012 for additional 
information on imputing entries and exits for nonreporting 
agencies.

Washington--Nonreporting agencies in 2012--three local 
agencies did not report data. The most recently available 
December 31 population count was used to estimate January 1, 
2012, and December 31, 2012, populations. See Imputing 
entries and exits for nonreporting agencies in 2012 for 
additional information on imputing entries and exits for 
nonreporting agencies.

Parole: Explanatory notes
**************************

Alabama--Closed agency in 2012--one agency has been removed 
from the roster because they no longer supervise parolees 
for the state.

California--Nonreporting agency in 2012--one respondent in 
California did not provide data. The December 31, 2011, 
population count was used to estimate the January 1, 2012, 
and December 31, 2012, populations. See Imputing entries and 
exits for nonreporting agencies in 2012 for additional 
information on imputing entries and exits for nonreporting 
agencies.

California’s total parole population includes 12,979 persons 
on January 1, 2012, and 32,948 persons on December 31, 2012, 
who were under post-release community supervision as a 
result of California’s public safety realignment. These 
persons account for 29,298 parolees entering and 9,329 
parolees exiting supervision during 2012.

Appendix tables 
****************

Community supervision
*********************

Appendix table 1. Adults under community supervision, 2012

Probation
**********

Appendix table 2. Adults on probation, 2012

Appendix table 3. Characteristics of adults on probation, 
2000, 2011, and 2012

Parole
******

Appendix table 4. Adults on parole, 2012

Appendix table 5. Adults entering parole, by type of entry, 
2012

Appendix table 6. Characteristics of adults on parole, 2000, 
2011, and 2012

Federal supervision
********************

Appendix table 7. Federal offenders under supervision, by 
sex and year, 2000, 2005, and 2010

Appendix table 8. Federal offenders under supervision, by 
type of offense and year, 2000, 2005, and 2010

*****************************************************
The Bureau of Justice Statistics, located in the Office 
of Justice Programs, U.S. Department of Justice, collects, 
analyses, and disseminates statistical information on 
crime, criminal offenders, victims of crime, and the 
operation of justice systems at all levels of government. 
William J. Sabol is acting director.

This report was written by Laura M. Maruschak and Thomas 
P. Bonczar. Erinn J. Herberman, Ph.D., and Sheri Simmons 
verified the report.

Morgan Young and Jill Thomas edited the report, and 
Barbara Quinn produced the report.
December 2013, NCJ 243826
***************************************************

**************************************************
Office of Justice Programs
Innovation * Partnerships * Safer Neighborhoods
www.ojp.usdoj.gov
**************************************************

********************
12/5/2013/JER/10:57am
*******************
