U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Programs
Bureau of Justice Statistics

Bulletin

Probation and Parole in the United States, 2008

December 2009   NCJ 228230

------------------------------------------------------------

This file is text only without graphics and many of the
tables. A Zip archive of the tables in this report in
spreadsheet format (.csv) and the full report including
tables and graphics in .pdf format are available from:
http://bjs.ojp.usdoj.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbdetail&iid=1764


This report is one in a series. More recent editions may be
available. To view a list of all in the series go to
http://bjs.ojp.usdoj.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbse&sid=42

------------------------------------------------------------

Lauren E. Glaze
and Thomas P. Bonczar 
BJS Statisticians

At yearend 2008, 5,095,200 offenders were under community
supervision the equivalent of about 1 in every 45 adults in
the United States (figure 1). The community supervision
population includes adults on probation and adults on parole.
Probationers (4,270,917) represented the majority (84%) of
offenders under community supervision. Parolees (828,169)
accounted for a significantly smaller share (16%) of this
population.***Footnote 1 Probation is a court-ordered period
of correctional supervision in the community generally as an
alternative to incarceration. In some cases probation can be
a combined sentence of incarceration followed by a period of
community supervision. Parole is a period of conditional
supervised release in the community following a prison
term.***

The data discussed in this report and additional 2008 data 
are available by jurisdiction in the appendix tables, 
following Methodology.

Highlights

*Nearly 5.1 million adults were under community supervision
at yearend 2008 the equivalent of about 1 in every 45 adults
in the United States. 

*Probationers (4,270,917) represented the majority (84%) of
the community supervision population in 2008; parolees
(828,169) accounted for a smaller share (16%). 

*The probation (0.9%) and parole (0.9%) populations grew at
the same rate during 2008. The probation population increased
by 36,446 probationers while the parole population increased
by 6,992 parolees during the year.

*Growth in the probation population has slowed in recent
years to an average of 0.7% annually between 2003 and 2008
from an average of 2.5% annually between 2000 and 2003. 

*The probation exit rate increased from 53 per 100
probationers in 2006 to 55 per 100 in 2008. 

*The increase in the probation exit rate was associated with
an increase in probationers discharged after completing the
terms of supervision (58% in 2006; 63% in 2008).

*During 2008 growth in the parole population slowed to about
a third of the average annual increase between 2005 and 2007
(2.6%), the fastest period of growth in the parole population
since 2000.

*The parole exit rate increased from 67 per 100 parolees in
2007 to 70 per 100 in 2008. This increase was associated with
an increase in parolees discharged after completing the terms
of supervision (46% in 2007; 49% in 2008).

-------------------------------------------------------------

The data discussed in this report and additional 2008 data
are available by jurisdiction in the appendix tables,
following Methodology.
-------------------------------------------------------------

During 2008 the community supervision population grew 0.9%,
or by 43,100 offenders (appendix table 1). Between 2000 and
2003 this population experienced its fastest rate of growth
(2.4% annually), growing at a rate three times faster than
the average annual increase (0.8%) between 2003 and 2008. 

The probation population increased 0.9% (or 36,446
probationers) during 2008 (appendix table 2). The fastest
period of growth (2.5% annually) in the probation population
occurred between 2000 and 2003. Since 2003 the average annual
rate of growth in the probation population has slowed.
Between 2003 and 2008 the probation population increased at
an average annual rate (0.7%) that was less than a third of
its average annual increase between 2000 and 2003. 

Similar to the increase in the probation population, the
parole population rose 0.9% (or 6,992 parolees) during 2008
(appendix table 12). Between 2000 and 2003 the parole
population increased an average of 2.1% annually before
slowing to an average increase of 0.7% per year between 2003
and 2005. The fastest period of growth in the parole
population since 2000 occurred between 2005 and 2007 (2.6%
annually). During 2008 (0.9%), growth in the parole
population slowed to about a third of the rate of growth
observed between 2005 and 2007. 

Probation has accounted for about 82% of the growth in
community supervision since 2000 

During the past eight years the number of offenders
supervised in the community has increased by more than half a
million (545,100), from an estimated 4.6 million in 2000 to
nearly 5.1 million in 2008. The increase in the community
supervision population largely reflected the growth in the
probation population during this period. The number of
probationers increased from 3.8 million in 2000 to almost 4.3
million in 2008, representing approximately 82% (or 444,708)
of the growth in the community supervision population between
2000 and 2008. During this period the parole population
increased from 723,898 parolees to 828,169, representing a
significantly smaller share (19% or 104,271) of the growth in
the community supervision population.***Footnote 2 A small
number (less than 1%) of the community supervision population
was known to be on both probation and parole. For this reason
the amount of growth represented by probationers (82%) and
parolees (19%) does not add to 100%.***
***Footnote 3 Changes in the community supervision
population, as well as the probation and parole populations,
are based on data reported by the jurisdictions annually.
While these data are specific to the reporting year, the
reporting methods for some probation and parole agencies
changed over time. See Methodology.***  

Entries to probation declined in 2008 while exits from
probation continued to rise

In addition to supervising nearly 4.3 million probationers in
2008, probation agencies received an estimated 2.4 million
adults who were placed on probation, up from nearly 2.2
million in 2000 (figure 2).***Footnote 4 Entries and exits
were estimated for nonreporting agencies, and the estimation
method for Pennsylvania changed in 2008. The national
estimates of entries and exits are based on estimation
methods for Pennsylvania from 2000 to 2007 that are
comparable to 2008; therefore, the estimates are not
comparable to previously published BJS reports. See
Methodology.***  These probation agencies discharged an
estimated 2.3 million probationers from supervision in 2008,
up from over 2.1 million in 2000.

Correctional population increased 0.5% in 2008; the smallest
annual increase since 2000

Over 7.3 million men and women were under some form of
correctional supervision at yearend 2008, including offenders
supervised in the community (5,095,200) on probation or
parole and those incarcerated (2,304,100) in state or federal
prisons and local jails (table 1). About 3.2% of adults in
the U.S. resident population, or 1 in every 31 adults, were
under correctional supervision at yearend 2008. This rate has
remained fairly stable during the past eight years. The 0.5%
(or 33,900 offenders) increase in the correctional population
in 2008 was the smallest annual increase since 2000. 

Offenders under community supervision (70%) made up the
majority of the correctional population at yearend 2008,
while inmates incarcerated in prison or jail accounted for
30%. These percentages have remained relatively unchanged
since 2000. Similar to the slower rate of growth in the
correctional population during 2008, the incarcerated
population (0.3%) experienced its smallest increase since
2000. Additionally, the community supervision population grew
less than 1% for the second year (0.7% in 2007; 0.9% in
2008). 

While the incarcerated population experienced a faster
average annual rate of growth (2.2%) than the community
supervision population (1.4%) between 2000 and 2008, the
community supervision population represented the majority of
the growth in the correctional population. The total
correctional population increased by 863,100 offenders
between 2000 and 2008. Offenders supervised in the community
represented 58% of the growth in the correctional population,
while inmates incarcerated in prison or jail represented
42%.***Footnote 5 Some offenders in prison or jail remained
under the jurisdiction of a probation or parole agency.
Information on calculating the growth of the total
correctional population and accounting for offenders with
dual correctional statuses is available in the
Methodology.***

In each year since 2000, the number of adults entering
probation has exceeded the number exiting, and the probation
population increased annually.***Footnote 6 See Methodology
for a discussion on entries and exits to probation and parole
and changes in the number of offenders in these populations.***  
In 2008 the number of entries to probation exceeded the number 
of exits by about 28,500. However, the number and rate of growth 
in probation entries declined during the year while exits 
continued to increase. Probation entries decreased by 1.0% 
(down 23,000 probationers) while exits increased 1.1% (up 25,000).

From 2000 to 2006 the average annual increase in probation
entries (0.9%) was slightly larger than exits (0.8%), and the
probation population increased by an average of 1.6% per
year. Since 2006 the growth in exits has, on average,
outpaced the growth in entries. From 2006 to 2008 probation
exits increased an average of 2.4% annually while entries
increased 1.5%, and growth in the probation population slowed
to an average annual rate of 0.7%.

Increase in probation exit rate since 2006 was associated
with an increase in probationers completing supervision 

The probation exit rate is a measure of how quickly the
probation population turns over and how long probationers
remain under supervision. The exit rate for all probationers
was 55 per 100 probationers in 2008 (table 2). This means
that more than half of the probation population was
discharged from supervision during the year. Since 2006 (53
per 100) the exit rate for all probationers has continued to
increase, and the average annual rate of growth in the
probation population has slowed.

The increase in the exit rate since 2006 was associated with
an increase in the percentage of probationers discharged
after either completing their full-term probation sentence or
receiving an early discharge. Of the estimated 2,230,200
probationers discharged from supervision during 2006, 58% had
either completed their full-term probation sentence or
received an early discharge (table 3). By 2008 the rate of
completion rose to 63% of the estimated 2,340,800
probationers discharged during the year. 

The increase in the probation population during 2008 was
partially offset by declines in five states with probation
populations over 100,000

During 2008, 30 states and the District of Columbia reported
an increase in their probation populations, accounting for a
total increase of 74,829 probationers during the year (figure
3). Georgia (17,877) reported the largest absolute increase
in its probation population, followed by Colorado (11,278),
Pennsylvania (9,986), Arizona (5,402), and Florida (3,506).
States that reported the smallest increases include Alaska
(180), Kansas (132), New Mexico (109), and Wyoming (80).

Growth in the probation population was partially offset by a
decrease of 38,383 probationers in 20 other states and the
federal system. Nearly three-quarters (72%) of this decrease
occurred in five states, each of which had a probation
population of more than 100,000. Those five states include
California (-9,602) which reported the largest absolute
decrease in its probation population, followed by Texas
(-7,226), Michigan (-5,704), Washington (-2,757), and New
York (-2,209). States that reported the smallest declines in
their probation populations during the year include Nevada
(-124), Vermont (-117), New Hampshire (-101), and Montana
(-34).

Majority of probationers were under active supervision at
yearend 2008; 1 in 12 were absconders

The majority (71%) of probationers were on active supervision
at yearend 2008 (appendix table 5). Probationers on active
supervision are required to regularly report to a probation
authority in person, by telephone, or by mail.

Probationers on inactive supervision (8%) were not required
to report regularly and accounted for a smaller share of the
population. Absconders who had failed to report and could not
be located also accounted for 8% of the probation population.
About 6% of probationers had a warrant issued for their
arrest, and 7% were on other statuses.

About 3 in 10 probationers were drug offenders in 2008, up
from about a quarter in 2000

The most common type of offense for which probationers were
under supervision in 2008 was a drug offense. About 3 in 10
probationers were under supervision for a drug offense in
2008, up from about a quarter (24%) of all probationers in
2000. 

A quarter (25%) of probationers were under supervision for a
property offense in 2008, up from 23% in 2004. The share of
probationers under supervision for a violent offense (19%)
remained unchanged between 2004 and 2008. Data on
probationers supervised for property and violent offenses
were not collected prior to 2002. 

Public-order offenders, including those supervised for a DWI
or other traffic offense, represented a smaller share of the
probation population in 2008 (17%) compared to 2000 (24%).

Other changes in the composition of the probation population
during the last eight years include a larger share of women
in 2008 (24%), compared to 2000 (22%). White probationers
also represented a larger share of the probation population
in 2008 (56%), compared to 2000 (54%). During this period the
percentage of black probationers declined from 31% in 2000 to
29% in 2008. The percentage of Hispanic probationers and
probationers of other races have remained fairly stable.

Parole exits grew at a faster rate than entries in 2008, and
growth in the parole population slowed

In 2008, 828,169 offenders were under parole supervision, an
increase of 6,992 parolees from the previous year. The growth
in the parole population during 2008 (0.9%) was a third of
the rate of growth during 2007 (2.7%).

From 2000 to 2008, parole entries grew from an estimated
484,400 to 581,000; parole exits increased from an estimated
473,900 to 574,000 (figure 4).***Footnote 7 Entries and exits
were estimated for nonreporting agencies, and the estimation
method for Pennsylvania changed in 2008. See footnote 4 and
Methodology.***  Since 2000 the size of the parole population
has grown each year as the number of adults entering parole
supervision has exceeded the number exiting.***Footnote 8 See
Methodology for a discussion on entries and exits to
probation and parole and changes in the number of offenders
in these populations.***  In 2008 the parole population grew
0.9% as the number of entries exceeded exits by 7,000.
However, the rate of growth in the population slowed during
2008 as exits from parole grew 5.6%, more than two and half
times faster than the growth in entries to parole (2.1%). The
slower growth rate in entries was consistent with the smaller
increase in the number of inmates conditionally released from
prison to community supervision during 2008. (See Prisoners
in 2008, available online at
<http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/abstract/p08.htm>.)

Between 2000 and 2003, the growth in parole entries (1.5% per
year) outpaced exits (0.9% per year), and the parole
population grew by an average of 2.1% annually. Parole exits
(3.2% annually) grew, on average, faster than entries (2.3%
annually) between 2003 and 2005, and the growth in the parole
population slowed (0.7% annually). The average increase (2.6%
annually) in the parole population rose again between 2005
and 2007. During this period the average annual rate of
growth in parole entries (3.6%) was faster than the growth in
parole exits (2.5%). In 2008 the growth in the parole
population slowed again as the number of exits from parole
increased at a faster rate than the number of entries to
parole.

Rise in parole exit rate during 2008 was associated with an
increase in parolees completing the terms of their
supervision 

The exit rate for all parolees was 70 per 100 in 2008 (table
4). This exit rate indicates that 70% of the parole
population was discharged from supervision at some point
during the year. Between 2005 and 2007 (67 per 100 for both
years) the parole exit rate remained fairly stable. During
this period as the exit rate remained stable and entries
continued to rise, the parole population experienced its
fastest average rate of growth (2.6% per year) since 2000.

As the exit rate for all parolees increased from 2007 to
2008, growth in the parole population slowed (0.9%). Growth
in the parole exit rate during 2008 was associated with an
increase in the percentage of parolees who were either
discharged from supervision either after completing their
full-term sentence or receiving an early discharge. Of the
estimated 543,600 parolees discharged from supervision in
2007, 46% had met the conditions of their supervision and
served their full-term sentence or received an early
discharge (table 5). The rate of completion increased to
almost half (49%) of the estimated 574,000 parolees who were
discharged during 2008.

Slowing rate of growth in parole population during 2008 was
related to the overall decline in state parole

During 2008, 34 states, the District of Columbia, and the
federal system reported an increase in their parole
populations, amounting to a total of 22,081 parolees (figure
5). The federal system (7,234) reported the largest absolute
increase in the nation, followed by Missouri (2,027) and
Michigan (1,392). The smallest increases occurred in Utah
(29), Wyoming (21), Delaware (16), and New Hampshire (8).

The federal system accounted for a third of the total
increase in the parole population in 2008. Growth in the
federal parole population exceeded the total change in the
nation's parole population (6,992) during the year.
Contributing to the rise in the federal parole population was
the significantly faster growth in entries (9%) to federal
parole supervision, compared to exits (0.4%) (not shown in
graph).

Fifteen states reported a decline in their parole populations
for a total decrease of 14,860 parolees during
2008.***Footnote 9 Excludes Virginia because the state could
not provide data for January 1. See Methodology.***  In
absolute numbers Pennsylvania (-5,516) and California
(-3,011) reported the largest declines among the states that
reported a decrease, accounting for more than half (55%) of
the decrease in the parole population during 2008. The
smallest declines in the number of parolees occurred in Maine
(-1) and Oregon (-1). 

Among the 50 states and the District of Columbia, the total
change in the parole population amounted to an estimated
decline of 242, which was offset by the increase in the
federal parole population during the year. Although the
federal parole population grew 7.9% during 2008, the overall
decline in state parole contributed to slowing the growth in
the nation's parole population to 0.9% during the year (not
shown in graph).

About 85% of all parolees were required to regularly report
to a parole authority in 2008; about 6% were absconders

In 2008, 85% of parolees were on active parole supervision
and were required to regularly report to a parole authority
in person, by mail, or by telephone (appendix table 15).
Another 6% of the parole population were classified as
absconders and could not be located, while 4% were on
inactive supervision and were not required to regularly
report to a parole authority. The remaining 5% of parolees
were on other statutes.

Most parolees were under supervision for a drug offense;
whites accounted for about 4 in 10 parolees in 2008

In 2008 parolees were more likely to have served a sentence
for a drug offense (37%) than any other type of offense, down
slightly from 38% in 2004. Property offenders represented a
smaller share of the parole population in 2008 (23%) compared
to 2004 (26%), while violent offenders accounted for a
slightly larger share of the parole population in 2008 (26%)
compared to 2004 (25%). Prior to 2002 no offense data on
parolees were collected; 2008 was the first year that weapon
offense data were collected separately. 

The parole population was predominantly male in 2008 (88%),
and this percentage has remained unchanged since 2000. White
parolees represented 41% of the parole population at yearend
2008, up from 38% in 2000. Black and Hispanic parolees
represented smaller shares of the population during this
period. Black parolees made up 38% of the population in 2008,
down from 40% in 2000. Hispanic parolees accounted for 19% of
the population, down from 21% in 2000.

Methodology

Begun in 1980 the Annual Probation Survey and the Annual
Parole Survey collect data on the total number of adults
supervised in the community on January 1 and December 31 each
year and data on the number of adults who enter and exit
supervision during each year. Both surveys cover all 50
states, the District of Columbia, and the federal system. The
Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS) depends entirely upon the
voluntary participation of state central reporters and
separate state, county, and court agencies for its annual
data on probation and parole.

In 2008 the U.S. Census Bureau served as the BJS collection
agent for the 50 states and the District of Columbia. Data
for the federal system were provided directly to BJS through
the BJS Federal Justice Statistics Program (FJSP), which
obtained data directly from the Office of Probation and
Pretrial Services, Administrative Office of the United States
Courts.

Probation

The 2008 Annual Probation Survey was sent to 467
respondents 33 central state reporters, 432 separate state,
county, or court agencies, the District of Columbia, and the
federal system. States with multiple reporters were Alabama
(3), Arizona (2), Colorado (8), Florida (41), Georgia (2),
Idaho (2), Kentucky (3), Michigan (134), Missouri (2),
Montana (4), New Mexico (2), Ohio (187), Oklahoma (3),
Pennsylvania (2), Tennessee (3), Washington (32), and West
Virginia (2).
 
Parole

The 2008 Annual Parole Survey was sent to 55 respondents 51
central state reporters, the California Youth Authority, one
municipal agency in Alabama, the state agency in Pennsylvania
which also provided county data, and the federal system.
States with multiple reporters were Alabama (2), California
(2), and Pennsylvania (2). Virginia was not able to provide
data for January 1, 2008. Additional details for Virginia are
provided under Estimating the January 1, 2008 parole
population in Virginia. 

Federal parole (as defined here) includes a term of
supervised release from prison, mandatory release, parole,
military parole, and special parole. Definitional differences
exist between parole reported here and in other BJS data
series. 

Additional information about the data collection instruments
is available online at
<http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/correct.htm#pandp> (last
accessed October 20, 2009).

Updating probation and parole population counts each year

Some states update their probation and parole population
counts for different reasons after submitting the data to
BJS. Updated population counts usually include data that were
not entered into the information system before the survey was
submitted or data that were not fully processed by yearend.
For these reasons and with the exception of the data reported
for 2008, the population counts on December 31 for years
ending 2000 to 2007 are based on the January 1 counts for the
next reporting year. Population counts for yearend 2008 are
based on December 31, 2008 data. 

Estimating the January 1, 2008 parole population in Virginia

Virginia was unable to provide data for January 1, 2008. The
respondent was able to provide an estimate of the change (5%
decrease) in Virginia's parole population during 2008. The
estimated decline was used to impute the January 1, 2008
parole population for Virginia (estimated at 4,700).

Changes in reporting methods among probation agencies within
certain jurisdictions from 2000 to 2008

Nine reporting agencies in separate jurisdictions changed
their methods of reporting probation data between 2000 and
2008. These changes included administrative changes, such as
consolidating databases or implementing new information
systems, resulting in data review and cleanup, reclassifying
offenders, including those on probation to parole and
offenders on dual community supervision statuses, and
including certain probation populations that were not
previously reported. This section discusses those nine
reporting agencies. It also discusses the year the change
occurred and the total change in the jurisdiction's probation
population, as well as the total change in the jurisdiction's
probation population between 2000 and 2008. Combined, changes
in population and changes due to new reporting methods for
these nine jurisdictions accounted for 207,900 additional
probationers between 2000 and 2008, representing
approximately 47% of the total change (444,708) in the
nation's probation population during this period. BJS was
unable to precisely break out the amount of change in the
probation population attributable to a change in population
versus a change in reporting methods based on the information
provided. 

Three Alabama agencies respond to the Annual Probation
Survey. The state agency changed its method of reporting
probation data beginning with its January 1, 2006 population
by including certain probationers in the population whose
statuses had previously been classified as other than a
probationer in prior years. The reporting change resulted in
a difference of about 9,600 additional probationers in
Alabama's total population reported between December 31, 2005
(38,995) and January 1, 2006 (48,607). The total change in
Alabama's probation population was about 13,100 additional
probationers between 2000 and 2008. 

The District of Columbia changed its method of reporting
probationers beginning with its January 1, 2008 population
because probationers who were on active supervision and
awaiting approval for a transfer through an interstate
compact agreement were excluded from the prior years' data.
The reporting change resulted in a difference of nearly 1,600
additional probationers between the December 31, 2007 (6,485)
and January 1, 2008 (8,073) populations reported by the
District of Columbia. The total change in the District of
Columbia's probation population between 2000 and 2008 was a
decline of about 2,100 probationers.

Two Georgia state agencies respond to the Annual Probation
Survey. The state agency that provides misdemeanant data of
probationers supervised by private agencies changed its
reporting methods beginning with its January 1, 2007
population when it expanded coverage. The reporting change
resulted in a difference of about 9,600 additional
probationers in Georgia's total population reported between
December 31, 2006 (422,790) and January 1, 2007 (432,436).
The same agency experienced another reporting change
beginning with its January 1, 2008 population when it
excluded probationers under supervision for a minor traffic
citation. This reporting change resulted in a decline of
nearly 56,200 probationers in Georgia's total population
reported between December 31, 2007 (435,361) and January 1,
2008 (379,204). The total change in Georgia's probation
population was about 75,700 additional probationers between
2000 and 2008. Additionally, because the state agency that
experienced reporting changes has the capacity to report
probation cases and not the number of individuals under
supervision, the counts may have overstated the total number
of individuals under probation supervision in Georgia.      

Maryland changed its method of reporting probationers
beginning with its January 1, 2007 population when it
expanded the scope of its probation population to include
certain DWI offenders who had previously been excluded from
its population. The reporting change resulted in a difference
of about 18,400 additional probationers between the December
31, 2006 (75,698) and January 1, 2007 (94,100) populations
reported by the state. The total change in Maryland's
probation population was approximately 14,800 additional
probationers between 2000 and 2008.

Massachusetts changed its method of reporting probationers
beginning with its January 1, 2003 population when it
classified certain types of offenders, who had been
previously excluded from the state's probation data, as
probationers based on new guidelines. The reporting change
resulted in a difference of about 87,300 additional
probationers between the December 31, 2002 (44,013) and
January 1, 2003 (131,319) populations reported by
Massachusetts. The state experienced a similar change in
reporting methods beginning with its January 1, 2004
population. This reporting change resulted in a difference of
approximately 39,300 additional probationers between the
December 31, 2003 (127,135) and January 1, 2004 (166,464)
populations reported by the state. The total change in
Massachusetts' probation population between 2000 and 2008 was
an increase of about 139,100. 

Two New Mexico agencies respond to the Annual Probation
Survey. The state agency changed its method of reporting
probation data beginning with its January 1, 2003 population
when its information system was modified to include certain
probationers who had been previously excluded from its
population. The reporting change resulted in a difference of
approximately 4,700 additional probationers in New Mexico's
total population reported between December 31, 2002 (11,626)
and January 1, 2003 (16,287). The state agency experienced
another reporting change beginning with its January 1, 2006
population because the agency's information system did not
have the capacity to report probationers on statuses other
than active supervision. This reporting change resulted in a
decline of about 3,700 in New Mexico's total probation
population reported between December 31, 2005 (18,706) and
January 1, 2006 (14,982). The state agency changed its method
of reporting probationers again beginning with its January 1,
2007 population when its capacity to report data, including
probationers on different types of supervision statuses, was
enhanced. The reporting change resulted in a difference of
nearly 1,400 additional probationers in New Mexico's total
population reported between December 31, 2006 (16,493) and
January 1, 2007 (17,878). The total change in New Mexico's
probation population was an increase of about 10,400 between
2000 and 2008. 

New York changed its method of reporting probation data for
two different reasons beginning with its January 1, 2003
population. First, the state reconciled the status of certain
probationers in its information system based on new
guidelines. Second, the probation data reported prior to
January 1, 2003 were case counts, and not counts of
individuals. The reporting change resulted in a decrease of
nearly 65,100 probationers between the December 31, 2002
(198,042) and January 1, 2003 (132,966) populations reported
by New York. The total change in New York's probation
population was a decrease of about 67,600 between 2000 and
2008. 

Pennsylvania's state agency provides both state and county
probation data. The agency changed its method of reporting
county probation data, starting with the December 31, 2004
population, by reconciling the status of certain offenders
who were previously classified as being on a dual probation
and parole status. The reporting change resulted in a
difference of nearly 30,000 additional probationers in
Pennsylvania's total population reported between January 1,
2004 (137,206) and December 31, 2004 (167,180). The total
change in Pennsylvania's probation population was an increase
of approximately 65,800 probationers between 2000 and 2008.

Washington has 32 agencies that respond to the Annual
Probation Survey. The state agency changed its method of
reporting probation data beginning with its January 1, 2004
population when the agency reclassified certain offenders on
supervised release following a prison term from probationers
to parolees. The change resulted in a decrease of nearly
25,100 in Washington's total probation population reported
between December 31, 2003 (172,814) and January 1, 2004
(147,741). The total change in Washington's probation
population was a decrease of about 41,300 probationers
between 2000 and 2008.

Changes in reporting methods among parole agencies within
certain jurisdictions from 2000 to 2008 

Six reporting agencies in separate jurisdictions changed
their methods of reporting parole data between 2000 and 2008
for the same reasons as those agencies that changed their
methods of reporting probation data adminstrative changes,
reclassification of offenders, and the addition of certain
parole populations not previously reported. This section
discusses those six reporting agencies. It also discusses the
year the change occurred and the change in the state's total
parole population, as well as the total change in the state's
parole population between 2000 and 2008.
Combined, changes in population and changes due to new
reporting methods in these six states accounted for 7,400
additional parolees between 2000 and 2008, representing
approximately 7% of the total change (104,271) in the
nation's parole population during this period. 

Two Alabama agencies respond to the Annual Parole Survey. The
state agency changed its method of reporting parole data
beginning with the January 1, 2006 population by including
certain offenders whose statuses had previously been
classified as other than a parolee in prior years. The
reporting change resulted in a difference of approximately
500 additional parolees in Alabama's total parole population
reported between December 31, 2005 (7,252) and January 1,
2006 (7,795). The state agency changed its reporting method
again beginning with the January 1, 2007 population when it
consolidated data sources. The change resulted in a decline
of about 1,200 parolees in Alabama's total parole population
reported between December 31, 2006 (8,685) and January 1,
2007 (7,508). The total change in Alabama's parole population
was an increase of about 2,600 between 2000 and 2008. 

Alaska made improvements to its method of reporting parole
data starting with its January 1, 2007 population. The
reporting change resulted in a difference of nearly 500
additional parolees between the December 31, 2006 (1,044) and
January 1, 2007 (1,527) populations reported by Alaska. The
total change in Alaska's parole population was an increase of
about 1,200 parolees between 2000 and 2008.

New Mexico changed its method of reporting parole data
beginning with its January 1, 2007 population because its
information system was enhanced, which resulted in an
increased capacity to report data, including parolees on
different types of supervision statuses. The reporting change
resulted in a difference of almost 600 additional parolees in
New Mexico's total parole population reported between
December 31, 2006 (2,922) and January 1, 2007 (3,517). The
total change in New Mexico's parole population was an
increase of nearly 2,100 parolees between 2000 and 2008.

Pennsylvania's state agency provides both state and county
parole data. The agency changed its method of reporting
county parole data, starting with its December 31, 2004
population, by reconciling the status of certain offenders
who were previously classified as being on a dual probation
and parole status. The reporting change resulted in a decline
of approximately 25,100 parolees in Pennsylvania's total
population reported between January 1, 2004 (102,244) and
December 31, 2004 (77,175). The total change in
Pennsylvania's parole population was a decrease of nearly
9,400 parolees between 2000 and 2008.

Virginia changed its method of reporting parolees starting
with its January 1, 2007 population when it expanded the
scope of its parole population based on new guidelines. The
change included post-release offenders who had been
previously excluded from the parole counts reported by the
state in prior years. The reporting change resulted in a
difference of approximately 3,200 additional parolees between
the December 31, 2006 (3,978) and January 1, 2007 (7,201)
populations reported by the state. In 2008 Virginia
consolidated its databases, which resulted in subsequent data
review and cleanup. This reporting change resulted in a
decrease of an estimated 2,200 parolees between the December
31, 2007 population (6,850) reported by the state and the
imputed January 1, 2008 population (estimated at 4,700). The
total change in Virginia's parole population was a decline of
nearly 700 parolees between 2000 and 2008. 

The state of Washington changed its method of reporting
parole data starting with its January 1, 2004 population when
it reclassified certain offenders on supervised release
following a prison term from a probation status to a parole
status. The change in the state's parole population was a
difference of 24,800 additional parolees between the December
31, 2003 (105) and January 1, 2004 (24,905) populations
reported by the state. The total change in Washington's
parole population was an increase of about 11,600 parolees
between 2000 and 2008. 

Imputing probation entries and exits for nonreporting
agencies in 2008

BJS used one of four methods to impute probation entries for
nonreporting agencies and a single method to impute exits.
The method used to impute entries was dependent on the data
available. The first method was used to estimate entries and
exits for nonreporting county and district agencies in
Arizona, Florida, Michigan, Ohio, and Washington. BJS
estimated probation entries in 2008 by using the ratio of
entries in 2007 to the agency's probation population on
January 1, 2007 and applying that ratio to the agency's
January 1, 2008 population. BJS estimated exits from
supervision by adding the agency's estimated probation
entries in 2008 to the agency's probation population on
January 1, 2008, and subtracting that estimate from the
probation population on December 31, 2008. Estimating
probation entries in 2008 for one agency in Arizona required
BJS to use data from 2004 because the growth observed in the
agency's probation population during that year was similar to
the growth observed in 2008. The agency provided probation
entries and exits for 2007; however, growth in the agency's
probation population in 2007 was significantly larger than
the growth observed during 2008.

The second method was used to estimate probation entries for
nonreporting county and district agencies in Colorado,
Florida, Kentucky, Michigan, Ohio, and Washington. These
agencies were also unable to report probation entries and
exits in 2007. The ratio of 2008 entries to the January 1,
2008 population among reporting agencies in the same state
was used to estimate the number of entries for nonreporting
agencies with similar numbers of probationers. To estimate
probation exits for these agencies, BJS used the first
estimation method.  
 
BJS used a third method to estimate probation entries for one
state agency in West Virginia. This agency reported
interstate compact data only. BJS estimated the number of
entries for this agency by using the ratio of 2008 entries to
the January 1, 2008 probation population among reporting
agencies within the same region. To estimate probation exits
for this agency, BJS used the first estimation method. 

BJS used a fourth method to estimate entries to and exits
from probation and parole supervision in Pennsylvania
counties. This method is discussed in Changes in estimating
probation and parole entries and exits in Pennsylvania
counties. 

Changes in estimating probation and parole entries and exits
in Pennsylvania counties 

From 1999 to 2007 probation and parole entries and exits were
estimated in Pennsylvania counties based on the last year
(1998) the state was able to provide the data. In 2008 the
method changed because the Pennsylvania respondent was able
to provide additional information, including the number of
combined probation and parole entries to county supervision,
by county, and the number of combined probation and parole
exits from county supervision, by county. The 2008 data were
estimated in two steps and the methodology was provided to
the Pennsylvania respondent for review. 

Sixty-two of the 65 counties in Pennsylvania were able to
provide combined probation and parole entries and exits to
the Pennsylvania county respondent in 2008. In the first step
of estimation, data for the three nonreporting counties were
estimated. To estimate the 2008 data for two of those
nonreporting counties, the first method (See Imputing
probation entries and exits for nonreporting agencies in
2008) was applied to the 2007 data provided by those
counties. The third county was also unable to provide
probation and parole entries and exits in 2007. For the third
county, entries and exits were estimated based on data
provided by other counties in Pennsylvania with a similar
number of probationers and parolees and that had a similar
increase in their combined probation and parole population
during 2008. The estimates of probation and parole entries
and probation and parole exits for these three counties were
added to the combined probation and parole entries and the
combined probation and parole exits for the other 62
counties, yielding a total number of probation and parole
entries and exit for all 65 counties.
 
In the second step of estimation, the total number of
probation entries and exits for all 65 counties and the total
number of parole entries and exits for all 65 counties were
estimated separately. The Pennsylvania respondent was able to
provide separate January 1, 2008 and December 31, 2008 counts
of county probationers and county parolees. The percentage of
the total combined probation and parole population on January
1, 2008 attributable to probation only was applied to the
total number of combined probation and parole entries in the
65 counties to estimate the number of entries to probation.
The residual was used as an estimate of the number of entries
to parole during 2008. Probation exits were estimated by
adding the estimated 2008 county probation entries to the
January 1, 2008 county probation population and subtracting
the December 31, 2008 county probation population. County
parole exits were estimated using the same method. 

National estimates of probation and parole entries and exits
from 2000 to 2008 

Probation and parole entries and exits are estimated for
nonreporting agencies and the estimation method for
Pennsylvania counties changed in 2008 because the
Pennsylvania respondent was able to provide additional
information. The national estimates of entries and exits are
based on estimation methods for Pennsylvania counties from
2000 to 2007 that are comparable to 2008. The 2007 estimates
of entries and exits nationwide were re-estimated using the
same method as 2008 because the Pennsylvania was able to
provide the same additional information for 2007. For years
2000 to 2006, the national totals of probation entries were
re-estimated by adding the difference (28,400) of probation
entries in Pennsylvania counties in 2007 between the old and
new methods of estimation. The national totals of probation
exits (difference of 28,400) and parole entries (difference
of 14,400) and exits (difference of 14,500) from 2000 to 2006
were re-estimated using the same method. 

Estimating national change in entries and exits and the
nation's probation and parole populations 

Technically, the change in the probation and parole
populations from the beginning of the year to the end of the
year should equal the difference between entries and exits
during the year. However, the differences may not be equal.
Some probation and parole information systems track the
number of cases that enter and exit community supervision
versus the number of offenders. This means that entries and
exits may include case counts as opposed to counts of
offenders, while the beginning and end of year population
counts represent individuals. Additionally, all the data on
entries and exits may not have been logged into the
information systems or the information systems may not have
fully processed all of the data before the data were
submitted to BJS.

Calculating growth in the total correctional population and
accounting for offenders on 
dual correctional statuses

Some offenders in prison or jail remained under the
jurisdiction of a probation or parole agency. In order to
calculate the contributions of both the community supervision
and incarcerated populations to the growth in the total
correctional population, offenders with dual correctional
statuses were excluded from the community supervision
population. If offenders with dual correctional statuses had
been excluded from the incarcerated population, the community
supervision population would have accounted for 63% of the
total growth in the correctional population between 2000 and
2008; the incarcerated population would have accounted for
37%.

Estimating 2007 community supervision and prison data for
nonreporting jurisdictions

In 2007 Oklahoma did not provide community supervision data.
Community supervision data for Oklahoma were estimated by
BJS. See Probation and Parole in the United States, 2007  
Statistical Tables, available online at
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/abstract/ppus07st.htm>. Maine
and Nevada did not provide prison data for 2007. Prison data
for Maine and Nevada were estimated by BJS. See Prisoners in
2007, available online at
<http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/abstract/p07.htm> (last
accessed October 20, 2009). 

Estimating the adult resident population 

The U.S. Census Bureau provided BJS with provisional
estimates of the adult resident population in each state on
January 1, 2009.

Other available information

Detailed information for 2008 is available in appendix tables
1 to 22. Explanatory notes for probation and parole are also
available. 

Appendix tables include--

Community supervision

*Appendix Table 1. Adults under community supervision, 2008 
Probation

*Appendix Table 2. Adults on probation, 2008

*Appendix Table 3. Adults entering probation, by type of
sentence, 2008

*Appendix Table 4. Adults exiting probation, by type of exit,
2008

*Appendix Table 5. Characteristics of adults on probation,
2000, 2004, 2008

*Appendix Table 6. Adults on probation, by gender, 2008

*Appendix Table 7. Adults on probation, by race and Hispanic
origin, 2008

*Appendix Table 8. Adults on probation, by status of
supervision, 2008

*Appendix Table 9. Adults on probation, by type of offense,
2008

*Appendix Table 10. Adults on probation, by most serious
offense, 2008

*Appendix Table 11. Adults on probation tracked by a Global
Positioning System (GPS), also on parole, or incarcerated,
2008

Parole

*Appendix Table 12. Adults on parole, 2008

*Appendix Table 13. Adults entering parole, by type of
sentence, 2008

*Appendix Table 14. Adults exiting parole, by type of exit,
2008

*Appendix Table 15. Characteristics of adults on parole,
2000, 2004, 2008

*Appendix Table 16. Adults on parole, by gender, 2008

*Appendix Table 17. Adults on parole, by race and Hispanic
origin, 2008

*Appendix Table 18. Adults on parole, by status of
supervision, 2008

*Appendix Table 19. Adults on parole, by maximum sentence to
incarceration, 2008

*Appendix Table 20. Adults on parole, by most serious
offense, 2008

*Appendix Table 21. Adults on parole, by type of release from
prison, 2008

*Appendix Table 22. Adults on parole tracked by a Global
Positioning System (GPS), also on probation, or incarcerated,
2008

Explanatory notes include--

Probation--Explanatory notes, 2008

Parole--Explanatory notes, 2008

-------------------------------------------------------------

The Bureau of Justice Statistics is the statistics agency of
the U.S. Department of Justice. Michael D. Sinclair is the
acting director. 

Lauren E. Glaze and Thomas P. Bonczar wrote this report.
Lauren E. Glaze, Thomas P. Bonczar, and Matthew S. Cooper
analyzed the data and prepared the tables. William J. Sabol
and Matthew S. Cooper provided statistical verification.
Sheri R. Simmons and Todd Minton provided statistical review.
Georgette Walsh and Jill Duncan edited the report. Tina
Dorsey produced the report and Jayne Robinson prepared it for
final printing under the supervision of Doris J. James.

Nicole S. Adolph and Jorgelina A. Arroyo carried out the data
collection and processing under the supervision of Latrice M.
Brogsdale-Davis, Governments Division, Census Bureau, U.S.
Department of Commerce. Ryan D. Driscoll provided technical
assistance under the supervision of Duane H. Cavanaugh.

December 2009, NCJ 228230

-------------------------------------------------------------

This report in portable document format and in ASCII and its
related statistical data and tables are available at the BJS
World Wide Web Internet site: <http://www.
ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/abstract/ppus08.htm>

-------------------------------------------------------------

Office of Justice Programs
Innovation  Partnerships  Safer Neighborhoods
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov

-------------------------------------------------------------

12/8/2009 JER/11:12am