U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Programs
Bureau of Justice Statistics

------------------------------------------------------

This file is text only without graphics and many of the 
tables. A Zip archive of the tables in this report in spreadsheet 
format (.csv) and the full report including tables and graphics in
PDF format are available on BJS's website at:
http://www.bjs.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbdetail&iid=5907

------------------------------------------------------
******************
Special Report
******************

************************************************
Police Response to Domestic Violence, 2006-2015
************************************************

Brian A. Reaves, Ph.D., BJS Statistician
******************************************

An average of 1.3 million nonfatal domestic violence 
victimizations occurred annually in the United States during 
the 10-year aggregate period from 2006 to 2015. Police were 
notified of more than half (56%) of these victimizations 
(figure 1). When police responded to the scene, they took a 
report 78% of the time. The victim or other household member 
signed a criminal complaint against the offender in about 
half (48%) of victimizations reported to police. The 
offender was arrested or charges were filed in 39% of 
reported victimizations, either during the initial response 
or during the follow-up period.

This report primarily uses data from the National Crime 
Victimization Survey (NCVS) for the 10-year aggregate period 
2006-15 to examine the reporting of nonfatal domestic 
violence victimizations to police and police response to 
these victimizations. Nonfatal domestic violence includes 
serious violence (rape or sexual assault, robbery, and 
aggravated assault) and simple assaults committed by 
intimate partners, immediate family members, or other 
relatives. ***Footnote 1 For offense definitions, see 
Criminal Victimization, 2015 (NCJ 250180, BJS web, October 
2016, p. 15) and Terms and Definitions: Victims on the BJS 
website.*** Data are based on victims’ descriptions of 
police actions during their initial response and any follow-
up actions. This report also includes data on the prevalence 
of arrests or charges filed related to these domestic 
violence victimizations and on the role of signed criminal 
complaints.  Unless otherwise noted, the comparisons in this 
report are significant at the 95% confidence level.

**********************************************************
************
Highlights
************

For nonfatal domestic violence victimizations occurring 
during the 10-year aggregate period from 2006-15--

* More than half (56%) of all victimizations were reported 
to police.

* Police responded to nearly two-thirds (64%) of reported 
victimizations in 10 minutes or less.

* Reasons victims did not report a victimization to police 
included personal privacy (32%), protecting the offender 
(21%), the crime was minor (20%), and fear of reprisal 
(19%).

* Female victimizations (24%) were four times as likely as 
male victimizations (6%) to go unreported due to fear of 
reprisal.

* Overall, the offender was arrested or charges were filed 
in 39% of victimizations reported to police.

* In 23% of reported victimizations, police arrested an 
offender during their initial response.

* The victim or other household member signed a criminal 
complaint against the offender in about half (48%) of 
victimizations reported to police. 

* The offender was arrested or charges were filed in 89% of 
the victimizations reported to police where a victim was 
seriously injured and signed a criminal complaint.

* About 9 in 10 local police departments serving 250,000 or 
more residents operated a full-time domestic violence unit.
**********************************************************

***************************************
More than half of nonfatal domestic 
violence victimizations were known 
to police
***************************************

During 2006-15, an estimated 56% of nonfatal domestic 
violence victimizations were reported or otherwise known to 
police (table 1). ***Footnote 2 Police became aware of about 
2% of victimizations through means other than someone 
reporting it to them. These are included as reported 
victimizations. *** ***Footnote 3 In this report, police 
refers to any law enforcement agency responding to a 
domestic violence victimization. The agency or agencies 
responding to a victimization may have included a state 
police agency, local police department, sheriffs’ office, 
special jurisdiction agency (such as campus police), or 
another type of law enforcement agency.*** Reporting rates 
were the same for victimizations involving an intimate 
partner (spouse, former spouse, boyfriend, or girlfriend) as 
for other victim-offender relationships (parent, child, 
sibling, or any other relative except spouses). Reporting 
rates were also the same for victimizations involving 
serious violence as for those involving simple assault. (See 
appendix table 3 for more information on reporting rates.)

Female victimizations involving a serious injury (54%) were 
reported to police at about the same rate as victimizations 
with no injury (55%) (figure 2). A greater percentage of 
male victimizations were reported to police when a serious 
injury was involved (77%), compared to when there was a 
minor injury (57%) or no injury (49%).

The victim reported the incident to police in about three-
quarters (76%) of reported victimizations (table 2). This 
was more often the case when the victimization involved 
intimate partners (80%) than other victim-offender 
relationships (68%). An additional 10% of victimizations 
reported to police came from a household member other than 
the victim. An estimated 15% of reports originated outside 
the household, including 4% from an official such as a 
security guard or a school administrator.

****************************************
An annual average of about 582,000 
domestic violence victimizations went 
unreported during 2006-15
****************************************

During 2006-15, an annual average of about 716,000 nonfatal 
domestic violence victimizations were reported or otherwise 
known to police, compared to about 582,000 victimizations 
that went unreported. In about a third (32%) of the 
victimizations not reported to police, victims cited the 
personal nature of the incident as a reason for not doing so 
(table 3). About a fifth of victimizations were not reported 
because the victim wanted to protect the offender (21%), 
felt the crime was minor or unimportant (20%), or feared 
reprisal from the offender or others (19%).

*******************************************************

****************************************
Measuring domestic violence with the 
National Crime Victimization Survey
****************************************

The National Crime Victimization Survey (NCVS) collects 
information on nonfatal crimes, both reported and not 
reported to police, against persons age 12 or older from a 
nationally representative sample of U.S. households. The 
survey collects information on personal crimes (rape or 
sexual assault, robbery, aggravated and simple assault, and 
personal larceny) and household property crimes (burglary, 
motor vehicle theft, and other theft).

The domestic violence victimizations analyzed in this report 
were categorized as either serious violence (rape or sexual 
assault, robbery, aggravated assault) or simple assault. The 
victimizations were also grouped into two categories of 
victim-offender relationships: those involving an intimate 
partner (current or former spouse, boyfriend, or girlfriend) 
and those involving other domestic victim-offender 
relationships (parent, child, sibling, or any other relative 
except spouses). Additional violent victimizations captured 
by the NCVS involving acquaintances or strangers did not 
fall under the definition of domestic violence and were 
excluded.

According to the NCVS, an annual average of 2.1 million 
victimizations involving serious violence and 4.1 million 
victimizations involving simple assault occurred during 
2006-15. When the victim-offender relationship was known 
(91%), about a quarter of violent victimizations were 
classified as domestic violence regardless of whether they 
involved serious violence (25%) or simple assault (23%) 
(table 4). Victimizations involving serious violence were 
more likely to be domestic violence when the victim was 
female (38%) than when the victim was male (12%). Female 
victims (27%) of serious violence were about four times as 
likely as male victims (7%) to have been victimized by an 
intimate partner. Similar patterns were observed for simple 
assault victimizations. ***Footnote 4 For more information 
on the characteristics of domestic violence, see appendix 
table 1 and Nonfatal Domestic Violence, 2003-2012 (NCJ 
244697, BJS web, April 2014) or the NCVS Victimization 
Analysis Tool on the BJS website.***
************************************************************

****************************************
About a quarter (24%) of female victims 
who did not report an incident cited 
fear of reprisal as a reason
****************************************

Overall, domestic violence victimizations involving serious 
violence (31%) were more likely than victimizations 
involving simple assault (13%) to go unreported due to fear 
of reprisal. Regardless of the severity of the incident, 
female victimizations (24%) were four times as likely as 
male victimizations (6%) to go unreported to police due to 
fear of reprisal (figure 3). Male victimizations (28%) were 
more likely than female victimizations (17%) to go 
unreported to police because the victim felt the crime was 
minor or unimportant.

****************************************
Police responded to most reported 
nonfatal domestic violence victimizations
within 10 minutes of notification
****************************************

In about 7% of reported domestic violence victimizations, 
the victim went to police rather than have police come to 
them. In another 7% of victimizations, the victim said 
police did not come when informed. ***Footnote 5 
Victimizations that police did not respond to, or that they 
responded to slowly, may not have required an immediate 
response because, in some instances, the victimization 
reported may have occurred days or weeks prior to police 
being notified. This cannot be determined from the NCVS
*** For the remaining victimizations, police responded to 
the scene within 10 minutes of being notified nearly two-
thirds (64%) of the time (table 5). The percentage of police 
responses that occurred within 10 minutes was about the same 
for victimizations involving serious violence (65%) as those 
involving simple assault (64%). Victims reported that nearly 
all (94%) police responses occurred within an hour.

According to victims, the most common police action during their 
initial response was to take a report (78%) (table 6). Police 
questioned persons during 36% of their initial responses. Less 
frequently, they conducted a search (14%) or collected evidence (11%).
 
Police arrested the offender in 23% of initial responses to nonfatal 
domestic violence victimizations.

Police arrested the offender during about a quarter (23%) of their 
initial responses to nonfatal domestic violence victimizations 
(table 7).*** Footnote 6 Some states and localities have mandatory 
or pro-arrest policies related to domestic violence. These 
policies may include special conditions for when an incident 
involves intimate partner violence, commission of a felony, 
or a protection order violation.*** In some cases, police may 
not have been able to make an arrest during an initial response, 
whether mandatory or discretionary, because the offender was 
not present at the scene. Initial arrest rates were about 
the same whether the victimization involved serious violence 
(24%) or simple assault (23%). The offender was arrested 
slightly more often for victimizations involving intimate 
partners (25%) than for other victim-offender relationships 
(20%) (90% confidence interval). 

When domestic violence victimization involved a female 
victim, the offender was arrested during the initial police 
response 32% of the time when the victim was seriously 
injured, compared to 16% of the time when the victim was 
uninjured (figure 4). When the victimization involved a male 
victim, the offender was arrested during the initial police 
response 44% of the time when the victim was seriously 
injured, compared to 16% of the time when the victim was 
uninjured.

****************************************
About half of reported nonfatal domestic 
violence victimizations resulted in a 
signed criminal complaint 
****************************************

During 2006-15, the victim or other household member signed 
a criminal complaint against the offender in about half 
(48%) of nonfatal domestic violence victimizations reported 
to police (table 8). A criminal complaint was usually filed 
by the prosecutor in cooperation with police, and in some 
cases the victim, to begin court proceedings. Signed 
complaints were obtained more often when the victimization 
involved intimate partners (52%) than when it involved other 
victim-offender relationships (40%). Complaints were also 
more likely when the victimization involved serious violence 
(56%) than when it involved simple assault (44%). (See 
appendix table 5 for more information on signed criminal 
complaints.)

Signed criminal complaints were obtained in 51% of female 
victimizations, compared to 38% of male victimizations 
(figure 5). About three-fifths of female victims signed a 
complaint when they received a serious or minor injury, 
compared to fewer than half of those who were uninjured. 
When a serious injury was involved, female victims (58%) 
were nearly twice as likely as male victims (32%) to sign a 
criminal complaint.

****************************************
Police took follow-up action in a third 
of nonfatal domestic violence 
victimizations
****************************************

In addition to contact with police during their initial 
response to the victimization, an estimated 40% of victims 
had contact with police at a later date about the same 
victimization (table 9). In about a third (34%) of 
victimizations, police took specific follow-up actions 
during this later contact, such as taking a report, 
questioning persons, conducting a search, collecting 
evidence, or making an arrest. Police follow-up was more 
common with victimizations involving intimate partners 
(36%) than with other victim-offender relationships (30%) 
(90% confidence interval).

Police arrested the offender as part of their follow-up 
response in about 10% of victimizations. Police arrested the 
offender when following up with 12% of the victimizations 
involving intimate partners, compared to 6% of the 
victimizations involving other victim-offender 
relationships.

************************************************************

****************************************
Nearly all local police departments 
serving 250,000 or more residents 
operated a full-time specialized unit 
for domestic violence
****************************************

In 2013, about 9 in 10 sheriffs’ offices (92%) and local 
police departments (89%) and 7 in 10 state law enforcement 
agencies (such as state police and highway patrol agencies) 
formally addressed domestic violence with a specialized 
unit, other dedicated personnel, policies, procedures, or 
training (table 10). Overall, about half (47%) of state and 
local law enforcement agencies employing 100 or more full-
time sworn personnel operated a full-time domestic violence 
unit in 2013, which was the same proportion as in 2003 (not 
shown). 

Specialized domestic violence units often consist of 
detectives and counselors or social workers and serve 
various roles, including--

* investigating serious domestic violence cases

* interacting with service and treatment agencies to prevent 
further violence

* assisting victims

* training officers, victims, and community members

* acting as a liaison for officers.

Larger agencies were the most likely to operate a 
specialized domestic violence unit. In 2013, 9 in 10 (90%) 
local police departments serving a population of 250,000 or 
more operated a domestic violence unit with personnel 
assigned full time. About 4 in 10 sheriffs’ offices serving 
250,000 or more residents (40%) and local police departments 
serving 50,000 to 249,999 residents (41%) had a full-time 
domestic violence unit. About 2 in 10 state law enforcement 
agencies had a domestic violence unit with personnel 
assigned full time (14%) or part time (5%).
************************************************************

****************************************
Police were more likely to follow up on 
nonfatal domestic violence victimizations 
involving injuries
****************************************

After the initial contact, police followed up with about 4 
in 10 reported nonfatal domestic violence victimizations 
involving a serious injury, regardless of whether the victim 
was female (42%) or male (43%) (figure 6). Police follow-up 
was more likely to occur with female victimizations than 
male victimizations when there was a minor injury (43% for 
female compared to 28% for male) or no injury (32% compared 
to 20%).

****************************************
Police followed up with about half of 
nonfatal domestic violence victimizations 
that included a signed complaint
****************************************

When a victim or other household member signed a criminal 
complaint against an offender, police followed up 52% of the 
time (figure 7). 
In comparison, police followed up with 17% of victimizations 
without a signed complaint. Police were more likely to 
follow up with victimizations for which a signed complaint 
was obtained than those without a signed complaint, 
regardless of whether the victim was seriously injured (60% 
with a complaint compared to 22% without), received a minor 
injury (57% compared to 18%), or was not injured (46% 
compared to 17%).

****************************************
The offender was arrested or charges 
were filed in about 2 in 5 nonfatal 
domestic violence victimizations 
reported to police
****************************************

In an estimated 39% of domestic violence victimizations 
reported to police, the offender had been arrested or 
charges were filed by the time of the NCVS interview (table 
11).*** Footnote 7 For all victimizations included in the 
analysis, the median time from incident to interview was 
about 4 months. See Methodology.*** Arrests or filed charges 
were more likely for victimizations involving intimate 
partners (42%) than other victim-offender relationships 
(33%). Arrests or filed charges occurred in about two-fifths 
of victimizations whether they involved serious violence 
(42%) or simple assault (38%). (See appendix table 7 for 
more information on offenders arrested or charges were 
filed.)

****************************************
Offenders who seriously injured the 
victim were more likely than other 
offenders to be arrested or charged
****************************************

In a majority of nonfatal domestic violence victimizations 
that involved serious victim injury, the offender was 
arrested or charges were filed whether the victim was female 
(62%) or male (63%) (figure 8). The offender was arrested or 
charges were filed when the victim was female in more than 
half (56%) of the victimizations that involved a minor 
injury, compared to 38% of the victimizations when the 
victim was male. When there was no victim injury, the 
offender was arrested or charges were filed in 29% of the 
victimizations involving a female victim, compared to 22% of 
those involving a male victim.

****************************************
About 9 in 10 offenders were arrested or 
charged when the victim was seriously 
injured and signed a complaint
****************************************

Among nonfatal domestic violence victimizations, offenders 
were arrested or charges were filed 59% of the time when the 
victim or other household member signed a criminal complaint 
against the offender, compared to 21% of the time when they 
did not sign a complaint (figure 9). When the victim was 
seriously injured, the offender was arrested or charges were 
filed in 89% of the cases with a signed complaint, compared 
to 35% of the cases without a complaint. When the victim was 
uninjured, an arrest was made or a charge was filed in 47% 
of the cases with a complaint, compared to 14% of the cases 
without.

************************************************************

****************************************
About half of local police departments 
and a third of sheriffs’ offices serving 
250,000 or more residents operated a 
full-time victim assistance unit
****************************************

Victim assistance is an important part of the response to 
domestic violence for many law enforcement agencies. Data 
from the Bureau of Justice Statistics’ (BJS) Law Enforcement 
Management and Administrative Statistics survey indicated 
that, in 2013, about 8 in 10 sheriffs’ offices (82%) and 
local police departments (79%) formally addressed victim 
assistance through a specialized unit, other dedicated 
personnel, policies, procedures, or training. About two-
thirds (66%) of state law enforcement agencies did so (table 
12).

As with domestic violence units, larger agencies were the 
most likely to operate a specialized victim assistance unit. 
In 2013, about half (49%) of local police departments 
serving a population of 250,000 or more operated a victim 
assistance unit with personnel assigned full time. About a 
third of sheriffs’ offices serving 250,000 or more residents 
(32%) and local police departments serving 50,000 to 249,999 
residents (29%) had a victim assistance unit with full-time 
personnel. A quarter (25%) of state law enforcement agencies 
operated such a unit. Overall, 36% of state and local law 
enforcement agencies employing 100 or more full-time sworn 
personnel operated a full-time victim assistance unit in 
2013, compared to 33% in 2003 (not shown). 

****************************************
Domestic violence victimizations that 
were reported to police were about twice 
as likely to result in assistance from 
victim service agency 
****************************************

Victim service agencies in the community provide assistance 
to domestic violence victims, often in addition to that 
provided by law enforcement. In some areas, these agencies 
may be the only source of such assistance. Like specialized 
units operated by law enforcement, victim service agencies 
provide victims with support and services to aid their 
physical and emotional recovery, offer protection from 
future victimizations, guide them through the criminal 
justice process, and assist them in obtaining restitution. 
***Footnote 8For more information on victim service 
agencies, see Use of Victim Service Agencies by Victims of 
Serious Violent Crime, 1993-2009 (NCJ 234212, BJS web, 
August 2011).***

During 10-year aggregate period from 2006-15, an estimated 
21% of domestic violence victimizations, or about 280,000 per 
year, resulted in a victim receiving assistance from a victim 
service agency (table 13). Those who reported their victimization 
to police were about twice as likely to receive assistance 
(28%) from a victim service agency as those who did not report (13%). 
Domestic violence victims received assistance more often 
when an incident involved an intimate partner (24%) than 
when it involved other victim-offender relationships (16%).
************************************************************

****************
Methodology
****************

Survey coverage
*****************

The National Crime Victimization Survey (NCVS) is an annual 
data collection conducted by the U.S. Census Bureau for the 
Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS). The NCVS is a self-
report survey in which persons are asked about the number 
and characteristics of victimizations they experienced in 
the preceding 6 months. The NCVS collects information on 
nonfatal personal crimes (rape or sexual assault, robbery, 
aggravated and simple assault, and personal larceny) and 
household property crimes (burglary, motor vehicle theft, 
and other theft) both reported and not reported to police. 
Because the NCVS is based on interviews with victims, it 
does not measure homicide.

The NCVS is administered to persons age 12 or older from a 
nationally representative sample of households in the United 
States. The NCVS defines a household as a group of members 
who all reside at a sampled address. Persons are considered 
household members when the sampled address is their usual 
place of residence at the time of the interview and when 
they have no usual place of residence elsewhere. It includes 
persons living in group quarters, such as dormitories, 
rooming houses, and religious group dwellings, but excludes 
persons living in military barracks and institutional 
settings, such as correctional or hospital facilities. It 
also excludes homeless persons.

Once selected, households remain in the sample for 3 years, 
and eligible persons in these households are interviewed 
every 6 months for a total of seven interviews. Generally, 
all first interviews are conducted in person with subsequent 
interviews conducted either in person or by phone. New 
households rotate into the sample on an ongoing basis to 
replace outgoing households that have been in the sample for 
the 3-year period.

Survey respondents provide information about themselves 
(age, sex, race, Hispanic origin, marital status, education 
level, and income) and whether they experienced a 
victimization. The NCVS also collects information from the 
victim’s perspective on each victimization incident about--

* the offender (age, race, Hispanic origin, sex, and victim-
offender relationship)

* characteristics of the crime (including time and place of 
occurrence, use of weapons, nature of injury, and economic 
consequences)

* whether the crime was reported to police

* reasons the crime was or was not reported

* victim experiences with the criminal justice system.

All of this information is provided by the victim, and the 
victim’s account may differ from the information maintained 
in official records.

Victimization is the basic unit of analysis used in this 
report. A victimization is a crime that affects one person 
or household. For personal crimes, the number of 
victimizations is equal to the number of victims present 
during a criminal incident. The number of victimizations may 
be greater than the number of criminal incidents because 
more than one person may be victimized during an incident.

Because the information provided by victims for use in this 
report is limited to the NCVS interview reference period, it 
is limited to victimizations that occurred in the preceding 
6 months. The median time elapsed from incident to interview 
for the domestic violence victimizations analyzed for this 
report was about 4 months. For an estimated 18% of 
victimizations, the domestic violence incident being 
referenced occurred less than 1 month before the interview. 
For these victimizations, some related events, especially 
those involving police follow-up activities, may not have 
occurred yet.

By the time of the interview, the offender was arrested or 
charges were filed in a smaller percentage of victimizations 
with a short-term reference period (30%) than victimizations 
with a longer reference period (41%). Because these short-
term cases accounted for nearly a fifth of domestic violence 
victimizations analyzed for this report, the estimates 
related to police follow-up activities, including arrests or 
charges filed that occurred after the initial response, may 
be slightly underestimated.

Nonresponse and weighting adjustments
****************************************

In 2015, there were 95,760 households and 163,880 persons 
age 12 or older interviewed for the NCVS. Each household was 
interviewed twice during the year. The response rate was 82% 
for households and 86% for eligible persons. Victimizations 
that occurred outside of the United States were excluded 
from this report. In 2015, fewer than 1% of the unweighted 
victimizations occurred outside of the United States.

Estimates in this report use 10-year aggregate data from the 
2006 to 2015 NCVS data files, weighted to produce annual 
estimates of victimization for persons age 12 or older 
living in U.S. households. Because the NCVS relies on a 
sample rather than a census of the entire U.S. population, 
weights are designed to inflate sample point estimates to 
known population totals and to compensate for survey 
nonresponse and other aspects of the sample design.

The NCVS data files include both person and household 
weights. Person weights provide an estimate of the 
population represented by each person in the sample. 
Household weights provide an estimate of the U.S. household 
population represented by each household in the sample. 
After proper adjustment, both household and person weights 
are also typically used to form the denominator in 
calculations of crime rates.

Victimization weights used in this analysis account for the 
number of persons present during an incident and for high-
frequency repeat victimizations (or series victimizations). 
Series victimizations are similar in type but occur with 
such frequency that a victim is unable to recall each 
individual event or describe each event in detail. Survey 
procedures allow NCVS interviewers to identify and classify 
these similar victimizations as series victimizations and to 
collect detailed information on only the most recent 
incident in the series.

The weight counts series incidents as the actual number of 
incidents reported by the victim, up to a maximum of 10 
incidents. Including series victimizations in national rates 
results in increases in the level of violent victimization. 
However, trends in violent crime are generally similar 
regardless of whether series victimizations are included.

In 2015, series incidents accounted for about 1% of all 
victimizations and 4% of all violent victimizations. 
Weighting series incidents as the number of incidents up to 
a maximum of 10 incidents produces more reliable estimates 
of crime levels, and it minimizes the effect of extreme 
outliers on the rates. Additional information on counting 
series incidents is detailed in the report Methods for 
Counting High-Frequency Repeat Victimizations in the 
National Crime Victimization Survey 
(NCJ 237308, BJS web, April 2012).

Standard error computations
******************************

When national estimates are derived from a sample, as with 
the NCVS, use caution when comparing one estimate to another 
estimate or when comparing estimates over time. Although one 
estimate may be larger than another, estimates based on a 
sample have some degree of sampling error. The sampling 
error of an estimate depends on several factors, including 
the amount of variation in the responses and the size of the 
sample. When the sampling error around an estimate is 
accounted for, estimates that appear different may not be 
statistically different.

One measure of the sampling error associated with an 
estimate is the standard error. The standard error may vary 
from one estimate to the next. Generally, an estimate with a 
small standard error provides a more reliable approximation 
of the true value than an estimate with a large standard 
error. Estimates with relatively large standard errors are 
associated with less precision and reliability and should be 
interpreted with caution.

To generate standard errors around numbers and estimates 
from the NCVS, the U.S. Census Bureau produced generalized 
variance function (GVF) parameters for BJS. The GVF 
parameters account for aspects of the NCVS’s complex sample 
design and represent the curve fitted to a selection of 
individual standard errors using the Jackknife Repeated 
Replication technique. The GVF parameters were used to 
generate standard errors for each point estimate (such as 
counts, percentages, and rates) in this report.

BJS conducted tests to determine if differences in estimated 
numbers and percentages in this report were statistically 
significant when accounting for the sampling error. Using 
statistical programs developed specifically for the NCVS, 
BJS tested all comparisons in this report for significance. 
The Student’s t-statistic, which tests the difference 
between two sample estimates, was the primary test 
procedure.

Data users can use the estimates and the standard errors of 
the estimates provided in this report to generate a 
confidence interval around the estimate as a measure of the 
margin of error. The following example illustrates how 
standard errors can be used to generate confidence 
intervals:

According to the NCVS, in 2006-15, 55.7% of all nonfatal 
domestic violence victimizations were reported to police. 
Using the GVF parameters, it was determined that the 
estimated percentage had a standard error of 1.5 (see 
appendix table 10). A confidence interval around the 
estimate was generated by multiplying the standard error by 
±1.96 (the t-score of a normal, two-tailed distribution that 
excludes 2.5% at either end of the distribution). Therefore, 
the 95% confidence interval around the 55.7% estimate from 
2015 is 55.7 ± (1.5 x 1.96) or (52.8 to 58.6). In other 
words, if different samples using the same procedures were 
taken from the U.S. population for the years 2006 to 2015, 
95% of the time the reporting rate for nonfatal domestic 
violence would be within the 52.8% to 58.6% range.

BJS also calculated a coefficient of variation (CV) for all 
estimates, which represents the ratio of the standard error 
to the estimate. CVs provide a measure of reliability and a 
means for comparing the precision of estimates across 
measures with differing levels or metrics (not presented in 
this report).When the CV was greater than 50%, or the 
unweighted sample had 10 or fewer cases, the estimate was 
noted with a “!” symbol. (Interpret data with caution. 
Estimate based on 10 or fewer sample cases, or the CV is 
greater than 50%.)

The LEMAS survey
*******************

This report uses data from the 2013 Law Enforcement 
Management and Administrative Statistics (LEMAS) survey. The 
LEMAS survey periodically collects data from more than 3,000 
general purpose law enforcement agencies, including state 
police/highway patrol agencies, local police departments, 
and sheriffs’ offices. The survey includes all agencies that 
employ 100 or more sworn officers and a nationally 
representative sample of smaller agencies.

Previous LEMAS data collections occurred in 1987, 1990, 
1993, 1997, 1999 (limited scope), 2000, 2003, and 2007. 
LEMAS obtains data on-- 

* functions performed 

* operating expenditures 

* job functions of sworn and nonsworn employees 

* officer salaries and special pay 

* demographic characteristics of officers 

* education and training requirements 

* types of weapons authorized 

* body armor policies 

* computers and information systems
 
* types of vehicles operated 

* use of special units 

* task force participation 

* community policing activities.

For more methodological information on the LEMAS survey 
including sample design and selection, response rates, and 
imputation procedures, see Local Police Departments, 2013 
(NCJ 248767, BJS web, July 2015).

************************************************************
The Bureau of Justice Statistics of the U.S. Department of 
Justice is the principal federal agency responsible for 
measuring crime, criminal victimization, criminal offenders, 
victims of crime, correlates of crime, and the operation of 
criminal and civil justice systems at the federal, state, 
tribal, and local levels. BJS collects, analyzes, and 
disseminates reliable and valid statistics on crime and 
justice systems in the United 
States, supports improvements to state and local criminal 
justice information systems, and participates with national 
and international organizations to develop and recommend 
national standards for justice statistics. Jeri M. Mulrow is 
acting director.

This report was written by Brian A. Reaves. Rachel Morgan 
and Connor Brooks verified the report.

Brigitte Coulton and Jill Thomas edited the report. Steve 
Grudziecki and Tina Dorsey produced the report.

May 2017, NCJ 250231

************************************************************

***************************************************
Office of Justice Programs 
Building Solutions 
* Supporting Communities * Advancing Justice 
www.ojp.usdoj.gov
***************************************************

*******************************
4/17/2017 JER 9:40am
*******************************


