U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Programs
Bureau of Justice Statistics

*****************************************************
This file is text only without graphics and many of 
the tables. A Zip archive of the tables in this 
report in spreadsheet format (.csv) and the full 
report includingtables and graphics in .pdf 
format are available on BJSwebsite at: 
http://www.bjs.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbdetail&iid=5456
******************************************************

Special Report

Police Use of Nonfatal Force, 2002–11

Shelley Hyland, Ph.D., Lynn Langton, Ph.D., and Elizabeth Davis, 
BJS Statisticians

From 2002 to 2011, an annual average of 44 million persons age 16 
or older had one or more face-to-face contacts with police. Of 
those who had contact, 1.6% experienced the threat or use of 
nonfatal force by the police during their most recent contact. 
***Footnote 1  ?The experiences reported are from the Bureau of 
Justice Statistics’ Police–Public Contact Survey (PPCS), a sample 
survey of U.S. residents age 16 or older. They do not include 
data from police records ***. About 75% of those with force (1.2% 
of persons with police contact) perceived the force as excessive. 
A greater percentage of non-Hispanic blacks (2.8%) than non-
Hispanic whites (1.0%) and Hispanics (1.4%) experienced excessive 
nonfatal force by police during their contact (figure 1)
***Footnote 2 The PPCS was not conducted in Spanish. See 
Methodology***.

This report examines the prevalence, circumstance, and 
characteristics of incidents in which police threatened or used 
nonfatal force and whether these factors varied across resident 
race and Hispanic origin. The data presented were aggregated from 
four data collections of the Bureau of Justice Statistics’ 
Police–Public Contact Survey (PPCS). It was administered as a 
supplement to the National Crime Victimization Survey (NCVS) 
every 3 years in 2002, 2005, 2008, and 2011 to collect 
information from persons age 16 or older about their most recent 
face-to-face contact with police and the outcomes of that 
contact.

***********************************************************
**************
Highlights
**************
The purpose of this report is to examine the prevalence of police 
threat or use of nonfatal force and whether it varies across race 
and Hispanic origin. Data are from the 2002, 2005, 2008 and 2011 
Police-Public Contact Survey (PPCS) supplement to the National 
Crime Victimization Survey (NCVS). 

* Across the four PPCS data collections from 2002–11, blacks 
(3.5%) were more likely to experience nonfatal force during their 
most recent contact with police than whites (1.4%) and Hispanics 
(2.1%).

* A greater percentage of persons who experienced the use of 
force (44%) had two or more contacts with police than those who 
did not experience force (28%).

* Blacks (14%) were more likely than Hispanics (5.9%), and 
slightly more than whites (6.9%) to experience nonfatal force 
during street stops.

* Of those who experienced force during their most recent 
contact, approximately three-quarters described the verbal (71%) 
or physical (75%) force as excessive.

* Of those who experienced force during their most recent 
contact, 87% did not believe the police behaved properly.

* Traffic stops involving an officer and driver of different 
races were more likely to involve force (2.0%) than traffic stops 
involving an officer and driver of the same race (0.8%).

* Blacks (1.4%) were twice as likely as whites (0.7%) to 
experience force during contacts involving a personal search.
***********************************************************

Resident surveys such as the PPCS provide a source of data on 
contacts with police and perceptions of police behavior that are 
independent from official police records. The PPCS is also the 
only national data collection that can provide information on the 
broad range of nonlethal police actions—from verbal threats to 
physical force—that are included in the continuum of police use 
of force. The Methodology further details the ability of the PPCS 
to capture nonlethal force.

Unless otherwise noted, data on the police threat or use of 
nonfatal force were based on a person’s most recent contact with 
police during the prior 12 months. Police contact includes any 
face-to-face interaction between a resident and one or more law 
enforcement officers, including sworn officers serving in 
municipal police departments; sheriff’s departments; state 
police; and special jurisdiction agencies, such as transit, park, 
and university police agencies. The contact could be initiated by 
the police, as in a traffic stop, or initiated by the resident 
reporting a crime to police or requesting police assistance. The 
majority of PPCS respondents (72%) reported one face-to-face 
contact with police during the 12-month reference period. For 
those respondents, the most recent contact was the only contact 
experienced during the year.

For the PPCS and this report, survey respondents defined what 
they considered to be the threat or use of force and whether it 
was excessive according to their perceptions of police behavior. 
Use of force and excessive were not defined for respondents. 
Residents who reported the threat or use of force were asked if 
the police did any of the following: shout, curse, threaten 
force, push or grab, hit or kick, use pepper spray (2005–11), use 
an electroshock weapon (2008–11), point a gun, or use other 
force. Throughout the report, “use of force” and “force” refer to 
the police threat or use of nonfatal force. 

This report examines the prevalence of force and excessive force 
during the most recent contact with police, focusing on race and 
Hispanic origin. It looks at the characteristics of incidents 
involving force, including the type of contact, type of force 
used, and whether the contact involved a personal search. The 
report also examines trends in the threat or use of force and the 
relationship between officer’s race and driver’s race in traffic 
stops involving force.

*****************************************
Blacks were more likely than whites to 
experience nonfatal force in their most 
recent contact with police
*****************************************

During the 2002–11 period, whites (20%) had a higher rate of 
police contact than blacks (17%) and Hispanics (16%) (table 1). 
However, during the most recent contact with police, blacks 
(3.5%) experienced force at higher rates than whites (1.4%) and 
Hispanics (2.1%). Whites were slightly less likely than Hispanics 
to experience force.

In addition, males and younger persons ages 16 to 25 were more 
likely to experience police contact and the use of force during 
their most recent contact than females and persons age 26 or 
older. Persons with police contact in urban areas (2.1%) were 
more likely than those in suburban (1.5%) and rural (1.2%) areas 
to experience nonfatal force, although the overall rates of 
contact with police were similar across urban, suburban, and 
rural areas (about 19%).

*****************************************
Residents who experienced multiple 
contacts with police were more likely 
to experience nonfatal force
*****************************************

Most persons age 16 or older who had face-to-face contact with 
police during the prior 12 months experienced one police contact 
during the year (table 2). A greater percentage of persons who 
experienced the use of force (44%) had two or more contacts with 
police than those who did not experience force (28%). About a 
quarter of residents (27%) who experienced the use of force had 
three or more contacts during the year, compared to about a tenth 
(12%) of residents who did not experience the use of force.
Among those who did not experience the use of force during their 
most recent police contact, whites (73%) were slightly more 
likely than blacks (70%) to report one contact during the prior 
12 months. There were no significant differences between whites 
and Hispanics or blacks and Hispanics in the percentage of 
persons who had a single contact during the year and did not 
experience the threat or use of force.

Among those who experienced force during the most recent contact, 
nearly double the percentage of whites (62%) experienced one 
contact during the year, compared to Hispanics (36%). Almost two-
thirds (64%) of Hispanics who experienced force had multiple 
police contacts during the year. Among persons with multiple 
face-to-face police contacts during the prior 12 months, there 
were no significant differences in the rates at which whites and 
blacks experienced force.

*****************************************
In police-initiated contacts more blacks 
than whites said they experienced the 
threat or use of force
*****************************************

Across all races and Hispanic origin, police-initiated stops 
accounted for the majority (51%) of face-to-face police contacts 
(table 3). Among police-initiated contacts, nontraffic stops or 
street stops (7.6%) were more likely than traffic stops (1.1%) to 
involve force. The greatest percentage of contacts involving 
force occurred during stops in which a person was suspected of 
wrongdoing (11%).

Of residents with any type of police-initiated contact during the 
2002–11 period, a greater percentage of blacks (4.9%) experienced 
the use of force than whites (1.8%) and Hispanics (2.5%). Blacks 
(2.5%) were slightly more likely than whites (0.8%) to experience 
the use of force during traffic stops. During street stops, 
blacks (14%) were more likely than Hispanics (5.9%) and slightly 
more than whites (6.9%) to experience nonfatal force.

Across all races or Hispanic origin, the use of force was greater 
during stops in which the police suspected the resident of 
wrongdoing compared to other types of contact. Blacks (11%) were 
slightly more likely than whites (5%) to experience the threat or 
use of force during stops that occurred because the police were 
investigating a crime.

Among residents with voluntary contact with police, such as 
requesting assistance from police or reporting a crime, there 
were no significant racial differences in the percentage of 
persons who experienced the use of force (0.7%).

***********************************************************
****************************
Trends in police threat 
or use of force
****************************

Across all four Police–Public Contact Survey (PPCS) data 
collections, rates and patterns in the use of force by police did 
not change significantly. The lack of substantial change over 
time made it possible to aggregate data across the four 
collections without distorting relationships or associations 
between variables or characteristics. This larger sample permits 
the examination of subgroup differences in greater detail than 
would be possible with a single year of data.

From 2002 to 2011, the overall rate of the threat or use of 
nonfatal force during the most recent contact with police 
remained flat at about 1.6% (figure 2). Likewise, among whites, 
blacks, and Hispanics, there was no significant change over time 
in the percentage of persons within those groups who experienced 
nonfatal force during the most recent contact (figure 3). The 
patterns in threat or use of force were also fairly consistent 
across racial groups over time. In some years, the differences 
between groups were not statistically significant, but the 
relationship of the estimates was generally consistent. For 
example, in 2002, 2005, and 2008, blacks experienced a higher 
prevalence of force by police than whites. In 2011, the estimated 
rate also appeared higher for blacks, but the difference between 
blacks (2.8%) and whites (1.9%) was not statistically significant 
due to small sample sizes. Similarly, across all 4 years, blacks 
appeared to experience a higher prevalence of force than 
Hispanics. The differences between the two groups were 
statistically significant in 2005 and 2008, but not in 2002 and 
2011.

The percentage of residents who said they experienced use of 
force during the most recent contact with police also did not 
vary over time by the reason for contact with police (figure 4). 
There was no statistically significant change over time in the 
percentage of traffic stops or voluntary contacts and accidents 
that resulted in the threat or use of force. Among residents with 
nontraffic-related stops, the percentage who experienced the 
threat or use of force was higher in 2005 than in 2002, but the 
rate dropped back down in 2008. No detectable differences were 
observed in the rates between any other years.
***********************************************************

*****************************************
Blacks were more likely than whites 
and Hispanics to perceive nonfatal 
force by police as excessive
*****************************************

During the 2002–11 period, 1.6% of residents who had contact with 
police experienced nonfatal force during their most recent 
contact (table 4). Of residents who experienced verbal force 
(0.7%), 71% described the force as excessive. Among residents who 
experienced physical force (0.8%), 75% described the force as 
excessive. Regardless of the type of force, blacks were more 
likely than whites and Hispanics to experience force and to 
describe the force as excessive.

Blacks (1.6%) were more likely to experience verbal force than 
whites (0.6%). There were no significant differences between 
whites, blacks, and Hispanics in the perception of verbal force 
as excessive. A higher percentage of blacks (1.6%) experienced 
physical force than whites (0.7%) and Hispanics (0.9%). Blacks 
(1.3%) were more likely to perceive physical force as excessive 
than whites (0.5%) and Hispanics (0.7%). There were no detectable 
differences between whites and Hispanics regarding the perception 
of physical force as excessive.

Across all races and Hispanic origin, the perception that the 
force used was excessive varied by the type of police action 
taken. ***Footnote 3 For residents who reported experiencing more 
than one type of nonfatal force in their most recent contact, the 
most severe form of force was counted. For the purposes of this 
report, the order of severity from least to most severe was 
shouting/cursing, threat, push/grab, hit/kick, pepper spray, and 
pointed gun***. A lower percentage of persons who were shouted or 
cursed at by police believed the force was excessive (49%) 
compared to those who were pushed or grabbed (79%), hit or kicked 
(97%), had a pepper spray used against them (81%), or had a gun 
pointed at them (81%) (figure 5). Verbal threats of force were 
also more likely to be seen as excessive (76%) than shouting or 
cursing. Persons who were hit or kicked were more likely to 
perceive the police action to be excessive than any other type of 
nonfatal force, except pepper spray. Regardless of the type of 
force, residents who experienced an injury were more likely to 
perceive the force as excessive (94%) than those who were not 
injured (74%) (not shown).

*****************************************
The majority of residents who experienced 
force did not believe that the police 
behaved properly
*****************************************

Across the four PPCS data collections, approximately 9 in 10 
residents believed the police behaved properly during contacts 
that did not involve force (table 5). Blacks (84%) were less 
likely to believe the police behaved properly during contacts not 
involving force than whites (91%) and Hispanics (88%). Hispanics 
were also less likely than whites to believe the police behaved 
properly during contacts that did not involve force.

Among residents who experienced force during their most recent 
contact with police (1.6% of all contacts), 13% believed the 
police behaved properly, while 87% did not. Apparent differences 
between whites, blacks, and Hispanics on whether the police 
behaved properly during contacts involving force were not 
statistically significant.

***********************************************************

*****************************************
Police use of force during the 
prior 12 months
*****************************************

This report focuses primarily on the police use of nonfatal force 
during a resident’s most recent contact with police. In 2005, 
2008, and 2011, the PPCS also asked respondents who had multiple 
face-to-face contacts with police if they had experienced force 
during the prior 12 months. During the 2005–11 period, whites had 
a significantly higher prevalence of police threat or use of 
force based on the 12-month reference period (1.9%) than on the 
most recent contact (1.4%). Among blacks and Hispanics, the 
differences in the prevalence of force based on 12–month and most 
recent contact reference periods were not statistically 
significant (not shown).

Persons who had three or more contacts with police were more 
likely to experience the use of force during the prior 12 months 
than persons with one or two contacts (table 6). Regardless of 
the number of contacts, a greater percentage of blacks (4.7%) 
experienced police use of force during the year than whites 
(1.9%) and Hispanics (2.7%). The difference between whites and 
Hispanics in the prevalence of force during the 12-month period 
was statistically significant among persons with one or two 
contacts, but not among those with three or more contacts.
***********************************************************

*****************************************
Interracial traffic stops resulted in 
a higher percentage of nonfatal force 
by police
*****************************************

In the PPCS, residents involved in a traffic stop for their most 
recent contact were asked about the race of the officer who 
conducted the stop. On average, 3.4 times more traffic stops 
involved officers and drivers of the same race than interracial 
stops (table 7). The majority of traffic stops involved a white 
officer and a white driver (not shown). Traffic stops involving 
an officer and driver of different races were significantly more 
likely to involve the threat or use of force (2.0%), compared to 
traffic stops involving an officer and driver of the same race 
(0.8%).
***********************************************************

*****************************************
Search involving nonfatal force
*****************************************

Contacts involving nonfatal force by police may vary by the 
outcome of the contact, particularly if the resident experienced 
a personal search (i.e., frisk or pat down). In 2005, this 
outcome was not asked of all types of contacts, so findings were 
based on the 2002, 2008, and 2011 surveys.*** Footnote 4 
Prevalence estimates on total use of force by race and Hispanic 
origin will differ from table 1 as 2005 was not included***.

Across all races and Hispanic origin, 3.5% of police contacts 
involved the resident being personally searched (table 8). In 
about 0.8% of all contacts, or 22% of contacts involving a 
search, the resident experienced both a personal search and use 
of force.

Whether individuals experienced a personal search or not varied 
by the race or Hispanic origin of the resident. Blacks (9.4%) 
were more likely to experience a personal search than whites 
(2.8%) and Hispanics (3.6%).

The percentage of persons who experienced force did not differ by 
whether a person was searched. Overall, about half of all use-of-
force contacts (48%) involved a personal search (0.8% of all 
contacts). This finding held true for whites, blacks, and 
Hispanics.

Blacks were more likely to experience force by police regardless 
of whether the contact also involved a personal search. Blacks 
(1.4%) were twice as likely as whites (0.7%) to experience force 
while also being personally searched. Blacks (1.8%) were also 
slightly more likely than whites (0.7%) to experience force 
during contacts that did not involve a personal search.

***********************************************************
*****************************************
Understanding gaps in Police–Public 
Contact Survey (PPCS) coverage
*****************************************

The PPCS is the only national source of data that captures 
resident perceptions of the use of nonfatal force and excessive 
force by police, but it has limitations. Some of its known 
limitations, such as populations that are out of scope or missed, 
can be quantified. Other limitations or sources of error are more 
difficult to measure.

Certain groups that may experience use of force by police are 
excluded from the PPCS due to the survey’s design. The PPCS is 
administered to persons in households. Therefore, it is unable to 
capture residents who experienced deadly force or those who were 
incarcerated after experiencing nonfatal force by police. Two 
other BJS collections, the Survey of Inmates in Local Jails 
(SILJ) and the Arrest-Related Deaths (ARD) collection, can be 
used to understand how much higher the prevalence of force would 
be if estimates included persons who were incarcerated and who 
experienced the use of deadly force by police.

The Survey of Inmates in Local Jails (SILJ) was last conducted in 
2002. The SILJ was a nationally representative stratified two-
stage sample of almost 7,000 inmates from 417 jails. Inmates were 
surveyed about various topics, including their current offenses 
and if they experienced use of force during their last contact 
with police. In 2002, 22% of inmates reported experiencing police 
use of force when they were arrested (not shown).

Estimates on deadly force were obtained from the Arrest-Related 
Deaths (ARD) program, conducted yearly from 2003 to 2009 and in 
2011.*** Footnote 5 Average proportions for race or Hispanic 
origin from 2005, 2008, and 2011 were applied to the average 
annual estimate of law enforcement homicides to be consistent 
with PPCS years***. ARD was an annual national census of persons 
who died during the process of arrest or while in custody of 
local, county, or state law enforcement personnel. 

The collection captured deaths related to police use of force, as 
well as deaths attributed to suicide, intoxication, accidental 
injury, or natural causes. From 2003–09 and 2011, the upper-bound 
annual average estimate of persons experiencing deadly force by 
police during arrest was 1,242. See Assessment of Coverage in the 
Arrest-Related Deaths Program (NCJ 249099, BJS web, October 
2015).

Based on estimates from the SILJ in 2002 and the ARD estimated 
number of persons who experienced deadly force, the PPCS captured 
approximately 88% of persons who experienced force (table 9). The 
PPCS captured approximately 94% of whites who experienced police 
use of force, compared to 78% of blacks and 84% of Hispanics.

Caution should be used in interpreting these findings as these 
two datasets are not without their own limitations in capturing 
the prevalence of use of force. The SILJ captured use of force at 
the time of arrest but not for any prior contacts. This may 
result in an underestimation of the prevalence of force among 
those who were incarcerated in jail following police contact. 
Additionally, the SILJ captured the stock of inmates in the jail 
in a single year and may not have been representative of the 
total population of inmates who flow through jail. It was also 
not representative of those incarcerated in prisons. The ARD 
collection was suspended in 2014 due to concerns about coverage 
and estimates that the program captured approximately 50 to 70% 
of all arrest-related deaths.

Beyond the coverage error, which can be quantified to some 
extent, the PPCS design also excluded persons age 15 or younger 
and persons who were homeless. However, there is no available 
estimate of the prevalence of police use of force for these 
groups that could be used to assess the potential PPCS 
undercoverage.

There is also some evidence that the PPCS may undercount police 
contacts among subgroups that should be included in the sample. 
For example, during the 2002–11 period, the PPCS was not 
conducted in Spanish. A 2011 assessment of nonresponse bias 
suggested that there may be bias among Hispanics. Beginning in 
2015, subsequent surveys will be administered in multiple 
languages. However, for the survey data examined in this report, 
it was difficult to assess the impact of this potential bias on 
rates of police contact and the prevalence of force. 

As with all resident surveys, the PPCS estimates may also be 
subject to measurement error. External sources of data suggest 
that the PPCS may not capture the full scope of police contacts. 
For example, in 2011, the FBI’s Uniform Crime Reports showed 12.4 
million arrests nationwide. Based on PPCS data from the same 
year, about 1.7 million persons were arrested during their most 
recent contact with police. A portion of the difference in the 
number of arrests was due persons who were incarcerated or 
outside of the scope of the survey (e.g., persons age 15 or 
younger or not living in households) at the time of the survey, 
but the remainder has to be attributed to persons with multiple 
arrests, PPCS undercoverage, or a combination of the two. The 
PPCS may not fully capture persons with the highest frequency of 
police contact and highest risk of police use of force. Because 
the PPCS is administered to a nationally representative sample of 
persons in households, it does not target specific subgroups or 
geographic areas in which contact with police might be highest.

The PPCS is also based on residents’ perceptions and reports 
about police behavior. What one respondent interprets as police 
use of force or excessive force may not be interpreted the same 
way by another respondent. Additionally, certain types of force 
measured by the survey are not captured in official police 
records or other independent sources of data. Although this is a 
strength of the survey, some respondents may exaggerate details 
about their experiences, while others may suppress information.

The potential PPCS coverage and measurement issues may impact 
estimates of the prevalence of police contact and use of force, 
perhaps differentially for non-whites compared to whites. 
However, there is no evidence to suggest that any racial 
differences in the prevalence and nature of police contact and 
use of force identified in this report would be eliminated with 
coverage improvements.
***********************************************************

****************
METHODOLOGY
***************

Data collection
***********************

The Police–Public Contact Survey (PPCS) is a supplement to the 
National Crime Victimization Survey (NCVS). The NCVS annually 
collects data on crime reported and not reported to the police 
against persons age 12 or older from a nationally representative 
sample of U.S. residents. The sample includes persons living in 
group quarters (such as dormitories, rooming houses, and 
religious group dwellings) and excludes persons living in 
military barracks and institutional settings (such as 
correctional or hospital facilities), and homeless persons. For 
more information, see Survey Methodology in Criminal 
Victimization in the United States, 2008 (NCJ 231173, BJS web, 
May 2011).

Since 1999, the PPCS was administered every 3 years—2002, 2005, 
2008, and 2011—at the end of the NCVS interview with persons age 
16 or older. Proxy responders and those who complete the NCVS 
interview in a language other than English were not eligible to 
receive the PPCS.

The U.S. Census Bureau administered the PPCS questionnaire during 
a 6-month period, and respondents were asked if they had 
experienced any face-to-face contacts with police during the 
prior 12 months. For example, persons interviewed in July 2011 
were asked about police contacts that occurred between August 
2010 and July 2011. Persons who said they had a contact during 
the 12-month reference period were asked to describe the nature 
of the contact. Those who had more than one contact were asked 
about only their most recent contact during the period.

PPCS nonrespondents fell into three categories:

* persons whose household did not respond to the NCVS (NCVS 
household nonresponse)

* persons within an interviewed NCVS household who did not 
respond to the NCVS (NCVS person nonresponse)

* persons who responded to the NCVS but did not complete the PPCS 
(PPCS person nonresponse).

The average response rate among persons eligible to complete the 
PPCS was about 80% across the four administrations of the survey. 
Non-interviews included respondents who were not available for 
the interview, those who refused to participate, non-English 
speaking respondents (unlike the NCVS interviews, PPCS interviews 
were conducted only in English), and proxy interviews 
representing household members who were unable to participate for 
physical, mental, or other reasons.

To produce national estimates on police–public contacts, sample 
weights were applied to the survey data so that the respondents 
represented the entire population, including the nonrespondents. 
After adjustment for nonresponse, the sample cases were weighted 
to produce national population estimates of 243,158,236 persons 
age 16 or older in 2011; 236,511,832 in 2008; 228,085,344 in 
2005; and 215,536,780 in 2002.

Despite the nonresponse adjustments, low overall response rates 
and low response rates to particular survey items can still 
increase variance in these estimates and produce bias when the 
nonrespondents have characteristics that differ from the 
respondents. The Office of Management and Budget guidelines 
require a nonresponse bias study when the overall response rate 
is below 80%. The Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS) and the 
Census Bureau compared the distributions of respondents and 
nonrespondents and nonresponse estimates for various household 
and demographic characteristics. They also examined their impact 
on the national estimates produced for each iteration of the 
PPCS. The study looked at household-level and person-level 
response rates and found some evidence of bias in the rates among 
blacks and persons of Hispanic origin. For example, Hispanics 
accounted for 14% of the U.S. population but about 11% of the 
PPCS respondents after weighting adjustments. Item nonresponse 
statistics were also computed for key survey questions from the 
PPCS, and no evidence of bias was found during the analysis.

Merging PPCS data files
*************************

The PPCS questionnaires changed slightly across each iteration of 
the survey. The analyses presented in this report are based on 
variables that were consistently measured across all four 
surveys. Specified text boxes throughout the report focus on 
three years of data when it was not possible to combine data from 
the fourth year due to substantial measurement differences.

In 2011, BJS redesigned the PPCS, which resulted in a 
significantly different survey instrument. To assess the impact 
of the redesign on trends in rates and types of police contact, 
BJS administered a split-sample design in which a subset of the 
sample was interviewed using the 2008 version of the 
questionnaire, and the remaining sample was interviewed using the 
2011 version. About 85% of the 2011 sample was randomly assigned 
the revised questionnaire and the other 15% received the 
questionnaire designed for the 2008 survey. The 2011 data used in 
this report were based on the 15% of the sample that received the 
unrevised instrument.

Standard error computations
*****************************

When national estimates are derived from a sample, as they are 
with the PPCS, caution must be taken when comparing one estimate 
to another. Although one estimate may be larger than another, 
estimates based on a sample have some degree of sampling error. 
The sampling error of an estimate depends on several factors, 
including the amount of variation in the responses, the size of 
the sample, and the size of the subgroup for which the estimate 
is computed. When the sampling error around the estimates is 
taken into consideration, the estimates that appear different may 
not be statistically different.

One measure of the sampling error associated with an estimate is 
the standard error, which can vary from one estimate to the next. 
In general, for a given metric, an estimate with a smaller 
standard error provides a more reliable approximation of the true 
value than an estimate with a larger standard error. Estimates 
with relatively large standard errors are associated with less 
precision and reliability and should be interpreted with caution.

Standard errors around PPCS estimates were generated through the 
SPSS Complex Samples package, which accounts for the multistage, 
cluster sample design of the NCVS. The Complex Samples package 
uses the Taylor series linearization method for direct variance 
estimation.

In this report, BJS conducted tests to determine whether 
differences in estimated numbers and percentages were 
statistically significant once sampling error was taken into 
account. Using statistical programs developed specifically for 
the NCVS, all comparisons in the text were tested for 
significance. The primary test procedure used was the Student’s 
t-statistic, which tests the difference between two sample 
estimates. Differences described as higher, lower, or different 
passed a test at the 0.05 level of statistical significance (95% 
confidence level). Differences described as somewhat or slightly 
different, passed a test at the 0.10 level of statistical 
significance (90% confidence level).

Data users can use the estimates and the standard errors of the 
estimates provided in this report to generate a confidence 
interval around the estimate as a measure of the margin of error. 
The following example illustrates how standard errors can be used 
to generate confidence intervals:

Across the four PPCS data collections, an estimated 3.5% of 
blacks experienced the threat or use of force in their most 
recent contact with police (see table 1). Using the SPSS Complex 
Samples package, BJS determined that the estimate has a standard 
error of 0.54 (see appendix table 2). A confidence interval 
around the estimate was generated by multiplying the standard 
errors by ±1.96 (the t-score of a normal, two-tailed distribution 
that excludes 2.5% at either end of the distribution). Therefore, 
the confidence interval around the estimate is 3.5 ± (0.54 X 
1.96) or from 2.44 to 4.56. In other words, if different samples 
using the same procedures were taken from the U.S. population in 
data collections occurring between 2002 and 2011, 95% of the time 
the percentage of blacks experiencing the threat or use of force 
by police during their most recent contact would be between 2.4% 
and 4.6%.

In this report, BJS also calculated a coefficient of variation 
(CV) for all estimates, representing the ratio of the standard 
error to the estimate. CVs provide a measure of reliability and a 
means for comparing the precision of estimates across measures 
with differing levels or metrics. When the CV was greater than 
50%, or the unweighted sample had 10 or fewer cases, the estimate 
was noted with a “!” symbol (interpret data with caution; 
estimate is based on 10 or fewer sample cases, or the coefficient 
of variation exceeds 50%).

Many of the variables examined in this report may be related to 
one another and to other variables not included in the analyses. 
Complex relationships among variables were not fully explored in 
this report and warrant more extensive analysis. Causal 
inferences should not be made based on the results presented.
*****************************************

*************************************************
The Bureau of Justice Statistics of the U.S. Department of 
Justice is the principal federal agency responsible for measuring 
crime, criminal victimization, criminal offenders, victims of 
crime, correlates of crime, and the operation of criminal and 
civil justice systems at the federal, state, tribal, and local 
levels. BJS collects, analyzes, and disseminates reliable and 
valid statistics on crime and justice systems in the United 
States, supports improvements to state and local criminal justice 
information systems, and participates with national and 
international organizations to develop and recommend national 
standards for justice statistics. William J. Sabol is director.

This report was written by Shelley Hyland, Lynn Langton, and 
Elizabeth Davis. Elizabeth Davis verified the report.

Lynne McConnell and Jill Thomas edited the report. Barbara Quinn 
produced the report.

November 2015, NCJ 249216
*************************************************

*************************************************
Office of Justice Programs
Innovation * Partnerships * Safer Neighborhoods
www.ojp.usdoj.gov
*************************************************

***********************
11/3/2015 10:00am JER 
***********************
