U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Programs
Bureau of Justice Statistics

Prevalence of Violent Crime among Households with Children, 
1993-2010

Jennifer L. Truman, Ph.D., and Erica L. Smith, BJS 
Statisticians

September 2012, NCJ 238799
------------------------------------------
This file is text without graphics and many of the tables. 
A Zip archive of the tables in this report in Comma-
delimited format (CSV) and the full report including tables 
and graphs in PDF format are available at:
http://www.bjs.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbdetail&iid=4472
------------------------------------------

In 2010, approximately 2.8 million children, representing 
3.9% of all children age 17 or younger living in U.S. 
households, lived in a household in which at least one 
member age 12 or older experienced one or more nonfatal 
violent victimizations during the year (figure 1). This was 
a decline from 1993, when an estimated 8.7 million 
children, or 12.6% of all children age 17 or younger, lived 
in a household that experienced a violent victimization. 
The decline in the number of children living in a household 
in which at least one member experienced violent crime 
corresponds with the decline in overall violent 
victimization during the same period.

The statistics in this report were developed from the 
Bureau of Justice Statistics’ (BJS) National Crime 
Victimization Survey (NCVS), which annually collects 
information on nonfatal victimizations against persons age 
12 or older, reported and not reported to the police, from 
a nationally representative sample of U.S. households. This 
report focuses on children living in households in which at 
least one member age 12 or older was the victim of a 
nonfatal violent crime during a given year. As defined in 
the NCVS, nonfatal violent victimizations include rape, 
sexual assault, robbery, aggravated assault, and simple 
assault. The NCVS does not measure homicide. The NCVS 
defines a household as a group of members who all reside at 
a sampled address. These members may be family or 
nonrelatives, as well as children or adults. Households 
with children are classified into three distinct types—
households with one or more children ages 0 to 11 only, 
households with one or more children ages 12 to 17 only, 
and households with at least one child age 0 to 11 and one 
child age 12 to 17.

This report measures violent crime involving members of a 
household as victims, and reports on the annual prevalence 
of that violent crime among U.S. households with children 
from 1993 to 2010. The prevalence rate is the percentage of 
unique households in which at least one member age 12 or 
older experienced a violent victimization in a given year, 
regardless of the number or frequency of victimizations or 
the different types of victimizations those households 
experienced. The prevalence rate differs from the incident-
based violent victimization rates commonly reported in 
statistics developed from the NCVS. (For more information, 
see Metholodogy.) 

This report describes the prevalence of violent 
victimization among the nation’s households and also 
presents estimates of the number of children living in a 
victimized household. These estimates were developed as an 
indicator of the extent to which children have direct and 
indirect exposure to violent victimization. The 
victimization of one household member is assumed to affect 
all other members of the household either emotionally, 
financially, or logistically.

Data on nonfatal violent victimizations experienced by 
households were disaggregated by whether children lived in 
the household and by the location of the violent crime 
(i.e., inside the home or outside the home). These 
analyses, however, did not indicate if any children age 17 
or younger living in victimized households were present 
during the violence, witnessed the violent crime, or were 
offenders involved in the violent crime. The data also did 
not provide information on the direct victimization of 
children ages 0 to 11. The prevalence measure, therefore, 
could not include households in which only children ages 0 
to 11 were victims of violent crime and no other household 
members were victims of violent crime. For more information 
about the data, see Methodology.

****************************************

**********
HIGHLIGHTS
***********
* In 2010, an estimated 2.8 million children lived in a 
household in which at least one member age 12 or older 
experienced violent crime. This represents 3.9% of all 
children age 17 or younger living in U.S. households.

* The number of children living in households that 
experienced violent crime was about 6 million fewer in 2010 
than in 1993.

* During 2010, about 1.6 million children ages 0 to 11 and 
1.2 million children ages 12 to 17 lived in a household in 
which at least one member age 12 or older was the victim of 
violent crime during the year.

* A smaller percentage of children ages 0 to 11 (3.4%) than 
children ages 12 to 17 (4.9%) lived in a household that 
experienced violent crime during 2010.

* A greater percentage of children lived in households that 
experienced simple assault (2.6%), compared to serious 
violent crime (1.6%).

* Among households with children in 2010, violent crime was 
most prevalent in households consisting of one adult with 
one child (6.5%) and households headed by a nonmarried 
adult (6.3%).
 
* Violent crime was greatest among households with children 
that had an annual income of less then $15,000 (7.0%) and 
in urban areas (4.5%).
***************************************

------------------------------------------
Children in households with violent crime
------------------------------------------

About 6 million fewer children lived in a household that 
experienced violent crime in 2010, compared to 1993
The number of children age 17 or younger living in a 
household in which at least one member age 12 or older 
experienced one or more nonfatal violent victimizations in 
a given year declined by 68.2% from 8.7 million in 1993 to 
2.8 million in 2010 (table 1). During this 18-year period, 
the decline among children ages 0 to 11 was 66.9%, and the 
decline among children ages 12 to 17 was 69.7%. Most of the 
decline occurred from 1993 to 2001. Over the 10-year period 
from 2001 to 2010, the number of children ages 0 to 11 
living in a household in which a member age 12 or older was 
a victim of violent crime declined by 31.3% (from 2.3 
million in 2001 to 1.6 million in 2010), while the number 
of children ages 12 to 17 living in a victimized household 
declined by 44.4% (from 2.1 million in 2001 to 1.2 million 
in 2010).

*****************************************
In 2010, 3.9% of children in U.S. households lived in a 
household that experienced violent crime
*****************************************

About 70.5 million children age 17 or younger lived in U.S. 
households in 2010 (table 2). An estimated 3.9% of these 
children (2.8 million) lived in a household in which at 
least one member age 12 or older was the victim of one or 
more nonfatal violent crimes. While a greater number of 
children ages 0 to 11 (1.6 million) than children ages 12 
to 17 (1.2 million) lived in a victimized household in 
2010, a smaller percentage of children ages 0 to 11 (3.4%) 
than children ages 12 to 17 (4.9%) lived in households that 
experienced violent crime.

In 2010, more children lived in a household in which at 
least one member age 12 or older experienced the 
victimization outside the home (1.7 million or 2.4%), 
compared to inside the home (1.2 million or 1.7%). An 
estimated 0.2% of all children lived in a household that 
experienced violent crime both inside the home and outside 
the home (not shown in table).

Comparable percentages of children ages 0 to 11 (1.6%) and 
ages 12 to 17 (1.8%) lived in households where a violent 
crime occurred inside the home. However, a greater 
percentage of children ages 12 to 17 (3.3%) than children 
ages 0 to 11 (2.0%) lived in households in which violent 
crime took place outside the home. These patterns remained 
true regardless of whether the victimization was a serious 
violent crime or simple assault.

*******************************************
About 1.1 million children lived in a household that 
experienced serious violent crime in 2010 
*******************************************

More children lived in households that experienced simple 
assault (1.8 million or 2.6%) than in households that 
experienced serious violent crime (1.1 million or 1.6%). 
This pattern held regardless of the children’s ages or 
whether the victimization was a serious violent crime or 
simple assault. An estimated 0.2% of all children lived in 
a household in which one or more members experienced both a 
serious violent crime and simple assault in 2010 (not shown 
in table).

****************************************
The percentage of children living in a household that 
experienced violent crime declined by 68.9% from 1993 to 
2010
****************************************

The percentage of children living in victimized households 
declined from 12.6% in 1993 to 3.9% in 2010 (figure 2). 
Over the 18-year study period, the percentage of children 
ages 12 to 17 who lived in households in which a member age 
12 or older was the victim of one or more violent crimes 
declined from 17.8% to 4.9%. Among children ages 0 to 11, 
the percentage living in households experiencing violent 
crime declined from 10.2% to 3.4%. 

---------------------------------------
Households experiencing violent crime
--------------------------------------

******************************************
From 1993 to 2010, the percentage of households with 
children in which a member was a violent crime victim 
declined by 69.2%
******************************************

In 1993, children lived in 36.5 million U.S. households 
(not in figure). In 11.8% of these households, at least one 
member  age 12 or older was the victim of one or more 
violent crimes (figure 3). By 2010, that percentage had 
declined to 3.6% of the 38.0 million U.S. households with 
children, representing a 69.2% decrease in the percentage 
of victimized households over the 18-year period. 
Households without children experienced a similar decline 
(64.1%) in the percentage that experienced violent crime, 
from 5.1% of the 63.3 million households in 1993 to 1.8% of 
the 84.9 million households in 2010.

****************************************
Households with children were twice as likely as households 
without children to experience violent crime
****************************************

In 2010, the overall percentage of households in which at 
least one member age 12 or older experienced one or more 
nonfatal violent victimizations was higher in households 
with children (3.6%) than households without children 
(1.8%). This pattern was also true for all previous years 
from 1993 to 2009. Each year from 1993 to 2010, the 
percentage of households with children in which at least 
one member age 12 or older was the victim of violent crime 
was about twice the percentage of households without 
children.  

***********************************
Among victimized households with children from 1993 to 
2010, declines were similar across all children’s age 
groups
***********************************

Among the three types of households with children—those 
with children 0 to 11 only, those with children ages 12 to 
17 only, or those with children in both age groups—all 
experienced a decline in violent crime from 1993 to 2010. 
The magnitude of the decline from 1993 to 2001 was similar 
for all three household types. From 2001 to 2010, however, 
households with children ages 0 to 11 only experienced a 
smaller decline in violent crime than households with 
children ages 12 to 17 only.

The percentage of households with children ages 0 to 11 
only in which at least one household member age 12 or older 
experienced a nonfatal violent victimization declined from 
7.8% in 1993 to 3.8% in 2001, and then to 2.9% in 2010 
(table 3). The percentage of households with children ages 
12 to 17 only that experienced violent crime also declined 
by about half (51.8%), from 16.3% in 1993 to 7.8% in 2001. 
Unlike households with children ages 0 to 11 only, the 
decline for households with children ages 12 to 17 
continued at nearly the same pace (47.4%) through 2010, 
falling to 4.1%. Households with children in both age 
groups experienced a similar pattern of decline as 
households with children ages 12 to 17 only. The magnitude 
of decline in violent crime among households without 
children was statistically similar to the decline from 1993 
to 2010 among households with children, as well as the 
shorter periods from 1993 to 2001, and from 2001 to 2010.

***********************************
Violent crime was more prevalent in Households with 
children ages 12 to 17 (4.1%) than with children ages 0 to 
11 (2.9%)
***********************************

In 2010, violent crime was about twice as prevalent in 
households with children (3.6%) than households without 
children (1.8%) (table 4). Among the three types of 
households with children, both types of households in which 
children ages 12 to 17 lived experienced statistically 
similar rates of violent crime, regardless of whether the 
victimization was serious violent crime or simple assault. 
Moreover, households with children ages 12 to 17 only 
(4.1%) and households with children in both age groups 
(5.0%) experienced higher rates of violent crime than 
households with children ages 0 to 11 only (2.9%). The same 
pattern was also found in household prevalence rates for 
serious violent crime and simple assault.

************************************
About 4 in 10 victimized households with children 
experienced at least one violent crime inside the home in 
2010
*************************************

Among the 1.4 million households with children in which at 
least one member age 12 or older was the victim of one or 
more violent crimes in 2010, a greater percentage of 
households had crime that occurred outside the home (62.4%) 
than inside the home (41.2%) (table 5). This pattern was 
similar among households with children ages 12 to 17 only 
and households with both children ages 0 to 11 and children 
ages 12 to 17. Among households with children ages 0 to 11 
only, the percentage of households experiencing violent 
victimization inside the home and outside the home was 
similar. In the estimated 587,000 victimized households 
with children ages 0 to 11 only, nearly half had violent 
crimes that occurred inside the home (47.7%) and about half 
had crimes that occurred outside the home (56.6%).

*************************************
Of households with children in which a member experienced 
serious violent crime in 2010, more than a third 
experienced the crime inside the home
*************************************

Of the estimated 561,000 households with children in which 
at least one member age 12 or older experienced serious 
violent crime in 2010, 36.6% had a serious violent crime 
that took place inside the home. Similarly, of the 896,000 
households with children in which a household member 
experienced simple assault, 43.8% of these households 
experienced the simple assault inside the home. Victimized 
households with children experienced serious violent crime 
inside the home and simple assault inside the home at 
similar percentages, with one exception. Among households 
with children ages 0 to 11 only, a smaller percentage 
experienced serious violent crime (35.7%) than simple 
assault (55.2%) inside the home.

************************************
Among households with children, violent crime was most 
prevalent in households with one adult and one child (6.5%) 
and households headed by a nonmarried adult (6.3%)
************************************

In general, the percentage of households in 2010 in which 
at least one household member was a victim of violent crime 
increased as the number of children in the household 
increased. About 3.4% of households with 1 or 2 children 
experienced violent crime (table 6). These households 
comprised about 80% of all households with children. In 
comparison, among the 1.8% of households with 5 or more 
children, the prevalence of violent crime was 6.8%.

Households consisting of one adult and one child accounted 
for 8.4% of all U.S. households with children in 2010. The 
prevalence of violent crime among these households (6.5%) 
was higher than the prevalence of violent crime among 
households with children that had 3 or 4 persons (2.9%) or 
those with 5 or more persons (4.5%). Additionally, a third 
of all households with children were headed by nonmarried 
adults. Among these households, 6.3% had at least one 
household member age 12 or older who was a violent crime 
victim. In comparison, the remaining two-thirds of 
households with children were headed by married adults, but 
the prevalence of violent crime among these households was 
lower (2.3%).

*************************************
Among households with children, violent crime was most 
prevalent in households with lower incomes and in urban 
areas
**************************************

The prevalence of violent crime in households with children 
generally declined as household income increased. In 2010, 
about 7.9% of U.S. households with children had an annual 
income of less than $15,000 (table 7). Of these households, 
7.0% had at least one member who was the victim of one or 
more violent crimes. In comparison, of the 24.3% of 
households with children in which a member had an annual 
income of $75,000 or more, an estimated 2.1% experienced 
violent victimization against a household member. 

In urban areas, households with children accounted for 
30.8% of all households with children, and those in 
suburban areas accounted for an additional 53.5%. In urban 
areas, approximately 4.5% of the households with children 
had at least one household member who was the victim of 
violent crime in 2010. In comparison, a smaller percentage 
of households with children in suburban areas experienced 
violent crime (3.2%). 

Among households with children, 14.0% were headed by a 
black adult and 61.4% were headed by a white adult. The 
percentage of households with children in which at least 
one member was a victim of violent crime was larger among 
households headed by a black adult (4.9%), compared to 
those headed by a white adult (3.4%).

-----------------
Methodology
-----------------

****************
Survey coverage
****************

The National Crime Victimization Survey (NCVS) is an annual 
data collection conducted by the U.S. Census Bureau for the 
Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS). The NCVS is a self-
report survey in which interviewed persons are asked about 
the number and characteristics of victimizations 
experienced during the prior six months. The NCVS collects 
information on nonfatal personal crimes (rape or sexual 
assault, robbery, aggravated and simple assault, and 
personal larceny) and household property crimes (burglary, 
motor vehicle theft, and other theft) both reported and not 
reported to police. In addition to providing annual level 
and change estimates on criminal victimization, the NCVS is 
the primary source of information on the nature of criminal 
victimization incidents. Survey respondents provide 
information about themselves (such as age, sex, race and 
ethnicity, marital status, education level, and income) and 
whether they experienced a victimization. Information are 
collected for each victimization incident about the 
offender (such as age, race and ethnicity, sex, and victim–
offender relationship), characteristics of the crime 
(including time and place of occurrence, use of weapons, 
nature of injury, and economic consequences), whether the 
crime was reported to police, reasons why the crime was or 
was not reported, and experiences with the criminal justice 
system.

The NCVS is administered to persons age 12 or older from a 
nationally representative sample of households in the 
United States. The NCVS defines a household as a group of 
members who all reside at a sampled address. Persons are 
considered household members when the sampled address is 
their usual place of residence at the time of the interview 
and when they have no usual place of residence elsewhere. 
Once selected, households remain in the sample for 3 years, 
and eligible persons in these households are interviewed 
every six months for a total of seven interviews. New 
households rotate into the sample on an ongoing basis to 
replace outgoing households that have been in sample for 
the 3-year period. The sample includes persons living in 
group quarters, such as dormitories, rooming houses, and 
religious group dwellings, and excludes persons living in 
military barracks and institutional settings, such as 
correctional or hospital facilities, and the homeless. (For 
more detail, see the Survey Methodology for Criminal 
Victimization in the United States, 2008, NCJ 231173, BJS 
website, May 2011.) 

In 2010, about 41,000 households and 73,300 individuals age 
12 or older were interviewed for the NCVS. Each household 
was interviewed twice during the year. The response rate 
was 92.3% of households and 87.5% of eligible individuals. 
Victimizations that occurred outside of the U.S. were 
excluded from this report. From 1993 to 2010, 1,657 (0.8%) 
of the total 197,849 unweighted victimizations occurred 
outside of the U.S.

*************************************
Weighting adjustments for estimating household 
victimization
*************************************

Estimates in this report use data from the 1993 to 2010 
NCVS data files. These files can be weighted to produce 
annual estimates of victimization for persons age 12 or 
older living in U.S. households. Because the NCVS relies on 
a sample rather than a census of the entire U.S. 
population, weights are designed to inflate sample point 
estimates to known population totals and to compensate for 
survey nonresponse and other aspects of the sample design.

The NCVS data files include both person and household 
weights. Person weights provide an estimate of the 
population represented by each person in the sample. 
Household weights provide an estimate of the U.S. household 
population represented by each household in the sample. 
Both household and person weights, after proper adjustment, 
are also typically used to form the denominator in 
calculations of crime rates.

Annual victimization estimates are derived by accumulating 
estimates across the two six-month interview periods. The 
weights of all crimes reported during interviews in that 
year are summed, regardless of when the crime occurred. 
This method provides annual estimates of victimization, the 
typical measure reported from NCVS analyses. This report, 
however, measures the prevalence of violent victimization 
among U.S. households. This prevalence estimate is a 
measure of the number of unique households in which at 
least one member age 12 or older experienced a violent 
victimization in a given year, regardless of the number or 
frequency of victimizations or the different types of 
victimizations those household members experienced. For 
example, if a household had three members, and one member 
was a victim of aggravated assault during the year, another 
member was a victim of robbery during the year, and the 
remaining member had no victimization during the year, the 
household would be counted only once in the prevalence rate 
as having been victimized by overall violent crime.

The NCVS does not measure direct victimization of children 
ages 0 to 11. The prevalence estimates of nonfatal violent 
victimization experienced by household members living with 
children ages 0 to 11 is likely an underestimate, as there 
may be victims ages 0 to 11 living in households in which 
no other person age 12 or older reported a victimization. 
These households are not included in the numerator of the 
nonfatal violent crime household prevalence estimates.

Household victimization weights were constructed to ensure 
that a household in which at least one member experienced 
one or more nonfatal violent victimizations in both six-
month periods in a given year was counted only once in that 
annual prevalence estimate. If a household experienced a 
violent victimization in just one of the six-month periods, 
the household victimization weight was set equal to the 
sample household weight representative of the national 
household population at the time of the interview. If a 
household experienced a violent victimization in both six-
month periods, the household victimization weight was set 
equal to half of this weight, so that these households 
would not represent twice the number of U.S. households in 
that year. From 1993 to 2010, households that experienced 
violent crime in both six-month periods in a given year 
represented about 0.2% of all households and 3.7% of all 
victimized households. See figure 4 for the trend in the 
prevalence of nonfatal violent crime among U.S. households 
for each six-month period from 1993 to 2010.

Persons living at a sampled address may also change over 
the course of the three-year interview period, as one set 
of household members moves out and another set moves in. 
For these replacement households, it may not be appropriate 
to divide the weight in half, if there are different people 
in each six-month period. Analyses were conducted to 
investigate the impact of replacement household members on 
the annual household prevalence estimates. Of all the 
households in which at least one member age 12 or older 
experienced a nonfatal violent victimization from 1993 to 
2010, an estimated 0.3% experienced violent crime in both 
six-month periods in a given year and were not the same set 
of household members in both sample periods. The household 
victimization weight was adjusted to account for this 0.3% 
of households, but the impact on the estimates was 
negligible. Given the imprecision of matching households 
across the sample period and the negligible impact on the 
household victimization estimates, the original 
construction of the household victimization weight was 
used.

*****************************************
Weighting adjustments for estimating the number of children 
living in victimized households 
*****************************************

The NCVS collects data on the number of children ages 0 to 
11 and ages 12 to 17 living in U.S. households. This report 
used these measures to develop weights to estimate the 
overall number of children living in households and the 
number of children living in households that experienced 
violent crime.

The weight for the total number of children living in 
households--the denominator used to calculate the 
prevalence of children living in households that 
experienced violent crime—was calculated by taking the 
number of children in the household (age 17 or younger) and 
multiplying by the household weight for the year. For 2010, 
the NCVS estimate for the number of children age 17 or 
younger living in households, calculated using this weight, 
was about 70 million. That estimate is comparable to the 
2010 U.S. Census Bureau estimate of about 74 million 
children. The weight for the number of children living in 
households that experienced violent crime—the numerator for 
the prevalence estimates—was calculated by taking the 
number of children in the household and multiplying by the 
household victimization weight previously described.

Several data limitations are important to recognize. 
Estimates of both household victimization prevalence and 
the prevalence of children living in victimized households 
take into account only violent crime experienced by 
household members age 12 or older. Because the NCVS 
provides an overall count of children ages 0 to 11 in the 
household, however, households can be disaggregated based 
on the age of children in the households. Some 
victimization differences between households with younger 
children and households with older children may be 
attributed to the NCVS capturing only the direct 
victimization of children ages 12 to 17 and not children 
ages 0 to 11.

****************************
Standard error computations
****************************

When national estimates are derived from a sample, as is 
the case with the NCVS, caution must be taken when 
comparing one estimate to another estimate or when 
comparing estimates over time. Although one estimate may be 
larger than another, estimates based on a sample have some 
degree of sampling error. The sampling error of an estimate 
depends on several factors, including the amount of 
variation in the responses, the size of the sample, and the 
size of the subgroup for which the estimate is computed. 
When the sampling error around the estimates is taken into 
consideration, the estimates that appear different may, in 
fact, not be statistically different.

One measure of the sampling error associated with an 
estimate is the standard error. The standard error can vary 
from one estimate to the next. In general, for a given 
metric, an estimate with a smaller standard error provides 
a more reliable approximation of the true value than an 
estimate with a larger standard error. Estimates with 
relatively large standard errors are associated with less 
precision and reliability and should be interpreted with 
caution.
In order to generate standard errors around numbers and 
estimates from the NCVS, the Census Bureau produces 
generalized variance function (GVF) parameters for BJS. The 
GVFs take into account aspects of the NCVS complex sample 
design and represent the curve fitted to a selection of 
individual standard errors based on the Jackknife Repeated 
Replication technique. The GVF parameters were used to 
generate standard errors for each point estimate (such as 
counts, percentages, and rates) in the report. 

In this report, BJS conducted tests to determine whether 
differences in estimated numbers and percentages were 
statistically significant once sampling error was taken 
into account. Using statistical programs developed 
specifically for the NCVS, all comparisons in the text were 
tested for significance. The primary test procedure used 
was Student’s t-statistic, which tests the difference 
between two sample estimates. To ensure that the observed 
differences between estimates were larger than might be 
expected due to sampling variation, the significance level 
was set at the 95% confidence level. 

Data users can use the estimates and the standard errors of 
the estimates provided in this report to generate a 
confidence interval around the estimate as a measure of the 
margin of error. The following example illustrates how 
standard errors can be used to generate confidence 
intervals:

According to the NCVS, in 2010, 3.9% of all children age 17 
or younger lived in a household in which at least one 
member age 12 or older was the victim of one or more 
nonfatal violent crimes (see table 2). Using the GVFs, BJS 
determined that the estimate has a standard error of 0.2% 
(see appendix table 5). A confidence interval around the 
estimate was generated by multiplying the standard errors 
by ±1.96 (the t-score of a normal, two-tailed distribution 
that excludes 2.5% at either end of the distribution). 
Thus, the confidence interval around the 3.9% estimate from 
2010 is equal to 3.9% ± .39% (0.2% X 1.96) or 3.51% to 
4.29%. In others words, if different samples using the same 
procedures were taken from the U.S. population in 2010, 95% 
of the time the percentage of all children that lived in a 
victimized household would fall between 3.51% and 4.29%. 

In this report, BJS also calculated a coefficient of 
variation (CV) for all estimates, representing the ratio of 
the standard error to the estimate. CVs provide a measure 
of reliability and a means to compare the precision of 
estimates across measures with differing levels or metrics. 
In cases where the CV was greater than 50%, or the 
unweighted sample had 10 or fewer cases, the estimate was 
noted with a “!” symbol (interpret data with caution; 
estimate based on 10 or fewer sample cases, or the 
coefficient of variation exceeds 50%).

***************************
Methodological changes 
to the NCVS in 2006
****************************

Methodological changes implemented in 2006 may have 
affected the crime estimates for that year to such an 
extent that they are not comparable to estimates from other 
years. Evaluation of 2007 and later data from the NCVS 
conducted by BJS and the Census Bureau found a high degree 
of confidence that estimates for 2007, 2008, 2009, and 2010 
are consistent with and comparable to estimates for 2005 
and previous years. The reports, Criminal Victimization, 
2006, NCJ 219413, December 2007; Criminal Victimization, 
2007, NCJ 224390, December 2008; Criminal Victimization, 
2008, NCJ 227777, September 2009; Criminal Victimization, 
2009, NCJ 231327, October 2010; and Criminal Victimization, 
2010, NCJ 235508, September 2011, are available on the BJS 
website.

******************************************
The Bureau of Justice Statistics is the statistical agency 
of the U.S. Department of Justice. James P. Lynch is the 
director. This report was written by Jennifer L. Truman, 
Ph.D., and Erica L. Smith. Shannan Catalano verified the 
report.

Morgan Young and Jill Thomas edited the report, and Jayne 
E. Robinson and Morgan Young produced the report, under the 
supervision of Doris J. James.

September 2012, NCJ 238799
******************************************

******************************************
Office of Justice Programs Innovation 
• Partnerships • Safer Neighborhoods 
www.ojp.usdoj.gov
******************************************

********************
9.5.2012/JER/ 10:00am
********************


