U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Programs
Bureau of Justice Statistics

------------------------------------------------------
This file is text only without graphics and many of the tables. 
A Zip archive of the tables in this report in spreadsheet format 
(.csv) and the full report including tables and graphics in.
pdf format are available on BJS's website at:
http://www.bjs.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbdetail&iid=5906

------------------------------------------------------

******************
Special Report
******************

************************************************
Police Vehicle Pursuits, 2012-2013
************************************************

Brian A. Reaves, Ph.D., BJS Statistician
******************************************

In 2012, general purpose state and local law enforcement agencies 
conducted an estimated 68,000 vehicle pursuits (figure 1). Local 
police departments conducted most of these pursuits (about 
40,000) followed by sheriffs’ offices (about 18,000) and state 
police and highway patrol agencies (about 10,000). During the 
year, 351 persons died as a result of pursuit-related crashes 
(not shown). 

Pursuit counts are based on the 2013 Law Enforcement Management 
and Administrative Statistics (LEMAS) survey sponsored by the 
Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS). The survey included a 
nationally representative sample of general purpose state and 
local law enforcement agencies. Such agencies employed 92% of all 
full-time state and local law enforcement officers. The LEMAS 
survey excludes federal agencies and special jurisdiction 
agencies, such as campus police and park police. Data on pursuit-
related fatalities are from the Fatality Analysis Reporting 
System (FARS), maintained by the National Highway Traffic Safety 
Administration (NHTSA), U.S. Department of Transportation.

******************************************************
*************
Highlights
************

* General purpose state and local law enforcement agencies 
conducted an estimated 68,000 vehicle pursuits in 2012. 

* From 1996 to 2015, an average of 355 persons (about 1 per day) 
were killed annually in pursuit-related crashes.

* In 2012, local police conducted 8 vehicle pursuits per 100 
officers employed and sheriffs’ offices conducted 
9 per 100 officers.

* As of January 2013, all state police and highway patrol 
agencies and nearly all local police departments (97%) and 
sheriffs’ offices (96%) had a written vehicle pursuit policy. 

* In jurisdictions with fewer than 10,000 residents, 4% of the 
local police departments and 10% of the sheriffs’ offices did not 
have a written pursuit policy.

* Most agencies had vehicle pursuit policies that used specific 
criteria (e.g., speed, type of offense, or surrounding 
conditions) to define when a pursuit was permissible.

* An estimated 2% of local police departments and 1% of sheriffs’ 
offices prohibited vehicle pursuits. No state police or highway 
patrol agencies prohibited pursuits.

* During 2012, the rate of vehicle pursuits was highest among 
agencies with a policy that left pursuit decisions to an 
officer’s discretion (17 pursuits per 100 officers employed).

* From 1997 to 2013, the percentage of sworn personnel working in 
agencies that left pursuit decisions to an officer’s discretion 
decreased from 17% to 11%.
***********************************************************

This report examines the types of written pursuit-related 
policies maintained by law enforcement agencies, and analyzes how 
the prevalence of police vehicle pursuits varies by type of 
pursuit policy. The report presents supplemental data on the 
characteristics of police vehicle pursuits that occurred in 
selected law enforcement agencies. These supplemental data are 
from the Pursuits database initiated by the International 
Association of Chiefs of Police (IACP) and currently maintained 
by LogIn, Inc. (See textbox on page 7.) Although this report 
focuses exclusively on vehicle pursuits, the LEMAS survey 
collected some data on agency policies related to foot pursuits. 
This information is presented in appendix tables 3 through 7.
 
The Police Policy Studies Council, a research-based law 
enforcement training and consultation corporation, defines a 
motor vehicle pursuit as “The act of attempting apprehension of a 
fleeing vehicle, once the operator has given some indication of 
his or her intent not to stop or yield. This indication can be by 
increasing speed, bypassing traffic control devices, or other 
means.”

******************************************
All state law enforcement agencies and 
most local agencies serving 10,000 or 
more residents conducted vehicle pursuits 
during 2012
******************************************

All state police and highway patrol agencies conducted vehicle 
pursuits in 2012 (table 1). Among local police departments, all 
of those serving 250,000 or more residents and nearly all (95%) 
of those serving 50,000 to 249,999 residents conducted vehicle 
pursuits. In comparison, fewer than half (47%) of local police 
departments serving fewer than 10,000 residents conducted vehicle 
pursuits.

Among sheriffs’ offices, about 9 in 10 agencies serving 100,000 
or more residents, 8 in 10 agencies serving 25,000 to 99,999 
residents, and 7 in 10 agencies serving 10,000 to 24,999 residents 
conducted vehicle pursuits in 2012. As was the case with smaller 
local police departments, fewer than half (43%) of sheriffs’
offices serving fewer than 10,000 residents conducted vehicle 
pursuits in 2012.

******************************************
About a quarter of local police pursuits 
occurred in departments serving fewer 
than 10,000 residents
******************************************

On average, state police and highway patrol agencies conducted 
more than 200 vehicle pursuits each during 2012 (table 2). Local 
police departments serving 250,000 or more residents conducted an 
average of 72 vehicle pursuits each. Collectively, these larger 
local police agencies conducted more than 7,000 pursuits, or 
about a sixth (18%) of all vehicle pursuits conducted by local 
police nationwide (not shown).
 
Local police departments that served fewer than 10,000 residents 
and had vehicle pursuits during 2012 conducted an average of 
three pursuits each. The collective number of pursuits conducted 
by these small departments was nearly 11,000, or about a quarter 
(27%) of all local police vehicle pursuits.

Sheriffs’ offices that served 250,000 residents, and had vehicle 
pursuits during 2012, conducted an average of 34 pursuits each. 
Overall, these agencies conducted more than 6,000 pursuits, or 
36% of all pursuits conducted by sheriffs’ offices in 2012 (not 
shown). 

******************************************
Local agencies in smaller jurisdictions 
conducted pursuits at a rate five times 
higher than those in the largest 
jurisdictions
******************************************

In 2012, state police and highway patrol agencies conducted 17 
vehicle pursuits per 100 officers employed, compared to 9 per 100 
for sheriffs’ offices and 8 per 100 for local police departments 
(table 3). By population size, rates among local police 
departments ranged from 4 pursuits per 100 officers in the 
largest jurisdictions to 15 pursuits per 100 officers in the 
smallest jurisdictions. 

Pursuit rates among sheriffs’ offices were also higher in smaller 
jurisdictions, with about 7 pursuits per 100 officers in agencies 
serving 100,000 or more residents compared to about 15 per 100 in 
agencies serving fewer than 25,000 residents.

By number of sworn personnel, the combined pursuit rate for local 
law enforcement agencies ranged from 5 pursuits per 100 officers 
employed in jurisdictions with 250,000 or more residents to 15 
per 100 in jurisdictions with fewer than 10,000 residents (figure 
2). Local police departments and sheriffs’ offices serving 
smaller jurisdictions also had higher pursuit rates when the rate 
was based on population size.

******************************************
4% of local police departments and 10% of 
sheriffs’ offices serving fewer than 10,000 
residents did not have a written vehicle 
pursuit policy
******************************************

As of January 2013, all state police and highway patrol agencies 
had a written vehicle pursuit policy, as did all local police 
departments serving 25,000 or more residents (table 4). Among 
sheriffs’ offices, at least 95% of the agencies in each 
population category of 10,000 or more had a written vehicle 
pursuit policy. An estimated 4% of local police departments and 
10% of sheriffs’ offices serving fewer than 10,000 residents did 
not have a written vehicle pursuit policy.

A majority of the written vehicle pursuit policies of state law 
enforcement agencies (53%), sheriffs’ offices (63%), and local 
police departments (71%) were based on restrictive criteria. 
These policies used specific criteria (e.g., type of offense, 
speed, and surrounding conditions) to define when a pursuit was 
permissible. 

******************************************
State law enforcement agencies were about 
twice as likely as local agencies to leave 
pursuit decisions to an officer’s 
discretion
******************************************

About a third (30%) of state police and highway patrol agencies 
permitted officers to use their own discretion when deciding to 
initiate a vehicle pursuit. Smaller percentages of sheriffs’ 
offices (17%) and local police departments (13%) had 
discretionary pursuit policies. In any population category, no 
more than 14% of local police departments and 23% of sheriffs’ 
offices had a discretionary policy.

An estimated 14% of state police and highway patrol agencies had 
written pursuit policies that required supervisory review and 
approval before pursuits could be initiated by officers. Twelve 
percent of sheriffs’ offices had this type of policy, as did 9% 
of local police departments. 

A small percentage of state police and highway patrol agencies 
(2%), sheriffs’ offices (2%), and local police departments (3%) 
had written policies that discouraged vehicle pursuits. Two 
percent of local police departments and 1% of sheriffs’ offices 
prohibited vehicle pursuits. No state police or highway patrol 
agencies prohibited vehicle pursuits.

Overall, sworn officers in local police departments (85%) and 
sheriffs’ offices (73%) were more likely to be employed by an 
agency with a restrictive type of vehicle pursuit policy than 
were officers employed by state police or highway patrol agencies 
(37%) (table 5). State law enforcement officers (36%) were more 
likely to be employed by an agency with a written policy that 
left pursuit decisions to the officer’s discretion than were 
local police (7%) or sheriffs’ (13%) officers.

******************************************
The percentage of officers employed by 
agencies with a discretionary vehicle pursuit 
policy declined from 1997 to 2013
******************************************

The percentage of state and local law enforcement officers 
employed by an agency with a restrictive policy increased from 
72% in 1997 to 78% in 2013 (figure 3). The percentage of officers 
in agencies with a policy that required supervisory review and 
approval of pursuit decisions also increased during this time 
from 2% to 9%. The percentage of officers employed by an agency 
that left pursuit decisions to an officer’s discretion decreased 
from 17% to 11%. The percentage of officers employed by an agency 
without a written pursuit policy decreased from 2.5% in 1997 to 
0.5% in 2013.

A majority of the general purpose state and local law enforcement 
agencies with a written policy permitting vehicle pursuits 
conducted at least one pursuit during 2012. This was true whether 
the policy used restrictive criteria (64%), required supervisory 
approval (60%), or allowed officer discretion (57%) (table 6). 
The largest number of pursuits, about 47,000, occurred in 
agencies with a restrictive pursuit policy. About 13,000 pursuits 
occurred in agencies with a policy that allowed officer 
discretion, and about 7,000 occurred in agencies with a policy 
that required supervisory review and approval.

******************************************
During 2012, about 500 vehicle pursuits 
occurred in agencies without a written 
pursuit policy
******************************************

An estimated 36% of the agencies without a written pursuit policy 
engaged in at least one vehicle pursuit during 2012, with an 
average of three pursuits each. Overall, an estimated 486 vehicle 
pursuits occurred in agencies without a written pursuit policy. 
During 2012, an estimated 17% of the agencies with a policy that 
discouraged or prohibited pursuits conducted at least one vehicle 
pursuit. Overall, an estimated 244 pursuits occurred in agencies 
with a written policy that either discouraged or prohibited 
vehicle pursuits.

******************************************
Agencies that left pursuit decisions to 
an officer’s discretion had the highest 
pursuit rate per officer
******************************************

The number of vehicle pursuits conducted per 100 officers varied 
by type of written policy. Agencies with a written policy that 
left the pursuit decision to an officer’s discretion had the 
highest vehicle pursuit rate (17 pursuits per 100 officers 
employed) (figure 4). Agencies that discouraged or prohibited 
pursuits had the lowest pursuit rate (2 per 100). Agencies with a 
restrictive policy conducted 8 pursuits per 100 officers 
employed.

The variation in pursuit rate by type of policy was also 
illustrated by the fact that 19% of all vehicle pursuits were 
conducted by agencies with discretionary pursuit policies, 
although these agencies employed just 11% of all officers (not 
shown). Agencies with restrictive pursuit policies accounted for 
69% of all pursuits, but employed 78% of all officers (not 
shown).

******************************************
From 1996 to 2015, there was an average 
of about one pursuit-related fatality 
per day 
******************************************

Police vehicle pursuits resulted in more than 6,000 fatal crashes 
during the 20-year aggregate period 1996 to 2015 (figure 
5).***Footnote 1 According to the Fatality Analysis Reporting 
System (FARS), a national reporting system on all known traffic 
fatalities. Data are collected through a cooperative agreement 
the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration has with each 
state, the District of Columbia, and Puerto Rico. To be included 
in FARS, a crash must involve a motor vehicle traveling on a 
trafficway customarily open to the public and result in the death 
of a person (occupant of a vehicle or a nonoccupant) within 30 
days of the crash. FARS currently collects more than 143 
different coded data elements that characterize the crash, the 
vehicle, and the persons involved.*** These fatal crashes 
resulted in more than 7,000 deaths, an average of 355 per year 
(or about 1 per day). There were more than 300 pursuit-related 
fatalities each year during this period. The number of fatalities 
peaked in 2006 and 2007 when there were more than 400 per year.

Nearly two-thirds (65%) of pursuit-related fatalities involved 
occupants of the vehicle being pursued (not shown). A third of 
those killed were occupants of a vehicle not involved in the 
pursuit (29%) or bystanders not in a vehicle (4%). Occupants of 
the pursuing police vehicle accounted for slightly more than 1% 
of the fatalities from 1996 to 2015.
***********************************************************
******************************************
Pursuits database includes detailed 
information on the characteristics of police 
vehicle pursuits in selected agencies
******************************************

The Pursuits online database was launched in 2001 by the 
International Association of Chiefs of Police. It standardizes 
pursuit reporting across 30 data fields and is the largest 
national repository of pursuit data of its kind, archiving nearly 
20,000 records as of 2016. The National Institute of Justice 
funded the database through a grant. LogIn, Inc. provided 
software development and managed the database. When the federal 
funding ended, LogIn took over Pursuits and provides ongoing 
management and development.

Agency participation in Pursuits is voluntary, and the analyses 
presented here are limited to the 115 agencies that provided data 
for 5,568 pursuits occurring from 2009 to 2013. These data are 
not necessarily representative of all pursuits occurring 
nationwide.

According to the Pursuits data, a majority of pursuits were short 
both in time (57% lasted 3 minutes or less) and distance (66% 
covered a distance of 3 miles or less). Despite their brevity, 
nearly half (45%) of police vehicle pursuits reached speeds of 
greater than 70 miles per hour, and nearly a quarter (23%) 
exceeded 90 miles per hour. 

About two-thirds (69%) of police vehicle pursuits began with a 
traffic violation, such as speeding (16%), reckless driving 
(13%), or suspicion of driving while intoxicated (12%) (figure 
6). About 1 in 5 pursuits were initiated because someone in the 
vehicle being pursued was suspected of committing a nonviolent 
(12%) or violent (9%) felony. 

Twenty-nine percent of pursuits ended because the fleeing driver 
voluntarily stopped, and 25% of pursuits ended because a pursuing 
officer or a supervisor discontinued it (figure 7). Fifteen 
percent of pursuits ended with a collision and 10% ended because 
the vehicle crossed into another jurisdiction. About 1 in 6 
violators eluded police either in their vehicle or on foot.

Among pursuits that occurred from 2009 to 2013, there were 2 
serious injuries and 10 minor injuries for every 100 pursuits 
(not shown). About 76% of serious injuries were to the suspect, 
21% were to persons not involved in the pursuit, and 3% were to a 
law enforcement officer. 

About 0.5% (1 in 200) of these pursuits resulted in a fatality 
(not shown). In comparison, using the Fatality Analysis Reporting 
System total of 295 pursuit-related fatal crashes in 2012 and the 
LEMAS estimate of 68,000 pursuits, the percentage of pursuits 
resulting in a fatality was about 0.4% (1 in 250).
***********************************************************

Methodology
****************

****************
Survey overview
****************

This report uses data from the 2013 Law Enforcement Management 
and Administrative Statistics (LEMAS) survey. The LEMAS survey 
periodically collects data from more than 3,000 general purpose 
law enforcement agencies, including state police/highway patrol 
agencies, local police departments, and sheriffs’ offices. The 
survey includes all agencies that employ 100 or more sworn 
officers and a nationally representative sample of smaller 
agencies. 

Previous LEMAS data collections occurred in 1987, 1990, 1993, 
1997, 1999 (limited scope), 2000, 2003, and 2007. LEMAS obtains 
data on--

* functions performed

* operating expenditures

* job functions of sworn and nonsworn employees

* officer salaries and special pay

* demographic characteristics of officers

* education and training requirements

* types of weapons authorized

* body armor policies

* computers and information systems

* types of vehicles operated

* use of special units 

* task force participation

* community policing activities.

The 2013 LEMAS survey was the first to collect data on the number 
of vehicle pursuits conducted. Survey questions were updated with 
each iteration to reflect emerging issues in the field of law 
enforcement. Publications based on prior LEMAS surveys can be 
accessed on the Bureau of Justice Statistics’ (BJS) website.

****************
Sampling frame 
****************
The sampling frame used for the 2013 LEMAS survey was the 2008 
BJS Census of State and Local Law Enforcement Agencies (CSLLEA), 
which was the most recent data collection year available.

The CSLLEA included all general purpose state and local law 
enforcement agencies employing the equivalent of at least one 
full-time sworn officer. The CSLLEA definition of sworn personnel 
relied exclusively on whether the officer possessed full arrest 
powers. Regardless of the arrest powers of their officers, some 
agencies that the CSLLEA included were out of scope for LEMAS. 
Because of its policing focus, LEMAS excluded agencies that did 
not have a primary jurisdictional area for which they provided 
law enforcement services.

*****************************
Sample design and selection
*****************************

Local police departments and sheriffs’ offices were chosen for 
the LEMAS survey using a stratified sample design based on the 
number of sworn personnel. The original 2013 LEMAS sample 
included 3,335 state and local law enforcement agencies. It was 
designed to be representative of all general purpose state and 
local law enforcement agencies in the United States, with 
separate samples drawn for local police departments and sheriffs’ 
offices. All 49 state police and highway patrol agencies were 
included. Because their primary functions differed from the other 
state agencies, the Hawaii Department of Public Safety was out of 
scope for this report. All agencies serving special jurisdictions 
(such as schools, airports, or parks) or with special enforcement 
responsibilities (such as conservation laws or alcohol laws), 
were out of scope for the survey. 

The 2013 LEMAS sample design called for 2,353 local police 
departments, divided into seven strata based on number of sworn 
officers employed, to receive the survey. During the initial 
contact phase, 26 of these departments were determined to have 
closed since the 2008 CSLLEA and were dropped from the sample. Of 
the remaining 2,327 departments, the sample design called for all 
659 departments employing 100 or more full-time sworn personnel 
to be self-representing (SR) and receive the survey. Twenty-nine 
of these SR departments did not receive the survey because of 
inaccurate contact information. As a result, the base weight for 
SR departments was 1.046 instead of the expected 1.000. The 6 
remaining strata and their corresponding base weights are 50 to 
99 officers, 2.572; 25 to 49 officers, 4.225; 10 to 24 officers, 
6.260; 5 to 9 officers, 7.288; 2 to 4 officers, 14.611, and 1 
officer, 31.302.

The 2013 LEMAS sample design called for 933 sheriffs’ offices, 
divided into seven strata based on the number of sworn officers 
employed, to receive the survey. During the initial contact 
phase, 38 of these offices were determined to not have an area of 
primary law enforcement jurisdiction and were dropped from the 
sample. All 350 offices employing 100 or more full-time sworn 
personnel were SR in the sample design and were to receive the 
survey. Seventeen of these SR offices did not receive the survey 
because of inaccurate contact information. As a result, the base 
weight for SR sheriffs’ offices was 1.051 instead of the expected 
1.000. The 6 remaining strata and their corresponding base 
weights were as follows: 50 to 99 officers, 2.800; 25 to 49 
officers, 4.412; 10 to 24 officers, 5.497; 5 to 9 officers, 
5.485; 2 to 4 officers, 6.190; and 1 officer, 5.000.

**********************
Agency response rate
**********************

Of the 49 state police and highway patrol agencies that received 
the survey, 44 completed it for a response rate of 90%. Of the 
2,327 eligible local police departments that received the survey, 
2,059 completed it for a response rate of 88%. By size, the 
response rate for local police ranged from 91% for agencies with 
50 or more officers to 84% for those with fewer than 10 officers. 
An adjustment factor unique to each stratum was used to account 
for nonresponse. These nonresponse adjustments and the resulting 
final analytical weights for each stratum are included in 
appendix table 10.

Of the 895 eligible sheriffs’ offices that received the survey, 
717 completed it for a response rate of 80%. By size, the 
response rate ranged from 90% for agencies with 25 to 49 full-
time sworn personnel to 73% for those with 5 to 9 full-time sworn 
personnel. An adjustment factor unique to each stratum was used 
to account for nonresponse. These nonresponse adjustments and the 
resulting final analytical weights for each stratum are included 
in appendix table 11.

********************************
Item nonresponse for pursuit-
related questions
********************************

Written vehicle pursuit policy
*******************************

Among the 86% of agencies that responded to the 2013 LEMAS 
survey, 98% provided the requested information on type of written 
vehicle pursuit policy. The item response rates by type of agency 
were--

* local police departments–98% (2,024 of 2,059)

* sheriffs’ offices–97% (697 of 717)

* state police/highway patrol–98% (43 of 44).

Number of vehicle pursuits conducted in 2012
***********************************************

Among the 86% of agencies that responded to the 2013 LEMAS 
survey, 84% (2,376 of 2,825) provided the requested information 
on number of vehicle pursuits conducted during 2012. The item 
response rates by type of agency were--

* local police departments–86% (1,778 of 2,059)

* sheriffs’ offices–78% (556 of 717)

* state police/highway patrol–95% (42 of 44).

*************************************
Imputations for number of pursuits
*************************************

When an agency did not provide the number of pursuits conducted 
during 2012, a ratio imputation method was used. The ratio 
imputation used the value of the ratio of the number of pursuits 
reported to the number of full-time sworn personnel employed for 
agencies that provided pursuits data. This ratio was computed for 
each population category and applied to the number of full-time 
personnel in agencies with the missing data to produce the 
imputed value.

To produce national estimates for the number of pursuits 
conducted by state and local law enforcement agencies, 
adjustments were made specific to each stratum in the LEMAS 
sample. The example below provides a step-by-step example of how 
these adjustments were calculated.

Pursuit count calculations for stratum 
103 (local police departments employing 
25 to 49 officers)
****************************************

Step 1–Determine the number of officers employed by agencies in 
the following groups:

   a. Reported 1 or more pursuits–37,500

   b. Reported 0 pursuits–9,988

   c. Did not report the number of pursuits–7,352

Step 2–For agencies that reported the number of pursuits, 
determine the ratio of officers employed by agencies that had one 
or more pursuits to the total number of officers employed by 
agencies that reported pursuit data (whether they had any 
pursuits or not).

    37,500 / (37,500 + 9,988) = 0.79

Step 3–Multiply the ratio produced in Step 2 by the number of 
officers employed by agencies that did not report the number of 
pursuits.

    0.79 × 7,352 = 5,806

Step 4–Determine the total number of pursuits reported by 
agencies that provided pursuit data. Calculate the ratio of this 
number to the number of sworn officers employed by these 
agencies.

    4,963 / 37,500 = 0.1324

Step 5–Multiply the ratio obtained in Step 4 by the number of 
officers obtained in Step 3.

    0.1324 × 5,806 = 768

Step 6–Add the number of reported pursuits from Step 4 to the 
estimated number of unreported pursuits from Step 5 to obtain the 
new adjusted estimate for the number of pursuits conducted by 
agencies in stratum 103.

   4,963 + 768 = 5,732

Step 7–Divide the new adjusted number of pursuits obtained in Step 6 
by the original number of pursuits from Step 4. 

   5,732 / 4,963 = 1.155

Step 8–Multiply the pursuit count adjustment factor from Step 7 
by the original final analytical file weight for stratum 103 to 
obtain the weight to be used for estimating the number of 
pursuits conducted by agencies in stratum 103.

   1.155 × 4.745 = 5.480

*****************************
Accuracy of the estimates 
*****************************

The accuracy of the estimates presented in this report depends on 
two types of error: sampling and nonsampling. Sampling error is 
the variation that may occur by chance because a sample was used 
rather than a complete enumeration of the population. Nonsampling 
error can be attributed to many sources, such as the inability to 
obtain information about all cases in the sample, inability to 
obtain complete and correct information from the administrative 
records, and processing errors. In any survey, the full extent of 
the nonsampling error is never known.

The sampling error, as measured by an estimated standard error, 
varies by the size of the estimate and size of the base 
population. Because LEMAS data were collected from a sample, the 
results are subject to sampling error. Variance and standard 
error estimates for the 2013 LEMAS were generated using the 
SUDAAN statistical software package. The Taylor Series method for 
a “stratified without replacement” design was used for these 
calculations. See appendix tables for standard error estimates.
 
Standard error estimates may be used to construct confidence 
intervals around percentages in this report. For example, the 95% 
confidence interval around the percentage of local police 
departments serving fewer than 10,000 residents with a 
discretionary vehicle pursuit policy was 14% ± 1.96 × 1.6% 
(approximately 11% to 17%). 

Standard error estimates may also be used to test the 
significance of the difference between two sample statistics by 
pooling the standard errors of the two sample estimates. For 
example, the standard error of the difference between departments 
serving fewer than 10,000 residents and those serving 2,500 to 
9,999 residents for having a restrictive vehicle pursuit policy 
was 5.9% (the square root of the sum of the squared standard 
errors for each group). The 95% confidence interval around the 
difference would be 1.96 × 5.9% (or 11.6%). Since the observed 
difference of 18% (72%–54%) was greater than 11.6%, the 
difference would be considered statistically significant.

Standard error estimates may also be used to construct confidence 
intervals around numeric variables, such as personnel counts. For 
example, the 95% confidence interval around the number of 
pursuits conducted by local police departments was 40,491 ± 1.96 
× 920, or 38,688 to 42,294.

******************************************************
The Bureau of Justice Statistics of the U.S. Department of 
Justice is the principal federal agency responsible for measuring 
crime, criminal victimization, criminal offenders, victims of 
crime, correlates of crime, and the operation of criminal and 
civil justice systems at the federal, state, tribal, and local 
levels. BJS collects, analyzes, and disseminates reliable and 
valid statistics on crime and justice systems in the United 
States, supports improvements to state and local criminal justice 
information systems, and participates with national and 
international organizations to develop and recommend national 
standards for justice statistics. Jeri M. Mulrow is acting 
director.

This report was written by Brian A. Reaves. Connor Brooks 
verified the report.

Caitlin Scoville and Jill Thomas edited the report. Tina Dorsey 
produced the report.

May 2017, NCJ 250545
*******************************************************
**************************************
*******************************************************
Office of Justice Programs
Building Solutions * Supporting Communities * Advancing Justice
www.ojp.usdoj.gov
*******************************************************

*****************************
4/17/2017 JER 9:10am
*****************************


