U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Programs
Bureau of Justice Statistics

Data Brief

Prisoners at Yearend 2009-Advance Counts

June 2010   NCJ 230189
-------------------------------------------------------------

This file is text only without graphics and many of the
tables. A Zip archive of the tables in this report in
spreadsheet format (.csv) and the full report including
tables and graphics in .pdf format are available from:
http://bjs.ojp.usdoj.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbdetail&iid=2272.

This report is one in a series. More recent editions may be
available. To view a list of all in the series go to
http://bjs.ojp.usdoj.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbse&sid=408
-------------------------------------------------------------

Heather C. West, Ph.D.
BJS Statistician

At yearend 2009, state and federal correctional authorities
had jurisdiction over 1,613,656 prisoners, an increase of
0.2% (3,897 prisoners) from yearend 2008 (figure 1).***
Footnote Jurisdiction refers to prisoners under the legal
authority of state or federal correctional officials,
regardless of where a prisoner is held.*** This was the
smallest annual increase in the current decade and continued
the trend of slower growth observed in the prison population
since 2006.

The number of prisoners under state jurisdiction declined by
2,941 prisoners (0.2%), the only decrease in the state prison
population between 2000 and 2009; the federal prison
population increased by 6,838 prisoners (3.4%) and accounted
for all of the increase in the U.S. prison population;
(appendix table 1).

Twenty-four states reported decreases in their prison
population during 2009, with a combined total decrease of
15,223 state prisoners (table 1). About three-fourths (71.7%)
of this decrease resulted from declines reported in six
states reporting decreases of more than 1,000 prisoners:
Michigan (down 3,260), California (down 2,395), New York
(down 1,660), Mississippi (down 1,272), Texas (down 1,257),
and Maryland (down 1,069).   

Offsetting the total decrease of 15,223 state prisoners was a
total increase of 12,282 prisoners in the remaining 26
states. Five of these states reported increases of more than
1,000 prisoners and accounted for more than half (60.7%) of
the total increase: Pennsylvania (up 2,214), Florida (up
1,527), Louisiana (up 1,399), Alabama (up 1,282), and Arizona
(up 1,038). 

The factors contributing to the yearend change will be
discussed in Prisoners in 2009.

The drop in semi-annual change continued during 2009

During recent years, most of the annual change in the U.S.
prison population has occurred over the period from December
to June, with a relatively small amount of change occurring
from June to December. The seasonality has been particularly
marked since 2006, as the pattern of larger changes from
December to June followed by smaller changes from June to
December has been extremely consistent (figure 2). From 2006
to 2009, the population change from December to June
accounted for over 75%, on average, of the annual change. For
example, growth in the first half of 2006 accounted for 72.1%
of the total year's growth (table 2). Growth in the first
half of 2007 accounted for 87.2% of the overall growth.
During 2008 and 2009, all of the population growth occurred
in the first half of the year. 

Since 2006, the level of change during each semi-annual
period (December 31 through June 30 and June 30 through
December 31) has dropped. During the first half of 2006, the
prison population increased by 30,306 prisoners. The prison
population continued to increase during the same time period
in 2007, with a smaller increase of 24,666 prisoners. This
trend continued during the first half of 2008 and 2009, when
the prison population increased by 12,297 prisoners and 7,719
prisoners, respectively. 

Similarly, the level of semi-annual change for the second
half of the year also dropped. From June 30, 2006 to December
31, 2006, the prison population increased by 11,710. During
the same period in 2007, there was an increase of 3,634
prisoners. In 2008, the direction of growth in the prison
population reversed, decreasing by 783 prisoners. The
decrease of 3,822 prisoners from June 30, 2009 to December
31, 2009 was the largest drop in the last 6 months of any
year from 2000 through 2009.

Smaller increases have led to slower rates of growth in the
number of prisoners during these semi-annual periods. In the
first half of 2006, the prison population grew at a rate of
2.0%. Over the next 3 years, growth in the prison population
during the first half of the year slowed from 1.6% in 2007 to
0.8% in 2008, and 0.5% at midyear 2009. From June 30, 2005 to
December 31, 2005, the prison population increased by 0.9%.
During the same period in 2006 and 2007, the growth slowed to
0.8% and 0.2%, respectively. A negligible decrease in growth
(783 prisoners) was observed during the last half of 2008.
The growth rate continued to decrease by 0.2% during the last
half of 2009, the largest decrease observed in the last 10
years. 

Methodology

National Prisoner Statistics

Begun in 1926 under a mandate from Congress, the National
Prisoner Statistics (NPS) program collects statistics on
prisoners at midyear and yearend. The Census Bureau serves as
the data collection agent for the Bureau of Justice
Statistics (BJS). BJS depends entirely on voluntary
participation by state departments of corrections and the
Federal Bureau of Prisons for NPS data.

The NPS distinguishes between inmates in custody and
prisoners under jurisdiction. To have custody of an inmate, a
state or the Federal Bureau of Prisons must hold that inmate
in one of its facilities. To have jurisdiction over a
prisoner, a state or the Federal Bureau of Prisons must have
legal authority over the prisoner. Some states are unable to
provide counts that distinguish between custody and
jurisdiction.

The NPS jurisdiction counts include prisoners serving a
sentence within a jurisdiction's facilities including
prisons, penitentiaries, correctional facilities, halfway
houses, boot camps, farms, training or treatment centers, and
hospitals. They include prisoners who are 

*temporarily absent (less than 30 days), out to court, or on
work release

*housed in privately operated facilities, local jails, other
state or federal facilities

*serving concurrent sentences for more than one correctional
authority.

The NPS custody counts include all inmates held within a
respondent's facilities including inmates housed for other
correctional facilities. The custody counts exclude inmates
held in local jails and in other jurisdictions. With a few
exceptions, the NPS custody counts exclude inmates held in
private facilities.

Additionally, NPS data include counts of inmates in combined
jail-prison systems in Alaska, Connecticut, Delaware, Hawaii,
Rhode Island, and Vermont. 

States and the Federal Bureau of Prisons have the ability to
update data submitted the previous year. This report provides
updates for midyear and yearend 2008 counts. 

The District of Columbia (D.C.) became a jail-only
jurisdiction by yearend 2001, when the Federal Bureau of
Prisons assumed responsibility for housing all sentenced
felons from D.C. Selected previously published prisoner
counts and percent population change statistics include D.C.
jail inmates for 2001, the last year of collection. See notes
in tables for additional information. 

Additional information about the NPS data collection
instrument is available on the BJS Website at
<http://bjs.ojp.usdoj.gov>.

Definitions

Average annual change the arithmetic average (mean) annual
change across a specific time period.

Jurisdiction the number of prisoners under the legal
authority of state or federal correctional officials,
regardless of where the prisoners are held. For example,
state-sentenced prisoners held in local jails are under the
jurisdiction of state correctional authorities.   

Prisons compared to jail facilities, prisons are longer-term
facilities run by a state or the federal government and
typically hold prisoners with sentences of more than 1 year.
However, sentence length may vary by state. Connecticut,
Rhode Island, Vermont, Delaware, Alaska, and Hawaii operate
integrated systems which combine prisons and jails.

Prisoners individuals under the legal authority
(jurisdiction) of state and federal correctional officials.

NPS jurisdiction notes

Alaska Prisons and jails form one integrated system. All NPS
data include jail and prison populations housed in-state and
out-of-state. Jurisdictional counts exclude inmates held in
local jails that are operated by communities.   

Arizona Population counts are based on custody data and
inmates in contracted beds. 

California Jurisdiction counts include felons and unsentenced
inmates who are temporarily absent, e.g., housed in local
jails, hospitals, etc. This definition is comparable to the
1998 NPS 1b definition. 

Colorado Counts include 222 male and 10 female inmates in the
Youthful Offender System, which was established primarily for
violent juvenile offenders. 

Connecticut Prisons and jails form one integrated system. All
NPS data include jail and prison populations.

Delaware Prisons and jails form one integrated system. All
NPS data include jail and prison populations.
 
Georgia Counts are based on custody data.

Hawaii Prisons and jails form one integrated system. All NPS
data include jail and prison populations. 

Iowa Population counts are based on custody data. The
jurisdiction count for December 31, 2009 is not comparable to
previous years due to a change in measurement. As of 2009,
the Iowa Department of Corrections began including the
Operating While Intoxicated population, prisoners on work
release, and prisoners in violation of their sentence.

Oklahoma Population counts for inmates with sentences of less
than 1 year consist mainly of offenders ordered by the court
to the Delayed Sentencing Program for Young Adults pursuant
to 22 O.S. 996 through 996.3. 

Oregon Counts include an undetermined number of inmates with
sentences of 1 year or less. County authorities retain
jurisdiction over the majority of these types of inmates.

Rhode Island Prisons and jails form one integrated system.
All NPS data include jail and prison populations. 

Vermont Prisons and jails form one integrated system. All NPS
data include jail and prison populations. 

----------------------------------------------------------
The Bureau of Justice Statistics is the statistical agency of
the U.S. Department of Justice. Michael D. Sinclair is acting
director.

This Crime Data Brief was written by Heather C. West, Ph.D.,
Todd Minton, Sheri Simmons, and Tracy Snell verified the
report.

Joshua Giunta carried out the data collection and processing
under the supervision of Steve Simoncini, Governments
Division, Census Bureau, U.S. Department of Commerce.

Catherine Bird and Jill Duncan edited the report, Tina Dorsey
produced the report, and Jayne E.Robinson prepared the report
for final printing under the supervision of Doris J. James.

June 2010, NCJ 230189
-----------------------------------------------------------

This report in portable document format and in ASCII and its
related statistical data and tables are available at the BJS
World Wide Web Internet site:
<http://bjs.ojp.usdoj.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbdetail&iid=2272>.

-------------------------------------------------------------

Office of Justice Programs
Innovation  Partnerships  Safer Neighborhoods
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov

---------------------------------------------------------

Revised 6/232/2010/JER/ 7:26
