U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Programs
Bureau of Justice Statistics

********************************************************
This file is text only without graphics and many of the
tables. A Zip archive of the tables in this report in
spreadsheet format (.csv) and the full report including
tables and graphics in .pdf format are available on BJS
website at: https://www.bjs.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbdetail&iid=6106
*********************************************************

****************
Special Report
****************

*****************************************
Race and Hispanic Origin of Victims 
and Offenders, 2012-15
*****************************************

Rachel E. Morgan, Ph.D., BJS Statistician

During the 4-year aggregated period from 2012 to 2015, half (51%) 
of violent victimizations were intraracial—that is both victims 
and offenders were the same race or both were of Hispanic origin 
(figure 1). ***Footnote 1 Unless otherwise noted, comparisons in 
this report are significant at the 95% confidence level.*** 
During 2012-15, the percentage of intraracial victimization was 
higher than the percentage of interracial victimization for all 
types of violent crime except robbery. There was no statistically 
significant difference between the percentages of intraracial and 
interracial robbery victimization during this period.

This report uses data from the Bureau of Justice Statistics’ 
(BJS) National Crime Victimization Survey (NCVS) to examine the 
race and Hispanic origin of victims age 12 or older and offenders 
of violent victimizations. Violent victimization includes rape or 
sexual assault, robbery, aggravated assault, and simple assault. 
Intraracial victimizations include victims and offenders who were 
both or all white; black; American Indian or Alaska Native; 
Asian, Native Hawaiian, or Other Pacific Islander; or of Hispanic 
origin. ***Footnote 2 For single-offender violent victimizations, 
intraracial victimizations include both victims and offenders who 
were the same race or were both of Hispanic origin. For multiple-
offender violent victimizations, intraracial victimizations 
include victims and offenders who were all the same race or were 
all of Hispanic origin.*** Interracial victimizations include 
victims and offenders who were not the same race or Hispanic 
origin, victims of two or more races, single offenders of two or 
more races, and multiple offenders of various races (mixed race 
offender group).

****************************************************************
************
Highlights
************

* During 2012-15, half (51%) of violent victimizations were 
intraracial, that is both victims and offenders were the same 
race or both were of Hispanic origin. 

* In the majority of violent victimizations, white victims’ 
offenders were white (57%) and black victims’ offenders were 
black (63%).

* The rates of total violent crime, serious violent crime, and 
simple assault were higher for intraracial victimizations than 
for interracial victimizations.

* From 1994 to 2015, white-on-white violence (down 79%) and 
black-on-black violence (down 78%) declined at a similar rate.

* During 2012-15, there were no differences among white, black, 
and Hispanic intraracial victimizations reported to police.

****************************************************************

The NCVS collects data from victims on their experiences with 
crime, and offender demographic characteristics are based on the 
victim's perceptions. (For more information, see Overview of 
National Crime Victimization Survey data collection on violent 
offenders text box on page 3 and Methodology.) This report 
presents aggregate estimates for the 4-year period from 2012 
through 2015. 

Unless noted, 1993 through 2015 trend estimates were based on 2-
year rolling averages centered on the most recent year. For 
example, estimates reported for 1994 represent the average 
estimates for 1993 and 1994. By rolling averages and aggregating 
years, estimates and comparisons of detailed victimization 
characteristics become more reliable and stable. Data from 2012 
to 2015 were aggregated in this report because of a change in the 
offender race and Hispanic origin categories that occurred in 
2012. (See Summary of changes to collecting offender race and 
Hispanic origin in the National Crime Victimization Survey text 
box on page 6 for more information.)

In the majority of violent victimizations, white victims’ 
offenders were white and black victims’ offenders were black 

During 2012-15, U.S. residents experienced 5.8 million violent 
victimizations per year (table 1). About 3.7 million of these 
violent victimizations were committed against white victims. 
***Footnote 3 White, black, and other race categories exclude 
persons of Hispanic or Latino origin. *** Among white victims, a 
higher percentage of victimizations were committed by white 
offenders (57%) than offenders of any other race. White victims 
perceived the offender to be black in 15% of violent 
victimizations and Hispanic in 11%. *** Footnote 4 Unless 
otherwise noted, offender refers to a single offender or a group 
of offenders who were the same race or were all of Hispanic 
origin. ***

Of the 850,720 victimizations committed against black victims, a 
higher percentage involved black offenders (63%) than offenders 
of any other race. Black victims perceived the offender to be 
white in 11% of violent victimizations and Hispanic in nearly 7%. 

Fewer than half (40%) of violent victimizations committed against 
a Hispanic victim were committed by a Hispanic offender. However, 
the percentage committed by a Hispanic offender was higher than 
any racial category. An equal percentage of victimizations 
committed against a Hispanic victim was committed by a white or 
black offender (20% each).

****************************************************************
**********************************************
Overview of National Crime Victimization 
Survey data collection on violent offenders
**********************************************

The National Crime Victimization Survey (NCVS) collects 
information from victims on their offenders in the Crime Incident 
Report (CIR). Offender demographic characteristics are based on 
the victim’s perceptions. The section on offenders begins with a 
question about the number of offenders. For violent 
victimizations involving a single offender, respondents are asked 
questions about the offender’s relationship with the victim, 
offender demographic characteristics (including sex, race, 
Hispanic origin, and age), membership in a street gang, use of 
alcohol or drugs at the time of the incident, and previous crimes 
committed against the respondent or respondent’s household.
 
For violent victimizations involving multiple offenders, 
respondents are asked similar questions that capture whether the 
demographic characteristics apply to all or most of the offenders 
(e.g., whether all or most offenders were male).***Footnote 5 See 
the BJS website for all questions included on the NCVS CIR*** BJS 
statisticians and NCVS data users can tabulate the race and 
Hispanic origin for offenders of all violent victimizations by 
combining the race and Hispanic origin of offenders in single 
offender victimizations with data on the race and Hispanic origin 
of offenders in multiple offender victimizations.

During 2012-15, U.S. residents experienced an estimated 5.8 
million violent victimizations, with 4.5 million of those 
committed by a single offender (table 2). The offender was 
perceived to be white in about half (49%) of single offender 
victimizations. About a quarter (23%) of single offender 
victimizations were committed by a black offender, and 13% were 
committed by a Hispanic offender. Eight percent of single 
offender violent victimizations were committed by an offender 
perceived to be of two or more races. *** Footnote 6 See 
Methodology for U.S. population of persons age 12 or older by 
race and Hispanic origin.***

During this period, U.S. residents experienced an estimated 1.2 
million violent victimizations committed by multiple offenders. 
Fourteen percent of multiple offender violent victimizations were 
committed by offenders perceived by the victim to be of a mixed 
race and Hispanic origin group. Because the primary focus of this 
report is on white, black, and Hispanic victims and offenders, 
this mixed race group category was not included in most tables in 
this report.
 
In the majority (80%) of the 1.2 million multiple offender 
victimizations, victims perceived all the offenders to be of the 
same race or all of Hispanic origin. Victims perceived multiple 
offenders to be all white in 30% of these victimizations, all 
black in 25%, or all Hispanic in 24%. 

During 2012-15, when the single offenders were combined with 
groups of offenders who were of the same race or who were all of 
Hispanic origin, fewer than half (44%) of all violent 
victimizations were committed by an offender perceived to be 
white by the victim. About a quarter (23%) of violent 
victimizations were perceived to be committed by a black 
offender. Fourteen percent of violent victimizations were 
perceived to be committed by a Hispanic offender.
****************************************************************

**********************************************
The rate of violent crime was higher for 
intraracial victimizations than interracial 
victimizations during 2012-15
**********************************************

Regardless of the race of the victim, the rate of violent crime 
was higher for intraracial victimizations than for interracial 
victimizations during 2012-15. The rate of violent crime 
committed against a white victim by a white offender was 12.0 
victimizations per 1,000 persons, compared to 3.1 per 1,000 for 
those committed by a black offender (table 3). The rate of 
violent crime committed against a black victim by a black 
offender was 16.5 victimizations per 1,000 persons, compared to 
2.8 per 1,000 for those committed by a white offender. The rate 
of violent crime committed against a Hispanic victim by a 
Hispanic offender was 8.3 victimizations per 1,000 persons, 
compared to 4.1 per 1,000 for those committed by a white offender 
and 4.2 per 1,000 for those committed by a black offender.

For intraracial violent victimizations, the rate of black-on-
black violence (16.5 victimizations per 1,000 black persons) was 
higher than the rate of white-on-white violence (12.0 per 1,000 
white persons) and Hispanic-on-Hispanic violence (8.3 per 1,000 
Hispanic persons). This pattern was similar for intraracial 
serious violent victimizations. The rate of black-on-black 
serious violence (6.7 per 1,000 black persons) was higher than 
the rate of white-on-white (3.7 per 1,000 white persons) and 
Hispanic-on-Hispanic (3.2 per 1,000 Hispanic persons) serious 
violence. The rate of black-on-black simple assault 
victimizations (9.8 per 1,000 black persons) was higher than the 
rate of Hispanic-on-Hispanic victimizations (5.1 per 1,000 
Hispanic persons) but not statistically different from the white-
on-white rate (8.4 per 1,000 white persons).

**********************************************
The rate of white-on-white and black-on-black 
violence declined from 1994 to 2015
**********************************************

From 1994 to 2015, white-on-white and black-on-black violence 
declined at a similar rate (figure 2). The rate of white-on-white 
violence declined 79%, from 52.5 victimizations per 1,000 white 
persons to 10.8 per 1,000. The rate of black-on-black violence 
declined 78%, from 66.6 victimizations per 1,000 black persons to 
14.5 per 1,000.

Similar to the trend for intraracial violent victimization, the 
rate of interracial violent victimization declined from 1994 to 
2015. The rate of white-on-black violence declined 74%, from 10.2 
victimizations per 1,000 black persons to 2.6 per 1,000. The rate 
of black-on-white violence declined 80%, from 14.9 victimizations 
per 1,000 white persons to 3.0 per 1,000. In 1994, the rate of 
black-on-white violence was higher than the rate of white-on-
black violence. However, the rates converged over time.

**********************************************
Stranger violence accounted for the largest 
proportion of interracial violence
**********************************************

During 2012-15, among white victims the percentage of violence 
committed by a white offender (31%) was more often domestic 
violence than the percentage committed by a black (6%) or 
Hispanic (7%) offender (table 4). Domestic violence against black 
and Hispanic victims was also more likely to be intraracial than 
interracial.

The percentage of violence committed against a white victim by a 
white offender (41%) was more often committed by a well-known or 
casual acquaintance than the percentage committed by a black 
offender (27%) who was a well-known or casual acquaintance. There 
were no statistically significant differences in the percentage 
of violence committed against black and Hispanic victims by a 
well-known or casual acquaintance.

During 2012-15, among white victims the percentage of violence 
committed by a white offender who was a stranger (27%) was lower 
than the percentage committed by a black (64%) or Hispanic (55%) 
offender who was a stranger. The percentage of violence committed 
against a black victim by a white offender who was a stranger 
(50%) was higher (90% confidence level) than the percentage 
committed by a black offender who was a stranger (38%). In 
comparison, the percentage of violence committed against a 
Hispanic victim by a black offender who was a stranger (57%) was 
greater than the percentage committed by a Hispanic offender who 
was a stranger (44%).

****************************************************************
**********************************************
Summary of changes to collecting offender race 
and Hispanic origin in the National Crime 
Victimization Survey 
**********************************************

In 2012, the Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS) changed the 
manner in which the National Crime Victimization Survey (NCVS) 
collects information about the perceived race of offenders. Prior 
to 2012, the NCVS offender race categories were white, black, or 
some other race. In 2012, offender race categories were expanded 
to align with the Office of Management and Budget’s standards for 
measuring race and ethnicity. Offender race categories now 
include American Indian or Alaska Native; Asian, Native Hawaiian, 
or Other Pacific Islander; and persons of two or more races. In 
2012, the NCVS also began collecting information on whether the 
offender was of Hispanic origin.  

During 2012-15, more than half (55%) of violent victimizations 
were committed by someone known to the victim (see table 4). 
Because most violent crime victims know their offender, most can 
provide reliable information about their race and Hispanic 
origin. Even with stranger-perpetrated violent crime, victims may 
be able to accurately identify the offender’s race and Hispanic 
origin using cues, such as the location of the crime, language 
used, mannerisms of the offender, and information from other 
sources, including police reports or arrest records.

NCVS questions aim to establish general characteristics of 
offenders instead of unique identities. Research on eyewitness 
testimony indicates that victims can identify general 
characteristics of offenders, such as sex, race, Hispanic origin, 
and age, and are more often correct than incorrect when 
identifying these characteristics.*** Footnote 7 Van Koppen, 
P.J., & Lochun, S.K. (1997). Portraying perpetrators: The 
validity of offender descriptions by witnesses. Law and Human 
Behavior, 21(6), 661-685.***

During 2008-11, prior to the implementation of the expanded 
offender race categories, there were an average of 5.7 million 
violent victimizations per year (table 5). Of these violent 
victimizations, the majority (54%) of offenders were white, 22% 
were black, and 7% were some other race.

During 2012-15, after the implementation of the expanded offender 
race categories, there were an average of 5.8 million violent 
victimizations per year. Of these victimizations, 44% involved a 
white offender, 23% involved a black offender, and 14% involved a 
Hispanic offender.

From 2008 to 2011, there was no statistically significant change 
in the rates of violent victimization committed by whites, 
blacks, and offenders of some other race (figure 3). From 2012 to 
2015, the rate of violent victimizations committed by non-
Hispanic whites, non-Hispanic blacks, and non-Hispanic offenders 
of some other race declined significantly. The rate of violent 
victimization committed by a non-Hispanic white offender declined 
24% from 11.0 victimizations per 1,000 persons to 8.4 per 1,000. 
The rate for non-Hispanic black offenders declined 35% (from 6.0 
victimizations per 1,000 to 4.0 per 1,000). The rate for non-
Hispanic offenders of some other race declined 51% (from 3.7 
victimizations per 1,000 to 1.8 per 1,000). There was no 
statistically significant change in the rate of violent 
victimizations committed by Hispanic offenders from 2012 to 2015.
****************************************************************

**********************************************
During 2012-15, there were no differences 
among white, black, and Hispanic intraracial 
victimizations reported to police
**********************************************

During 2012-15, the percentage of violent victimizations reported 
to police by white victims was not statistically different 
whether the offenders were white, black, or Hispanic (table 6). 
***Footnote 8 The NCVS allows for examination of crimes reported 
and not reported to police. Police notification may occur during 
or immediately following a criminal incident or at a later date. 
The term police includes municipal police departments, sheriffs’ 
offices, or other state or local law enforcement agencies.*** 
This pattern was similar for black and Hispanic victims.
 
Violent victimizations involving a Hispanic victim and white 
offender (43%) were less likely to be reported to the police 
than violent victimizations involving a black victim and white 
offender (57%, 90% confidence level). Victimizations involving 
white (47%) or Hispanic (55%) victims were equally as likely 
to be reported to police when the offender was black. White (45%) 
and black (47%) victims were equally as likely to report their 
victimization to police when the offender was Hispanic.

**********************************************
Among white victims, intraracial violence 
was less likely to involve a weapon than 
interracial violence
**********************************************

During 2012-15, the percentage of violent victimizations that 
involved a weapon was lower for a white victim with a white 
offender (18%) than with a black (25%) or Hispanic (26%) offender 
(table 7). Among black and Hispanic victims, there were no 
statistically significant differences in the percentage of 
violent victimizations that involved a weapon, regardless of 
the race of the offender. 

During 2012-15, a lower percentage of violent victimizations 
against white victims involved a firearm when the offender was 
white (3%) than when the offender was black (11%) or Hispanic 
(7%). The percentage of violent victimizations that involved a 
firearm was lower for a Hispanic victim with a Hispanic offender 
(8%) than those committed by a black offender (19%). Among black 
victims, there were no statistically significant differences in 
the percentage of violent victimizations that involved a firearm 
across offender race and Hispanic origin categories.

There were no differences in the likelihood of injury for 
Hispanic victims across offender race and Hispanic origin 
categories

During 2012-15, the majority of violent victimizations did not 
result in injury to the victim. During this period, the 
percentage of violent victimizations resulting in injury was 
higher for white victims with white offenders (27%) compared to 
white victims with black offenders (21%) (table 8). There were no 
statistically significant differences in the percentage of 
victimizations that resulted in injury for Hispanic victims 
across offender race and Hispanic origin categories.

During 2012-15, a third (33%) of violent victimizations committed 
against a black victim by a black offender resulted in injury to 
the victim. A quarter (25%) of violent victimizations committed 
against a Hispanic victim by a Hispanic offender resulted in 
victim injury during this same period. The percentage of violent 
victimizations that resulted in injury was higher for black 
victims and black offenders (33%) than for white victims and 
black offenders (21%) during 2012-15.

**********************************************
Intraracial violence was higher than 
interracial violence for victims ages 
12 to 49, regardless of victim race
**********************************************

During 2012-15, the percentage of intraracial violence was higher 
than the percentage of interracial violence for males and 
females, regardless of victim race or Hispanic origin (table 9). 
Among white victims, a similar percentage of the victimizations 
against females (70%) and males (68%) were committed by a white 
offender. Black (83%) and Hispanic (56%) female victims were more 
likely to experience intraracial victimization than their male 
counterparts. 

For all instances except among Hispanic victims age 50 or older, 
the percentage of intraracial violence was higher than the 
percentage of interracial violence for victims of all ages, 
regardless of victim race or Hispanic origin. Among Hispanic 
victims ages 50 or older, there were no statistically significant 
differences in the percentage of violence committed by white, 
black, and Hispanic offenders.

White and Hispanic youth ages 12 to 17 were more likely to 
experience intraracial violence than whites and Hispanics ages 50 
or older. Among black victims, youth were less likely to 
experience intraracial violence (74%) than adults ages 50 or 
older (86%, 90% confidence level). 

**********************************************
Intraracial violence was higher than interracial 
violence for white and black victims, regardless 
of the victim's location of residence
**********************************************

During 2012-15, the percentage of intraracial violence was higher 
than the percentage of interracial violence for white and black 
victims, regardless of the victim’s location of residence (table 
10). For Hispanic victims in urban and suburban areas, a higher 
percentage of violence was committed by a Hispanic offender than 
a black or white offender. This pattern did not hold true in 
rural areas.

The percentage of intraracial violence for white victims was 
lower in urban areas (57%) than in suburban (70%) and rural (86%) 
areas. The percentage of intraracial violence for black victims 
was higher in urban (82%) than suburban (72%) areas, but not 
statistically different than rural areas (77%). There were no 
statistically significant differences across the victim's 
location of residence for Hispanic victims of intraracial 
violence.

***************
Methodology
***************

*****************
Survey coverage
*****************

The National Crime Victimization Survey (NCVS) is an annual data 
collection conducted by the U.S. Census Bureau for the Bureau of 
Justice Statistics (BJS). The NCVS is a self-report survey in 
which interviewed persons are asked about the number and 
characteristics of victimizations experienced during the prior 6 
months. The NCVS collects information on nonfatal personal crimes 
(rape or sexual assault, robbery, aggravated and simple assault, 
and personal larceny) and household property crimes (burglary, 
motor vehicle theft, and other theft) both reported and not 
reported to police. In addition to providing annual level and 
change estimates on criminal victimization, the NCVS is the 
primary source of information on the nature of criminal 
victimization incidents.

Survey respondents provide information about themselves (sex, 
race, Hispanic origin, age, marital status, education level, and 
income) and whether they experienced a victimization. For each 
victimization incident, the NCVS collects information from the 
victim's perspective about the offender (sex, race, Hispanic 
origin, age, and victim-offender relationship), characteristics 
of the crime (including time and place of occurrence, use of 
weapons, nature of injury, and economic consequences), whether 
the crime was reported to police, reasons the crime was or was 
not reported, and victim experiences with the criminal justice 
system.

The NCVS is administered to persons age 12 or older from a 
nationally representative sample of households in the United 
States. The NCVS defines a household as a group of persons who 
all reside at a sampled address. Persons are considered household 
members when the sampled address is their usual place of 
residence at the time of the interview and when they have no 
usual place of residence elsewhere. Once selected, households 
remain in the sample for 3 years, and eligible persons in these 
households are interviewed every 6 months either in person or 
over the phone for a total of seven interviews.

All first interviews are conducted in person with subsequent 
interviews conducted either in person or by phone. New households 
rotate into the sample on an ongoing basis to replace outgoing 
households that have been in the sample for the 3-year period. 
The sample includes persons living in group quarters, such as 
dormitories, rooming houses, and religious group dwellings, and 
excludes persons living in military barracks and institutional 
settings, such as correctional or hospital facilities and persons 
who are homeless.

Nonresponse and weighting adjustments
***************************************

In 2015, there were 95,760 households and 163,880 persons age 12 
or older interviewed for the NCVS. Each household was interviewed 
twice during the year. The response rate was 82% for households 
and 86% for eligible persons.

Victimizations that occurred outside the United States were 
excluded from this report. In 2015, fewer than 1% of the 
unweighted victimizations occurred outside the United States and 
were excluded from the analyses.

Estimates in this report use data from the 1993 to 2015 NCVS data 
files, weighted to produce annual estimates of victimization for 
persons age 12 or older living in U.S. households. Because the 
NCVS relies on a sample rather than a census of the entire U.S. 
population, weights are designed to inflate sample point 
estimates to known population totals and to compensate for survey 
nonresponse and other aspects of the sample design.

The NCVS data files include both person and household weights. 
Person weights provide an estimate of the population represented 
by each person in the sample. Household weights provide an 
estimate of the U.S. household population represented by each 
household in the sample. After proper adjustment, both household 
and person weights are also typically used to form the 
denominator in calculations of crime rates.

Victimization weights used in this analysis account for the 
number of persons present during an incident and for high-
frequency repeat victimizations (series victimizations). Series 
victimizations are similar in type but occur with such frequency 
that a victim is unable to recall each individual event or 
describe each event in detail. Survey procedures allow NCVS 
interviewers to identify and classify these similar 
victimizations as series victimizations and to collect detailed 
information on only the most recent incident in the series.

The weight counts series incidents as the actual number of 
incidents reported by the victim, up to a maximum of 10 
incidents. Including series victimizations in national rates 
results in large increases in the level of violent victimization. 
However, trends in violent crime are generally similar, 
regardless of whether series victimizations are included. In 
2015, series incidents accounted for about 1% of all 
victimizations and 4% of all violent victimizations. Weighting 
series incidents as the number of incidents up to a maximum of 10 
incidents produces more reliable estimates of crime levels, while 
the cap at 10 minimizes the effect of extreme outliers on rates. 
Additional information on the series enumeration is detailed in 
the report Methods for Counting High-Frequency Repeat 
Victimizations in the National Crime Victimization Survey (NCJ 
237308, BJS web, April 2012).

Standard error computations
******************************

When national estimates are derived from a sample, as with the 
NCVS, caution must be used when comparing one estimate to another 
estimate or when comparing estimates over time. Although one 
estimate may be larger than another, estimates based on a sample 
have some degree of sampling error. The sampling error of an 
estimate depends on several factors, including the amount of 
variation in the responses and the size of the sample. When the 
sampling error around an estimate is taken into account, the 
estimates that appear different may not be statistically 
different.

One measure of the sampling error associated with an estimate is 
the standard error. The standard error may vary from one estimate 
to the next. Generally, an estimate with a small standard error 
provides a more reliable approximation of the true value than an 
estimate with a large standard error. Estimates with relatively 
large standard errors are associated with less precision and 
reliability and should be interpreted with caution.

To generate standard errors around numbers and estimates from the 
NCVS, the U.S. Census Bureau produced generalized variance 
function (GVF) parameters for BJS. The GVFs take into account 
aspects of the NCVS complex sample design and represent the curve 
fitted to a selection of individual standard errors based on the 
Balanced Repeated Replication (BRR) technique. The GVF parameters 
were used to generate standard errors for each point estimate 
(counts, percentages, and rates) in this report.

BJS conducted tests to determine whether differences in estimated 
numbers, percentages, and rates in this report were statistically 
significant once sampling error was taken into account. Using 
statistical programs developed specifically for the NCVS, all 
comparisons in the text were tested for significance. The primary 
test procedure was the Student’s t-statistic, which tests the 
difference between two sample estimates. Unless otherwise noted, 
the findings described in this report as higher, lower, or 
different passed a test at the 0.05 level of statistical 
significance (95% confidence level). Findings that passed a test 
at the 0.10 level of statistical significance are noted as such 
in the text (90% confidence level). Caution is required when 
comparing estimates not explicitly discussed in this report.

Data users can use the estimates and the standard errors of the 
estimates provided in this report to generate a confidence 
interval around the estimate as a measure of the margin of error. 
The following example illustrates how standard errors can be used 
to generate confidence intervals:

According to the NCVS, during 2012-15, the rate of violent crime 
committed against a white victim by an offender perceived to be 
white was 12.0 victimizations per 1,000 persons (see table 3). 
Using the GVFs, BJS determined that the estimated rate has a 
standard error of 0.65 (see appendix table 4). A confidence 
interval around the estimate was generated by multiplying the 
standard errors by ±1.96 (the t-score of a normal, two-tailed 
distribution that excludes 2.5% at either end of the 
distribution). Therefore, the 95% confidence interval around the 
12.0 estimate during 2012-15 is 12.0 ± (0.65 × 1.96) or (10.7 to 
13.3). In others words, if BJS used the same sampling method to 
select different samples and computed an interval estimate for 
each sample, it would expect the true population parameter (rate 
of violent crime committed against a white victim by an offender 
perceived to be white) to fall within the interval estimates 95% 
of the time.

In this report, BJS also calculated a coefficient of variation 
(CV) for all estimates, representing the ratio of the standard 
error to the estimate. CVs provide a measure of reliability and a 
means for comparing the precision of estimates across measures 
with differing levels or metrics.

Methodological changes to the NCVS in 2006
*********************************************

Methodological changes implemented in 2006 may have affected the 
crime estimates for that year to such an extent that they are not 
comparable to estimates from other years. Evaluation of 2007 and 
later data from the NCVS conducted by BJS and the U.S. Census 
Bureau found a high degree of confidence that estimates for every 
year from 2007 to 2015 are consistent with and comparable to 
estimates for 2005 and previous years. The reports are available 
on the BJS website: 

* Criminal Victimization, 2006 (NCJ 219413, December 2007)

* Criminal Victimization, 2007 (NCJ 224390, December 2008) 

* Criminal Victimization, 2008 (NCJ 227777, September 2009) 

* Criminal Victimization, 2009 (NCJ 231327, October 2010) 

* Criminal Victimization, 2010 (NCJ 235508, September 2011) 

* Criminal Victimization, 2011 (NCJ 239437, October 2012)

* Criminal Victimization, 2012 (NCJ 243389, October 2013) 

* Criminal Victimization, 2013 (NCJ 247648, September 2014) 

* Criminal Victimization, 2014 (NCJ 248973, August 2015)

* Criminal Victimization, 2015 (NCJ 250180, October 2016)

Changes to collecting offender race and 
Hispanic origin in the NCVS
****************************************

In 2012, BJS changed the manner in which the NCVS collects 
information about the perceived race of a violent offender. 
Information on an offender’s race and Hispanic origin is 
collected from the victim. Therefore, it is based on the victims’ 
perceptions. Prior to 2012, the NCVS offender race categories 
were white, black or African American, and some other race. In 
2012, offender race categories were expanded to align with the 
Office of Management and Budget’s standards for measuring race 
and ethnicity. The race variable now includes categories for 
American Indian or Alaska Native; Asian, Native Hawaiian, or 
Other Pacific Islander; and persons of two or more races. In 
2012, the NCVS also began collecting information on whether an 
offender was of Hispanic origin.

The following page lists the NCVS questions on offender race and 
Hispanic origin prior to 2012 and also lists questions that 
include the new categories implemented in 2012.

**********************************************
Race and Hispanic origin of victims 
and offenders in this report
**********************************************

Exclusion of the other race category
**************************************

BJS has received numerous requests from data users and the media 
seeking statistics on the race and Hispanic origin of violent 
crime victims and their offenders. Most requests asked for 
statistics on white, black, and Hispanic victims and offenders 
perceived to be white, black, or Hispanic origin. For this 
reason, this report covers these groups. It excludes victims and 
offenders perceived to be of some other race (including American 
Indian or Alaska Native, or Asian, Native Hawaiian, or Other 
Pacific Islander) and persons of two or more races from the 
majority of the tables and figures. These other race categories 
were also excluded because the sample sizes for these categories 
were small and many estimates were flagged as unreliable.

Perceived Hispanic victims and offenders
******************************************

Victim and offender racial categories (white, black, or some 
other race) presented in this report did not include persons of 
Hispanic origin. If a victim identified as Hispanic or the victim 
perceived an offender to be Hispanic, they were included in the 
Hispanic category, regardless of their race. 

Violent crime victims were asked whether they perceived their 
offenders to be of Hispanic origin. Only offenders perceived by 
the victim to be Hispanic were included as Hispanic. If victims 
did not know whether the offender was Hispanic, they were not 
included as Hispanic and were instead coded into their perceived 
racial category.

Missing data on race and Hispanic origin of offenders
*******************************************************

The majority (55%) of violent victimizations were committed by 
someone known to the victim (current or former intimate partner, 
other relative, or well-known or casual acquaintance); therefore, 
it was assumed that the victim knew the approximate sex, race, 
Hispanic origin, and age of the offender. During 2012-15, the 
race and Hispanic origin of single and multiple offenders was 
unknown in 5% of violent victimizations.

****************************************************************
The Bureau of Justice Statistics of the U.S. Department of 
Justice is the principal federal agency responsible for measuring 
crime, criminal victimization, criminal offenders, victims of 
crime, correlates of crime, and the operation of criminal and 
civil justice systems at the federal, state, tribal, and local 
levels. BJS collects, analyzes, and disseminates reliable and 
valid statistics on crime and justice systems in the United 
States, supports improvements to state and local criminal justice 
information systems, and participates with national and 
international organizations to develop and recommend national 
standards for justice statistics. Jeri M. Mulrow is acting 
director.

This report was written by Rachel E. Morgan. Erika Harrell 
verified the report.

Brigitte Coulton and Jill Thomas edited the report. Steve 
Grudziecki produced the report.

October 2017, NCJ 250747
****************************************************************

****************************************************************
Office of Justice Programs
Building Solutions * Supporting Communities * Advancing Justice
www.ojp.usdoj.gov
**************************************************************** 

**************************************
10/4/2017  JER 12:00pm
**************************************

