U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Programs
Bureau of Justice Statistics

-------------------------------------------------------
This file is text only without graphics and many of the
tables. A Zip archive of the tables in this report in
spreadsheet format (.csv) and the full report including
tables and graphics in .pdf format are available on BJS
website at: 
http://www.bjs.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbdetail&iid=4986

-------------------------------------------------------

*******************
Special Report
*******************

Recidivism of Prisoners Released in 30 States in 2005: 
Patterns from 2005 to 2010

Matthew R. Durose, Alexia D. Cooper, Ph.D., and Howard N. 
Snyder, Ph.D., BJS Statisticians


Overall, 67.8% of the 404,638 state prisoners released in 
2005 in 30 states were arrested within 3 years of release, 
and 76.6% were arrested within 5 years of release (figure 1). 
Among prisoners released in 2005 in 23 states with available 
data on inmates returned to prison, 49.7% had either a parole 
or probation violation or an arrest for a new offense within 
3 years that led to imprisonment, and 55.1% had a parole or 
probation violation or an arrest that led to imprisonment 
within 5 years.

While prior Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS) prisoner 
recidivism reports tracked inmates for 3 years following 
release, this report used a 5-year follow-up period. The 
longer window provides supplementary information for 
policymakers and practitioners on the officially recognized 
criminal behavior of released prisoners. While 20.5% of 
released prisoners not arrested within 2 years of release 
were arrested in the third year, the percentage fell to 13.3% 
among those who had not been arrested within 4 years. The 
longer recidivism period also provides a more complete 
assessment of the number and types of crimes committed by 
released persons in the years following their release.

********************************************************
************
HIGHLIGHTS
************

* Among state prisoners released in 30 states in 2005—
* About two-thirds (67.8%) of released prisoners were 
arrested for a new crime within 3 years, and three-quarters 
(76.6%) were arrested within 5 years.

* Within 5 years of release, 81.4% of property offenders were 
arrested for a new crime, compared to 76.3% of drug 
offenders, 73.2% of public order offenders, and 70.7% of 
violent offenders.

* More than a third (36.8%) of all prisoners who were 
arrested within 5 years of release were arrested within the 
first 6 months after release, with more than half (56.7%) 
arrested by the end of the first year.

* Two in five (42.3%) released prisoners were either not 
arrested or arrested once in the 5 years after their release.

A sixth (16.1%) of released prisoners were responsible for 
almost half (48.4 %) of the nearly 1.2 million arrests that 
occurred in the 5-year follow-up period.

* An estimated 10.9% of released prisoners were arrested in a 
state other than the one that released them during the 5-year 
follow-up period.

* Within 5 years of release, 84.1% of inmates who were age 24 
or younger at release were arrested, compared to 78.6% of 
inmates ages 25 to 39 and 69.2% of those age 40 or older.

********************************************************

********************************************************

*************************************
Factors contributing to differences 
with prior BJS studies
*************************************

Policymakers, practitioners, researchers, and the general 
public may be interested in understanding how the 2005 
prisoner recidivism rates in this report compare with those 
in the previous BJS recidivism study that measured prisoners 
released in 1994. While both the 1994 and 2005 studies were 
based on systematic samples of persons released from state 
prisons, direct comparisons between the published recidivism 
statistics should not be made.

*************************************
Adjustments for some differences in 
the 1994 and 2005 prison populations 
are possible
*************************************

One reason for not directly comparing the 1994 and 2005 
recidivism estimates relates to differences in the attributes 
of the prisoners included in the two samples. The number of 
states contributing released prisoners to the study increased 
from 15 in 1994 to 30 in 2005. To control for this 
difference, BJS conducted analyses that limited the 
comparison to the post-release arrest rates among the inmates 
released in the 12 states (California, Florida, Maryland, 
Michigan, Minnesota, New Jersey, New York, North Carolina, 
Ohio, Oregon, Texas, and Virginia) that participated in both 
studies. Among the inmates released in these 12 states, an 
estimated 66.9% of the 249,657 inmates released in 1994 were 
arrested for a new crime within 3 years, compared to an 
estimated 69.3% of the 286,829 inmates released in 2005—a 2.4 
percentage point difference.

Another difference between the two studies involved the 
demographic and offending characteristics of prisoners 
released from the state prisons, attributes known to be 
related to recidivism. For example, the proportion of inmates 
who were age 40 or older at release increased from 17.2% in 
the 1994 sample to 32.1% in the 2005 sample. In addition, the 
proportion who were in prison for a violent offense increased 
from 22.4% in the 1994 sample to 27.4% in the 2005 sample 
(table 1).

BJS standardized the demographic (i.e., sex, race, Hispanic 
origin, and age) and commitment offense distribution of the 
2005 cohort to the distribution of the 1994 cohort to control 
for the effects these factors had on the overall recidivism 
estimates. (See Methodology for more information.) These 
calculations produced the 3-year arrest rate of prisoners 
released in 2005 that would have been observed if the 2005 
release cohort had the characteristics of the 1994 cohort. 
After adjusting for these compositional differences, the 
estimated percentage of the 2005 released prisoners who were 
arrested within 3 years rose to 71.6%, a recidivism rate 4.7% 
greater than the 1994 estimate (66.9%) (table 2). However, 
these analyses only partially address the differences between 
the 1994 and 2005 studies.

*************************************
Additional death records on released 
prisoners leads to increases in 
recidivism rates
*************************************

A critical difference between the 1994 and 2005 studies was 
the use of the Social Security Administration’s public Death 
Master File (DMF) in the 2005 study to identify individuals 
who died during the follow-up period. (See Methodology for 
more information.) These individuals should be removed from 
the analysis because they artificially reduce the calculated 
recidivism rates. The 1994 study limited the identification 
of released prisoners who died to those who had an indication 
of death on their criminal history record (i.e., rap sheet). 
The 2005 study supplemented the death information obtained 
from the FBI’s Interstate Identification Index (III) with the 
DMF data. Based on both sources of information, 1,595 of the 
70,878 inmates sampled for the 2005 study had died during the 
5-year follow-up period. Less than 10% of those deaths were 
captured in the fingerprint verified death information that 
criminal justice agencies submitted to the FBI’s III system. 
If the DMF data had not been used in the 2005 study and the 
rap sheets of these individuals had been included in the 
analyses, the estimated 5-year recidivism rate would have 
been about one-half of one percent lower.

*************************************
Effects of the criminal history record 
improvements on recidivism research 
are difficult to quantify
*************************************

Direct comparisons between the published recidivism rates 
from the 1994 and the new 2005 study are also difficult due 
to the completeness of the criminal history records available 
to BJS at the time of the data collections. Both studies were 
based on fingerprint-verified automated rap sheets stored in 
the FBI and the state repositories. While both studies relied 
on records within the FBI’s III system for information on the 
arrests and prosecutions that occurred outside of the states 
that released the inmates, the 2005 study used new data 
collection capabilities to directly access the criminal 
history record systems of all 50 states and obtain more 
comprehensive out-of-state information than what was 
available for the 1994 study. (See Methodology for more 
information.) In addition, BJS was unable to obtain any out-
of-state criminal history information on the prisoners 
released in one state in the 1994 study due to a 
nondisclosure agreement.

The improved reporting of arrests and prosecutions maintained 
by the FBI and state repositories in the decade between the 
two studies also resulted in more complete documentation of 
the official criminal records of prisoners released in 2005. 
The quality of rap sheets has improved since the mid-1990s 
due to efforts funded by individual states and by BJS’s 
National Criminal History Improvement Program (NCHIP), which 
awarded more than $500 million over this period to states for 
criminal history record improvements. As a result, many 
existing paper arrest records were automated and stored 
within a computerized criminal history system. Also, the 
growth in the use of automated fingerprint technology (e.g., 
livescan) reduced the proportion of illegible fingerprint 
images delivered to the repositories, resulting in more 
arrests and court adjudications being recorded on the rap 
sheets.

In addition, while local law enforcement agencies 
historically limited their criminal history repository 
submissions to arrests for felonies and serious misdemeanors, 
the reporting of less serious misdemeanors or minor 
infractions expanded during this time, although it is unknown 
whether this increase is due to changes in reporting 
practices or changes in the criminal behaviors of the 
released prisoners. In general, violent crimes are considered 
to be more serious than public order offenses. Among the 
prisoners who were arrested for a new crime within 3 years, 
public order offenses made up 36.0% of the first post-release 
arrests for the 2005 cohort, compared to 22.9% of the first 
post-release arrests for the 1994 cohort (table 3). Violent 
offenses accounted for 14.8% of the first post-release 
arrests for the 2005 cohort, compared to 18.8% of the first 
post-release arrests for the 1994 cohort.* **These estimates 
were based on prisoners released in the 11 states in both 
studies that included charge descriptions in their criminal 
history records***.

As a result of the improvements to the nation’s criminal 
history records, the rap sheets of prisoners released in 2005 
likely captured more complete offending histories than the 
rap sheets used in the 1994 study. These improvements would 
have resulted in higher observed recidivism rates in 2005 
than in 1994, even if the two samples had the same true 
recidivism rates.

BJS conducted a test of this assumption by comparing the 
recidivism rates of the 1994 and 2005 samples using only new 
arrests for a violent offense. The logic behind this test was 
that, while the rap sheets for the 2005 cohort may contain 
more arrests overall and more arrests for minor offenses, 
arrests for violent offenses should be well represented in 
both sets of rap sheets. Using this more serious indictor of 
criminal behavior and controlling for cohort differences in 
offender demographics and most serious commitment offense, 
the percentage of released prisoners who were arrested for a 
violent crime within 3 years following release did not differ 
significantly between the 1994 (21.3%) and 2005 (21.8%) 
cohorts (table 4).

The stability in the 1994 and 2005 recidivism rates when 
recidivism is measured as a new arrest for a violent crime 
and the difference observed when recidivism is measured as a 
new offense for any offense raises questions about the 
overall consistency of rap sheet content between the 1994 and 
2005 studies.  More research is required to better understand 
the effects of rap sheet improvements on observed recidivism 
rates. However, given the limited empirical data currently 
available on the state-level changes in rap sheet content 
since the mid-1990s, the effects of rap sheet improvements on 
the observed recidivism rates cannot be quantified, and 
statistical adjustments for their effects cannot be made. 
Therefore, it is not advisable to compare the 2005 recidivism 
rates in this report with those found in earlier BJS reports 
until we have a deeper understanding of the changes in rap 
sheet content.

*************************************
Criminal history and prison records 
were used to document recidivism 
patterns
*************************************

This study estimates the recidivism patterns of 404,638 
persons released in 2005 from state prisons in 30 states. In 
2005, these states held 76% of the U.S. population and were 
responsible for 77% of the prisoners released from U.S. 
prisons (not shown). A representative sample of inmates 
released in 2005 was developed for each of the 30 states 
using data reported by state departments of correction to 
BJS’s National Corrections Reporting Program (NCRP), yielding 
a final sample of 68,597 persons. (For a complete description 
of the sampling and weighting procedures, see Methodology.) 
Using information contained in state and federal criminal 
history records (i.e., rap sheets) and the records of state 
departments of corrections, this report details the arrest, 
adjudication, conviction, and incarceration experiences of 
these former inmates within and outside of the state that 
released them for a 5-year period following their release 
from prison.

This research has attempted to minimize the effect on 
recidivism statistics posed by state variations in criminal 
history reporting policies, coding practices, and coverage. 
The analysis excluded arrest events in the rap sheets that 
were not commonly recorded by all states (e.g., arrests for 
many types of traffic offenses). The analysis also excluded 
sections of the rap sheets that recorded the issuance of a 
warrant as an arrest event when no arrest actually occurred. 
Some variations in the content of rap sheets remained and 
cannot be remediated, such as the nature of the charging 
decision. For example, when an inmate on parole is arrested 
for committing a burglary, some local law enforcement 
agencies coded the arrest offense as a parole violation, some 
coded it as a burglary, and others coded both the burglary 
and the parole violation. Given that this is often a local 
coding decision, it is difficult to discern from the contents 
of the rap sheets which charging approach was employed at 
each arrest.

Along with these coding variations, it is commonly assumed 
that the information derived from criminal history 
repositories understates the criminal histories of offenders, 
especially information on actions that occurred over 20 years 
ago. While it cannot be quantified at this time, the common 
perception is that, through targeted funding and the efforts 
of criminal justice practitioners across the country, the 
quality and completeness of rap sheets has improved so that 
they provide better assessments of recidivism patterns.
Among the 404,638 prisoners released in 30 states in 2005, 
31.8% were in prison for a drug offense, 29.8% for a property 
offense, 25.7% for a violent offense, and 12.7% for a public 
order offense (table 5). Nearly 9 in 10 (89.3%) of released 
prisoners were male. More than a third (36.9%) of these 
persons were under age 30 at release, and about a third 
(31.5%) were age 40 or older. The proportions of non-Hispanic 
black (40.1%) and non-Hispanic white (39.9%) prisoners were 
similar. An estimated 25.7% of the released prisoners had 4 
or fewer prior arrests, while 43.2% had 10 or more. Half of 
the released prisoners had 3 or more prior convictions.
*************************************
1 in 10 state prisoners had an 
out-of-state arrest within 5 years 
of release
*************************************

An estimated 24.7% of the released prisoners had a prior 
arrest in a state other than the one that released them 
(table 6). About 1 in 10 (10.9%) released prisoners were 
arrested at least once outside the state that released them 
during the 5-year follow-up period. These statistics show the 
limitations of recidivism studies that only have access to 
in-state criminal history information.

*************************************
3 in 4 state prisoners were arrested 
within 5 years of release
*************************************

Within 1 year after their release from state prison, 43.4% of 
prisoners had been arrested either in or outside of the state 
that released them. This percentage grew each year, 
increasing to 59.5% by the end of the second year, 67.8% by 
the end of the third year, and 76.6% by the end of the 5-year 
follow-up period.

Another way to view these recidivism statistics is to 
consider how quickly those who recidivated actually did so. 
More than a third (36.8%) of all released prisoners who were 
arrested within 5 years of release were arrested within the 
first 6 months, with more than half (56.7%) arrested by the 
end of the first year (not shown).

The longer released prisoners went without being arrested, 
the less likely they were to be arrested within the 5-year 
period. For example, compared to the arrest rate of 43.4% in 
the first year after release, 28.5% of persons not arrested 
in the first year were arrested for the first time in the 
second year following their release from prison (figure 2). 
Similarly, for those not arrested by the end of the second 
year, 20.5% were arrested by the end of the third year, with 
the arrest rate falling to 16.1% in the fourth year. Finally, 
13.3% of released prisoners who went 4 years without an 
arrest were arrested in the fifth year.

The 404,638 persons released in 2005 were arrested an 
estimated 1,173,000 times in the 5 years after release (table 
7). While some of them had a large number of arrests in the 
follow-up period (maximum of 81), most did not. Among all 
released prisoners, the average number of arrests in the 5-
year period was 2.9, while the median number of arrests was 
1.5. About 2 in 5 (42.3%) of all releasees were arrested no 
more than once in the 5-year period, and more than half 
(57.6%) had fewer than 3 arrests in the 5 years following 
their release. Despite this, among released prisoners who 
were arrested at least once during the 5-year follow-up 
period, three-quarters (75.4%) were arrested again during the 
5-year period (not shown). About a sixth (16.1%) of released 
prisoners were responsible for about half (48.4%) of the 
1,173,000 arrests of released prisoners that occurred in the 
5-year follow-up period.

*************************************
Prisoners released after serving time 
for a property offense were the most 
likely to be arrested
*************************************

Within 5 years of release, 82.1% of prisoners who had been 
committed for a property offense had been arrested for a new 
offense, followed by 76.9% of those committed for a drug 
offense (figure 3 and table 8). Offenders sentenced for a 
violent (71.3%) or public order offense (73.6%) were the 
least likely to be arrested after release.

This general pattern of recidivism was maintained across the 
5-year follow-up period. A year after release from prison, 
the recidivism rate of prisoners sentenced for a property 
offense (50.3 %) was higher than the rates for drug (42.3%), 
public order (40.1%), and violent (38.4%) offenders. Among 
violent offenders, the annual recidivism rates of prisoners 
sentenced for homicide or sexual assault were lower than 
those sentenced for assault or robbery across the 5-year 
period. Among property offenders, inmates committed for 
larceny or motor vehicle theft had higher annual recidivism 
rates than those committed for fraud or forgery across the 
5-year period.

Within the first 5 years of release from state prison in 
2005, an estimated 28.6% of inmates were arrested for a 
violent offense (table 9). Among all released inmates, an 
estimated 1.7% were arrested for rape or sexual assault, and 
23.0% were arrested for assault. During the 5-year follow-up 
period, the majority (58.0%) of released prisoners were 
arrested for a public order offense. About 1 in 4 (25.3%) 
released prisoners were arrested for a probation or parole 
violation. An estimated 39.9% were arrested for some other 
public order offense, including failure to appear and 
obstruction of justice, which in some jurisdictions may be 
the legal response to probation or parole violations. Other 
public order offenses include drunkenness, disorderly 
conduct, liquor law violation, or a family-related offense.
  
Compared to inmates incarcerated for a property (28.5%), drug 
(24.8%), or public order offense (29.2%), a higher percentage 
of inmates incarcerated for a violent offense were arrested 
for another violent crime (33.1%) during the 5-year period 
(table 10). A higher percentage of released property 
offenders were arrested for a property crime (54.0%) than 
violent, drug, or public order offenders. A higher percentage 
of released drug offenders were arrested for a drug crime 
(51.2%) than violent, property, or public order offenders.
While these statistics suggest that there was some 
specialization in the offending behaviors of released 
inmates, the recidivism patterns also show that released 
inmates were involved in a wide range of law-violating 
behaviors. 

During the 5-year period, inmates released for a drug offense 
were less likely than property and public order inmates to be 
arrested during the 5-year period for a violent offense. In 
addition, inmates released for a property offense were more 
likely than violent and public order inmates to be arrested 
for a drug offense at some point during the 5-year period.

*************************************
Inmate recidivism increased 
with criminal history
*************************************

In this study, an inmate’s prior criminal history was 
measured by the number of arrests found on their criminal 
history records prior to their date of release. A year after 
release from prison, about a quarter (26.4%) of released 
inmates with 4 or fewer arrests in their prior criminal 
record had been arrested, compared to over half (56.1%) of 
released inmates who had 10 or more prior arrests (figure 4 
and table 11).

While recidivism rates increased through the fifth year for 
both released inmates with 4 or fewer prior arrests and those 
with 10 or more prior arrests, both groups consistently 
differed about 30% by the end of the first year. This general 
pattern remained through the next 4 years. For example, 60.8% 
of released inmates with 4 or fewer arrests in their prior 
criminal history had been arrested by the end of the fifth 
year, compared to 86.5% of released inmates who had 10 or 
more prior arrests. This finding suggests that the effect of 
criminal history on recidivism is observable within a year 
after release and continues into the future.

The negative effect of criminal history on recidivism held 
across the inmate’s most serious incarceration offense 
category. Inmates incarcerated for a violent offense who had 
4 or fewer arrests in their prior criminal history were less 
likely to be arrested within 5 years (56.3%) than those with 
10 or more prior arrests (85.6%) (table 11). This disparity 
was also observed among violent offenders arrested within a 
year of release from prison, as 23.8% of inmates incarcerated 
for a violent offense were arrested within a year of release, 
compared to 55.4% of those with 10 or more prior arrests.

*************************************
Male inmates were arrested at higher 
rates than female inmates following 
release
*************************************

Within 3 years of release from prison, 69.0% of male and 
58.5% of female inmates had been arrested at least once 
(figure 5 and table 12). Five years after release from 
prison, more than three-quarters (77.6%) of males and two-
thirds (68.1%) of females had been arrested. At the end of 
the first year, the male recidivism rate (44.5%) was about 10 
percentage points higher than the female rate (34.4%), a 
difference that remained relatively stable over the following 
4 years.

Among all released prisoners, the average number of arrests 
in the 5-year period was 2.9 for males and 2.5 for females, 
while the median number of arrests was 1.6 for males and 1.0 
for females (table 13). Half (50.6%) of released females and 
about 41.3% of released males were arrested no more than once 
in the 5-year period, while 64.2% of females and 56.8% of 
males had 2 or fewer arrests over the same period.

The recidivism rates (as measured by arrests) for males were 
higher than those for females, regardless of the 
incarceration offense or the recidivism period. At the end of 
the 5-year follow-up period, the post-release arrest rate for 
both males and females was highest among those incarcerated 
for a property offense.

*************************************
Younger released inmates were arrested 
at higher rates than older inmates 
following release
*************************************

Three years after release, 75.9% of inmates who were age 24 
or younger at the time of their release had been arrested for 
a new offense, compared to 69.7% of those ages 25 to 39 and 
60.3% of those age 40 or older (figure 6 and table 14). These 
patterns were still evident by the end of the fifth year. At 
the end of the 5-year recidivism period, 84.1% of inmates 
released at age 24 or younger had been arrested for a new 
offense, compared to 78.6% of those ages 25 to 39 and 69.2% 
of those age 40 or older.

*************************************
By the end of the fifth year after 
release, black inmates had the highest 
recidivism rate among all racial 
or ethnic groups
*************************************

One year after release from prison, non-Hispanic black 
(45.8%) and Hispanic (46.3%) inmates had been arrested at 
similar rates. In comparison, non-Hispanic white inmates 
(39.7%) had lower recidivism rates within the first year of 
release than black and Hispanic inmates (figure 7 and table 
15). Over the next 4 years, the recidivism rate for Hispanics 
did not increase as much as that for blacks. By the end of 
the fifth year after release from prison, white (73.1%) and 
Hispanic (75.3%) offenders had lower recidivism rates than 
black offenders (80.8%).

From at least 6 months after release from prison through the 
end of the 5-year follow-up period, black offenders had 
higher rates of recidivism than white offenders. This pattern 
generally held, regardless of the type of offense for which 
the inmate was imprisoned. Three years after release, 55.6% 
of white inmates who were imprisoned for a violent crime had 
been arrested for a new offense, compared to 66.4% of black 
inmates. By the end of the fifth year after release, these 
proportions for inmates who were imprisoned for a violent 
crime increased to 65.1% for white and 76.9% for black 
inmates.

Recidivism rates across the 5-year follow-up period for black 
and Hispanic inmates differed by commitment offense. For 
example, the recidivism rates at the end of the first year 
for inmates committed for a violent or drug offense were 
similar for both groups. By the fifth year after release, the 
recidivism rates for Hispanics were lower than those for 
blacks committed for violent or drug crimes.
*******************************************************

******************************
Other measures of recidivism
******************************

An arrest is one of many possible measures of recidivism. In 
this study, four additional measures (i.e., adjudication, 
conviction, incarceration, and imprisonment) were prepared 
using criminal history records. These measures were based on 
prisoners released from the 29 states in the study that had 
the necessary data. A fifth measure-return to prison—was 
prepared using a combination of criminal history records and 
the records of state departments of corrections. This measure 
was based on prisoners released from 23 of the 30 states.

Because the various measures of recidivism set different 
criteria for labeling a person as a recidivist, the 
percentage of inmates classified as recidivists declined as 
the recidivism measurement progressed from arrest to 
adjudication to conviction to incarceration to imprisonment. 
Any use of these recidivism rates must take into account the 
quality and completeness of the data found in rap sheets. 
(See Methodology for more information.)

Adjudication-Classifies persons as a recidivist when an 
arrest resulted in the matter being sent deeper into the 
criminal justice system to be sanctioned by a court. An 
estimated 49.8% of inmates had an arrest within 3 years of 
release that resulted in the matter being referred to 
criminal court for adjudication, and 60.0% had an arrest 
within 5 years of release that resulted in an adjudication 
(figure 8 and table 16).

Conviction-Classifies persons as a recidivist if the court 
has determined the individual committed a new crime. An 
estimated 45.2% of inmates had an arrest within 3 years of 
release that resulted in a conviction in criminal court, and 
55.4% of inmates had an arrest within 5 years that resulted 
in a conviction.

Incarceration-Classifies persons as a recidivist when an 
arrest resulted in a prison or jail sentence. An estimated 
36.2% of inmates had an arrest within 3 years of release that 
resulted in a conviction with a disposition of a jail or 
prison sentence, compared to 44.9% within 5 years of release.

Imprisonment-Classifies persons as a recidivist when an 
arrest resulted in a prison sentence. Among inmates who had 
an arrest that resulted in a conviction with a disposition of 
a prison sentence, 22.0% were within 3 years of release, and 
28.2% were within 5 years of release.

Return to prison-Classifies persons as a recidivist when an 
arrest resulted in a conviction with a disposition of a 
prison sentence or when the offender was returned to prison 
without a new conviction because of a technical violation of 
his or her release, such as failing a drug test or missing an 
appointment with a parole officer. Within 3 years of release, 
49.7% of inmates either had an arrest that resulted in a 
conviction with a disposition of a prison sentence or were 
returned to prison without a new conviction because they 
violated a technical condition of their release, as did 55.1% 
of inmates within 5 years of release.

Returning to prison is probably the most common measure used 
in the field when studying the recidivism of released 
inmates. Among inmates in this study who returned to prison 1 
year after release in 2005, property crime offenders (36.4%) 
had the highest percentage of recidivism. The 1-year return-
to-prison percentages for violent (27.5%), drug (28.1%), and 
public order (27.7%) inmates were equal, and all were lower 
than that of property offenders. Five years after release 
from prison, the return-to-prison rate of inmates committed 
for a property offense (61.8%)  remained higher than the 
return-to-prison rates of inmates committed for a violent 
(50.6%), drug (53.3%), or public order (52.6%) offense.

*******************************************************

*************
Methodology
*************

Background
************

In 2008, the Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS) entered into 
a data sharing agreement with the FBI’s Criminal Justice 
Information Services (CJIS) Division and the International 
Justice and Public Safety Network (Nlets) to provide BJS 
access to criminal history records (i.e., rap sheets) through 
the FBI’s Interstate Identification Index (III). A data 
security agreement was executed between BJS, the FBI, and 
Nlets to define the operational and technical practices used 
to protect the confidentiality and integrity of the criminal 
history data during exchange, processing, and storage.

The FBI’s III is an automated pointer system that allows 
authorized agencies to determine whether any state repository 
has criminal history records on an individual. Nlets is a 
computer-based network that is responsible for the interstate 
transmissions of federal and state criminal history records. 
It allows users to query III and send requests to states 
holding criminal history records on an individual. The FBI 
also maintains criminal history records that they are solely 
responsible for disseminating. The identification bureaus 
that operate the central repositories in each state respond 
automatically to requests over the Nlets network. Responses 
received via Nlets represent an individual’s national 
criminal history record.

Under the Criminal History Records Information Sharing 
(CHRIS) Project (award 2008-BJ-CX-K040), Nlets developed an 
automated collection system for BJS to retrieve national 
criminal history records from the FBI and state repositories 
on large samples of study subjects. Nlets produced software 
to parse the fields from individual criminal history records 
into a relational database. The database consists of state- 
and federal-specific numeric codes and text descriptions 
(e.g., criminal statutes and case outcome information) in a 
uniform record layout. In September 2010, BJS and Nlets 
conducted a pilot test of the data collection system and rap 
sheet parsing programs to ensure the software could handle 
the wide variations in the nation’s criminal history records.

The Conversion of Criminal History Records into Research 
Databases (CCHRRD) Project (grant 2009-BJ-CX-K058) funded 
NORC at the University of Chicago to develop software that 
standardizes the content of the relational database produced 
by Nlets into a uniform coding structure that supports 
national-level recidivism research. The 2005 prisoner 
recidivism study was the first project to use the systems 
developed under the CHRIS and CCHRRD projects. The electronic 
records accessed by BJS through III for this study are the 
same records used by police officers to determine the current 
criminal justice status (e.g., on probation, parole, or bail) 
of a suspect; by judges to make pretrial and sentencing 
decisions; and by corrections officials to determine inmate 
classifications, parole releases, and work furloughs.

Sampling
**********

States were selected for the study based on their ability to 
provide prisoner records and the FBI or state identification 
numbers on persons released from correctional facilities in 
2005. The fingerprint-based identification numbers were 
needed to obtain criminal history records on the released 
prisoners. The prisoner records—obtained from the state 
departments of corrections through BJS’s National Corrections 
Reporting Program (NCRP)—also included each inmate’s date of 
birth, sex, race, Hispanic origin, confinement offenses, 
sentence length, type of prison admission and release, and 
date of release. The 30 states that supplied BJS with the 
required data included Alaska, Arkansas, California, 
Colorado, Florida, Georgia, Hawaii, Iowa, Louisiana, 
Maryland, Michigan, Minnesota, Missouri, Nebraska, Nevada, 
New Jersey, New York, North Carolina, North Dakota, Ohio, 
Oklahoma, Oregon, Pennsylvania, South Carolina, South Dakota, 
Texas, Utah, Virginia, Washington, and West Virginia. Among 
each of these states, the percentage of prisoner records with 
a state or FBI identification number ranged from 93% to 100%, 
and averaged 99% (not shown).

Of the 544,728 inmates released in the study’s 30 states in 
2005, 412,731 met BJS’s selection criteria for this study 
(table 17). The study excluded releases that were transfers 
to the custody of another authority, releases due to death, 
releases on bond, releases to seek or participate in an 
appeal of a case, and escapes from prison or absent without 
official leave (AWOL). Inmates whose sentence was less than 1 
year were also excluded. The first release during 2005 was 
selected for persons released multiple times during the year.

BJS drew a systematic random sample of eligible cases from 
each of the 30 states. Sex was used to stratify the sampling 
frame within each state. The eligible cases were then 
separated into 16 categories based on the most serious prison 
commitment offense. The sampling design included all 
individuals who were in prison for homicide. Before selecting 
the sample, prison records of persons committed for a 
nonhomicide offense were grouped by sex, and then sorted by 
the county in which the sentence was imposed, race, Hispanic 
origin, age, and commitment offense. The sampling rate for 
female prisoners was doubled to improve the precision of 
their recidivism estimates. A total of 70,878 released 
prisoners were randomly selected to represent the 412,731 
released in 2005 in the 30 states. Each prisoner in the 
sample was assigned a weight based on the probability of 
selection within the state.

Collecting and processing criminal 
records for recidivism research
**********************************

BJS received approval from the FBI’s Institutional Review 
Board to access criminal history records through III for this 
study. This study employed a 5-year follow-up period, two 
years longer than found in previous BJS recidivism studies.  
In June 2011, BJS sent the state and FBI identification 
numbers supplied by the departments of corrections to III via 
Nlets to collect the criminal history records on the 70,878 
former prisoners. These criminal history records contain 
information from the state that released them, as well as all 
other states in the U.S., and records covering events prior 
to and following their release in 2005. Over a 3-week period, 
Nlets electronically collated the responses received from the 
FBI and state criminal history repositories into a relational 
database.

The criminal history information on the sampled prisoners 
from 30 states included over 800,000 pre- and post-release 
arrests and dispositions from more than 25,000 criminal 
justice agencies in all 50 states and the District of 
Columbia. BJS conducted a series of data quality checks on 
the criminal history records to assess the accuracy and 
completeness of the information, beginning with an 
examination of the response messages and the identification 
numbers that failed to match a record in III. In August 2011, 
BJS had Nlets submit a separate set of record requests 
directly to the state repositories for cases in which the 
original request in June did not produce criminal history 
information. These secondary requests provided additional 
criminal history records that were not available through III.

To ensure that the correct records were received on the 
released prisoners using their fingerprint-based 
identification numbers, BJS compared other individual 
identifiers in the NCRP data to those reported in the 
criminal history records. A released prisoner’s date of birth 
in the NCRP data exactly matched his or her birthdate in the 
criminal history records 98% of the time. Nearly 100% of the 
NCRP and criminal history records matched on sex and race at 
the person level.

This report relied on a combination of arrest charge, court 
disposition, incarceration sentence, and custody information 
to measure recidivism. Juvenile offenses were rarely included 
in the criminal history records unless the offender was 
charged or tried in court as an adult. BJS reviewed the 
composition of information reported in the criminal history 
records for distributional differences and inconsistencies in 
reporting practices and observed some variations across 
states. During the data processing and analysis phases, steps 
were taken to standardize the information used to measure 
recidivism and to minimize the impact these variations had on 
the overall recidivism estimates.

For example, administrative (e.g., a criminal registration or 
the issuance of a warrant) and procedural (e.g., transferring 
a suspect to another jurisdiction) records embedded in the 
arrest data that did not refer to an actual arrest were 
identified and removed from the study. Traffic violations 
(with the exception of vehicular manslaughter, driving while 
intoxicated, and hit-and-run) were also excluded from the 
study because the coverage of these events in the criminal 
history records varied widely by state.

The criminal history records from some states recorded 
sentence modifications that occurred after the original court 
disposition and sentence while records from other states did 
not. To ensure consistent counting rules were employed when 
measuring recidivism across states, the initial court 
disposition was captured for an arrest charge when subsequent 
sentence modifications were also reported within the same 
arrest cycle. For instance, if a court adjudication was 
originally deferred and then later modified to a conviction, 
the deferred adjudication was coded as the disposition for 
that arrest charge. 

To assess the completeness of the adjudication and 
incarceration information reported in the criminal history 
records, BJS attempted to identify an incarceration sentence 
(within the state where the release occurred) in each 
prisoner’s criminal history prior to the date of his or her 
most recent prison admission before being released in 2005 
according to the NCRP. Overall, 93% of the cases had a 
criminal history record that met these criteria.

Most criminal history records reported detailed information 
on the offender’s adjudicated guilt or innocence and, if 
convicted, on the sentence imposed (e.g., prison, jail, or 
probation). BJS examined the disposition rates and found the 
proportion of arrests with a court disposition varied across 
states. This could be due to natural variations in state 
practices. However, the variations may be caused by either a 
lack of reporting court dispositions to the state repository 
or the inability of the repository to connect a reported 
court disposition to a specific arrest. BJS also found in 
some states that disposition information for certain arrests, 
such as arrests for failure to appear or contempt of court, 
was sometimes reported back on the earlier arrest for the 
underlying crime.

One aspect of recidivism measured in this study was a return 
to prison for a technical parole or other community 
supervision violation (e.g., failing a drug test or missing 
an appointment with a probation officer) or a sentence for a 
new crime. BJS found that the availability of the information 
on technical violations varied in the criminal history 
records by state likely because the return did not involve a 
new court sentence. Given the inconsistent reporting of such 
custody information in the criminal history records, the 
annual prison admission records from the NCRP were used to 
supplement the criminal history data to capture returns to 
prison with or without a sentence for a new crime. Analyzing 
the NCRP data, BJS used a set of individual identifiers 
(e.g., state identification number, inmate identification 
number, date of birth, sex, and race) to locate information 
on new prison admissions for a study subject during the 5 
years following release in 2005. Using this information in 
combination with incarcerations recorded on the rap sheets, 
BJS identified released prisoners who returned to prison 
within the 5-year recidivism window.

Adjustment of sample weights
******************************

Deaths
********

BJS determined that 1,595 of the 70,878 sampled prisoners 
died during the 5-year follow-up period. Initial 
identification of sampled prisoners who died within the 5-
year follow-up period was done using death information 
contained on the rap sheets. Additional deaths were 
identified by probabilistically linking sampled prisoners to 
individuals identified as dead in the Social Security 
Administration’s (SSA) public Death Master File (DMF).
 
Specifically, linkplus, a probabilistic record linkage 
program developed by CDC, was used to create and score 
potential matches between the released prisoners’ records and 
the public DMF, using common information found on each file 
(i.e., social security number (SSN), first name, last name, 
and date of birth (DOB))1. For persons with multiple SSNs, 
names and DOBs, all possible combinations (over 3.5 million 
unique permutations) were tested for matches.  Based on the 
framework and decision rules as proposed by Fellegi and 
Sunter (1969), the software computed a probabilistic record 
linkage score for each matched record, with the score 
representing the sum of the agreement and disagreement 
weights for each matching variable; the higher the score, the 
greater the likelihood that the match made is a true match.2 
In order to differentiate true matches from false matches, 
the scores of the linked records were manually evaluated to 
ascertain the appropriate upper and lower bound cutoff 
scores. During this review, it was determined that records 
with a score of 20.0 or higher were exact matches of name, 
SSN, and DOB, and scores of less than 10.9 indicated none of 
the personally identifiable information matched. 
 
Accordingly, these cutoffs were used as the upper and lower 
cutoff scores to automatically designate true matches and 
nonmatches.  All remaining pairs that fell between the upper 
and lower cutoff scores were manually reviewed by two 
independent reviewers and independently categorized and all 
discrepancies where the reviewers did not agree (less than 
1%) were jointly classified.

These 1,595 prisoners who died during the follow-up period 
were excluded from the study, along with four additional 
cases that were later determined to be invalid release 
records. When weighted, these 1,599 cases represented 8,092 
prison releases. Therefore, the study’s sample of 69,279 
eligible prisoners is statistically representative of the 
404,638 prisoners released in 2005 who were identified as 
living for at least 5 years after their dates of release.

Of importance, the number of released prisoners who were 
identified as dead in the DMF likely represents an undercount 
of the actual number of deaths within the sample. This is 
due, in part, to the limitations of the public DMF. 
Specifically, due to state disclosure laws, the public DMF 
does not include information on certain protected state death 
records (defined as records received via SSA’s contracts with 
the states). This change, which occurred in November 2011, 
resulted in SSA removing over 4.2 million state-reported 
death records from the public DMF and adding over 1 million 
fewer records annually to the current public DMF thereafter. 
As a result, the public DMF contains an undercount of annual 
deaths.

It is unknown precisely how extensively the public DMF 
undercounts the annual number of deaths. Preliminary analyses 
comparing the number of deaths in the public DMF to those 
reported via the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention’s 
(CDC) mortality counts suggest that in 2005 the public DMF 
undercounted the overall number of deaths in the United 
States by around 10%. The undercount has increased each year 
since 2005. As of 2010 the public DMF contained around half 
(45%) of the deaths reported by the CDC (not shown). 
Furthermore, the coverage of the public DMF differs by 
decedent age, with younger decedents being less likely to 
appear in the public file. Because of this, it is likely that 
the death count of prisoners released in 2005 is an 
undercount of the actual number of deaths within the sample.

Missing criminal history records
**********************************

Among the 69,279 eligible prisoners sampled from 30 states, 
BJS did not obtain criminal history records on 406 subjects 
because the departments of corrections were unable to provide 
their FBI or state identification number. An additional 276 
prisoners had an identification number, but no criminal 
history record linked to this number was found in the FBI or 
state record repositories. To account for the missing data, 
the original sample weights for the cases with complete 
criminal history information required adjustment. The sample 
weights for the 682 cases without a criminal history record 
were equally distributed among the weights of the 68,597 
cases with the same commitment offense, demographic 
characteristics (i.e., sex, race, Hispanic origin, and age 
category), and state where released. The adjusted weights for 
the final sample of 68,597 persons were used to produce 
recidivism estimates on the 404,638 persons released from 
prison in the 30 states in 2005.

Conducting tests of statistical 
significance
**********************************

Because this study was based on a sample and not a complete 
enumeration, the estimates in this report are subject to 
sampling error (i.e., a discrepancy between an estimate and a 
population parameter based on chance). One measure of the 
sampling error associated with an estimate is the standard 
error. The standard error can vary from one estimate to the 
next. In general, for a given metric, an estimate with a 
smaller standard error provides a more reliable approximation 
of the true value than an estimate with a larger standard 
error. Estimates with relatively large standard errors are 
associated with less precision and reliability and should be 
interpreted with caution. BJS conducted tests to determine 
whether differences in estimated numbers and percentages were 
statistically significant once sampling error was taken into 
account.

All differences discussed in this report are statistically 
significant at or above the 95% confidence interval. Standard 
errors were generated using SUDAAN, a statistical software 
package that estimates sampling error from complex sample 
surveys. Standard errors for each table are available at the 
end of the report.

Computing population-adjusted 
estimates of recidivism for the 
1994 and 2005 studies
**********************************

To examine how the recidivism rates from this study compared 
with those found in the previous one that measured the 
recidivism of prisoners released in 1994, BJS limited the 
comparison to the post-release arrest rates among inmates 
released from state prisons in the 12 states that were in 
both studies (California, Florida, Maryland, Michigan, 
Minnesota, New Jersey, New York, North Carolina, Ohio, 
Oregon, Texas, and Virginia). To control for the 
compositional differences in the types of prisoners released 
in these states during 1994 and 2005, RTI International (RTI) 
assisted BJS with standardizing the distribution of the 2005 
prison release cohort to the distribution of the 1994 prison 
release cohort based on the following categorical variables.

* Sex (male or female)

* Age at release (24 or younger, 25 to 29, 30 to 34, 35 to 
39, or 40 or older)

* Race/Hispanic origin (non-Hispanic white, non-Hispanic 
black, Hispanic, or other race)

* Most serious prison commitment offense (violent, property, 
drug, or public order).

RTI used SUDAAN software to generate the standardized 
estimates and determine whether any differences between the 
estimates for 1994 and 2005 cohorts were statistically 
significant. The following procedures were used to complete 
the analysis.

1.Missing data on the demographic characteristics and 
commitment offenses of the inmates were imputed using a 
stochastic imputation approach, which determined the 
cumulative distribution function (CDF) for the 
characteristic being imputed based on inmates with a 
known value for the characteristic. Inmates with a 
missing value were randomly assigned a value based on 
the CDF. For age at release, the CDF was conditioned on 
the sex of the inmate. For all other characteristics, 
the CDF was conditioned on the sex and age at release 
of the inmate. Data on the sex of inmates released in 
1994 were known for 100% of cases, race and Hispanic 
origin for 99.9%, age at release for nearly 100%, and 
commitment offense for 99.9%. Data on sex of inmates 
released in 2005 were known for 100% of cases, race and 
Hispanic origin for 99.8%, age at release for 100%, and 
commitment offense for 99.8%.

2.A joint probability distribution was produced of 
inmates in the 1994 cohort based on sex, age at 
release, race/Hispanic origin, and most serious 
commitment offense. This distribution documented the 
proportion of the 1994 cohort that fell into each of 
160 specific inmate subpopulations defined by crossing 
five categories of age, two categories of sex, four 
categories of race/Hispanic origin, and four categories 
of commitment offenses.

3.In order to allow for simultaneous estimation and 
comparisons, a stacked file was created containing the 
records on both the 1994 cohort and the 2005 cohort. A 
new variable (called GROUP) was created to distinguish 
in which cohort the inmate resided (1=1994 and 2=2005).

4.The PROC DESCRIPT procedure in SUDAAN was used to 
generate the standardized point estimates. This 
approach standardized the estimates for the 2005 cohort 
to the probability distribution of the 1994 cohort 
obtained in step 2.

      a.The standard errors for the standardized estimates 
         were calculated in SUDAAN with a “without 
         replacement” sample design (DESIGN = WOR). 

      b.The sampling weights for the 1994 and 2005 studies 
        were assigned in the WEIGHT statement.

      c.A single variable that accounted for the unique 
        sample designs of the 1994 and 2005 studies was 
       specified in the NEST statement. 

      d.In the STDVAR statement, the four imputed inmate 
        characteristic variables were listed in the order 
        the probability distribution was created--sex, age, 
        race/Hispanic origin, and commitment offense. These 
       variables were also listed in the CLASS statement.

      e.The joint probability distribution of the 1994 
        cohort was listed in the STDWGT statement.

      f.In the TABLE statement, the GROUP variable was 
        crossed with each of the nonimputed inmate 
        characteristics. In other words, an index combining 
        the cohort identifier and each of the inmate 
        characteristics was specified. This generated a 
        separate marginal recidivism estimate for each set 
        of inmate characteristics by cohort year. 

      g.The recidivism outcome variables of interest (i.e., 
        arrested for any type of crime and arrested for a 
        violent crime) were listed in the VAR statement

      h.The mean (MEAN) and standard error of the mean 
        (SEMEAN) were calculated, imported into a table, and 
        then converted into percentages by multiplying the 
        proportions by 100.

5.The PROC DESCRIPT procedure was used to test the 
statistical differences for each inmate characteristic 
between the 1994 cohort and the standardized 2005 
cohort. Using the PROC DESCRIPT procedure to conduct 
the test of differences allowed any correlation between 
the two cohort groups to be accounted for in the 
standard error of the test statistic.

       a.The same DESIGN, WEIGHT, NEST, STDVAR, and STDWGT 
         statements specified in step 4 were used to conduct the 
         statistical significance tests. 

       b.The inmate characteristics were listed in the TABLE 
         statement.

       c.The same VAR statement was used from step 4.

       d.The two levels in the GROUP variable were compared 
         using the DIFFVAR statement.

       e.In the CATLEVEL statement, the numeric code “1” was 
         indicated to get the percentages of inmates who had a 
         post-release arrest within 3 years.

       f.The difference in the percentages (PERCENT), the 
         standard error of the percentages (SEPERCENT), the test 
         for the statistical difference (T_PCT), and the p-value 
         for the test statistic (P_PCT) were imported into a 
         table.

6.The p-value was used to determine which comparisons 
were significant at the 95% confidence interval, and 
those comparisons were assigned a symbol of “**.”

Recidivism measures
*********************

This study measured six types of events to describe the 
recidivism of persons released from prison in 2005:

* Arrest: An arrest within 5 years of exiting prison in 2005. 
Information presented on the number of arrests is based on 
unique arrest dates, not individual charges.

* Adjudication: An arrest within 5 years of exiting prison in 
2005 that resulted in a subsequent court adjudication or 
disposition (e.g., convictions, dismissals, acquittals, or 
deferred adjudications). Information on the number of 
adjudications is based on each unique arrest date that led to 
an adjudication, not the date of adjudication.

* Conviction: An arrest within 5 years of exiting prison in 
2005 that resulted in a subsequent court conviction. 
Information on the number of convictions is based on each 
unique arrest date that led to a conviction, not the date of 
conviction.

* Incarceration: An arrest within 5 years of exiting prison 
in 2005 that resulted in a prison or jail sentence. 
Information on the number of incarcerations is based on each 
unique arrest date that led to a prison or jail sentence, not 
the date that the sentence was imposed.

* Imprisonment: An arrest within 5 years of exiting prison in 
2005 that resulted in a prison sentence. When the type of 
facility (e.g., prison or jail) where an incarceration 
sentence was to be served was not reported in the criminal 
history records, a sentence of a year or more was defined as 
imprisonment. Information on the number of prison sentences 
is based on each unique arrest date that led to a prison 
sentence, not the date that the sentence was imposed.

The arrests that occurred within the 5-year follow-up period 
were tracked for an additional 6 months to determine whether 
the case outcomes led to an adjudication, conviction, 
incarceration, or imprisonment. These four measures were 
based on prisoners released in 29 of the study’s 30 states. 
Louisiana prisoners were excluded because the disposition and 
sentencing information from that state was generally not 
linked to the associated arrest.

* Return to prison: An arrest or a technical violation of a 
condition of release within 5 years of exiting prison in 2005 
that resulted in a return to prison. This recidivism measure 
incorporates the criminal history records from the FBI and 
state repositories and the prisoner records obtained from the 
state departments of corrections through the NCRP. The 
criminal history records provided information on arrests that 
resulted in incarceration during the 5-year follow-up period. 
BJS used the NCRP files from 2005 through 2010 to supplement 
the criminal history records with information on the released 
prisoners who returned to prison for a technical violation 
that did not involve a sentence for a new crime.

Prisoners released from Maryland, Nebraska, Nevada, Ohio, 
Pennsylvania, and Virginia were excluded from the return-to-
prison analysis because the individual identifiers or 
complete prison admission data needed to locate returns to 
prison during the entire 2005 through 2010 observation window 
were not available. Louisiana prisoners were also excluded 
from the return-to-prison analysis because the sentencing 
information in the criminal history records from this state 
was generally not linked to the associated arrest.

Offense definitions
********************

Violent offenses include homicide, rape or sexual assault, 
robbery, assault, and other miscellaneous or unspecified 
violent offenses.

Homicide includes murder, nonnegligent manslaughter, 
negligent manslaughter, and unspecified homicide offenses.

* Murder is (1) intentionally causing the death of another 
person without extreme provocation or legal justification, or 
(2) causing the death of another while committing or 
attempting to commit another crime.

* Nonnegligent (or voluntary) manslaughter is intentionally 
and without legal justification causing the death of another 
when acting under extreme provocation. 

* Negligent (or involuntary) manslaughter is causing the 
death of another person through recklessness or gross 
negligence, without intending to cause death. Negligent 
manslaughter also includes vehicular manslaughter, but 
excludes vehicular murder (intentionally killing someone with 
a motor vehicle), which is classified as murder.

Rape or sexual assault includes (1) forcible intercourse 
(vaginal, anal, or oral) with a female or male, (2) forcible 
sodomy or penetration with a foreign object (sometimes called 
“deviate sexual assault”), (3) forcible or violent sexual 
acts not involving intercourse with an adult or minor, (4) 
nonforcible sexual acts with a minor (such as statutory rape 
or incest with a minor), and (5) nonforcible sexual acts with 
someone unable to give legal or factual consent because of 
mental or physical defect or intoxication.

Robbery is the unlawful taking of property that is in the 
immediate possession of another, by force or the threat of 
force. Includes forcible purse snatching, but excludes 
nonforcible purse snatching.

Assault includes aggravated, simple and unspecified assault. 
Aggravated assault includes (1) intentionally and without 
legal justification causing serious bodily injury, with or 
without a deadly weapon, or (2) using a deadly or dangerous 
weapon to threaten, attempt, or cause bodily injury, 
regardless of the degree of injury, if any. The category also 
includes attempted murder, aggravated battery, felonious 
assault, and assault with a deadly weapon. Simple assault 
includes intentionally and without legal justification 
causing less than serious bodily injury without a deadly or 
dangerous weapon, or attempting or threatening bodily injury 
without a dangerous or deadly weapon.

Other violent offenses contain a range of crimes, including 
intimidation, illegal abortion, extortion, cruelty towards a 
child or wife, kidnapping, hit-and-run with bodily injury, 
and miscellaneous or unspecified crimes against the person.

Property offenses include burglary, fraud/forgery, larceny, 
motor vehicle theft, and other miscellaneous or unspecified 
property offenses.

* Burglary is the unlawful entry of a fixed structure used 
for regular residence, industry, or business, with or without 
the use of force, to commit a felony or theft.

* Larceny is the unlawful taking of property other than a 
motor vehicle from the possession of another, by stealth, 
without force or deceit. Includes pocket picking, nonforcible 
purse snatching, shoplifting, and thefts from motor vehicles. 
Excludes receiving or reselling stolen property or both, and 
thefts through fraud or deceit.

* Motor vehicle theft is the unlawful taking of a self-
propelled road vehicle owned by another. Includes the theft 
of automobiles, trucks, and motorcycles, but not the theft of 
boats, aircraft, or farm equipment (classified as larceny). 
Also includes receiving, possessing, stripping, transporting, 
and reselling stolen vehicles, and unauthorized use of a 
vehicle (joyriding).

* Fraud/forgery includes using deceit or intentional 
misrepresentation to unlawfully deprive persons of his or her 
property or legal rights. It also includes offenses such as 
embezzlement, check fraud, confidence game, counterfeiting, 
and credit card fraud.

* Other property offenses include arson, stolen property 
offenses, possession of burglary tools, damage to property, 
trespassing, and miscellaneous or unspecified property 
crimes.

Drug offenses include possession, trafficking, and other 
miscellaneous or unspecified drug offenses.

* Drug possession includes possession of an illegal drug, but 
excludes possession with intent to sell. It also includes 
offenses involving drug paraphernalia and forged or 
unauthorized prescriptions.

* Drug trafficking includes manufacturing, distributing, 
selling, smuggling, and possession with intent to sell.
Other drug offenses include offenses involving drug 
paraphernalia, forged or unauthorized prescriptions, and 
other miscellaneous or unspecified drug offenses.

Public order offenses include weapons offenses, driving under 
the influence, and other miscellaneous or unspecified 
offenses.

* Weapons offenses include the unlawful sale, distribution, 
manufacture, alteration, transportation, possession, or use 
of a deadly or dangerous weapon or accessory.

* Driving under the influence (DUI) is driving under the 
influence of drugs or alcohol and driving while intoxicated.

* Other public order offenses are those that violate the 
peace or order of the community or threaten the public health 
or safety through unacceptable conduct, interference with 
governmental authority, or the violation of civil rights or 
liberties. The category also includes probation or parole 
violation, escape, obstruction of justice, court offenses, 
nonviolent sex offenses, commercialized vice, family 
offenses, liquor law violations, bribery, invasion of 
privacy, disorderly conduct, contributing to the delinquency 
of a minor, and other miscellaneous or unspecified offenses.

******************************************************
The Bureau of Justice Statistics, located in the Office of 
Justice Programs, U.S. Department of Justice, collects, 
analyzes, and disseminates statistical information on crime, 
criminal offenders, victims of crime, and the operation of 
justice systems at all levels of government. William J. Sabol 
is acting director.

This report was written by Matthew R. Durose, Alexia D. 
Cooper, Ph.D., and Howard N. Snyder, Ph.D. Alexia Cooper, 
Ph.D., and Andrew Tiedt, Ph.D., verified the report.

The International Justice and Public Safety Network (Nlets) 
collected the criminal history records for this study on 
behalf of BJS. Pragmatica, LLC and Information Sharing, LLC 
assisted Nlets with the data collection activities. NORC at 
the University of Chicago assisted BJS with selecting the 
sample and processing the criminal history data. The Justice 
Research and Statistics Association assisted NORC with 
compiling documentation from the states on their criminal 
history records. Joseph Mulako-Wangota, BJS IT Specialist, 
assisted with processing and analyzing the criminal history 
data. Avinash Bhati, BJS Visiting Fellow, assisted with 
processing the NCRP records for the return-to-prison 
analysis. Marcus Berzofsky, of RTI, assisted with generating 
the population-adjusted estimates that were used to compare 
the recidivism rates from the 1994 and 2005 studies.

Morgan Young and Jill Thomas edited the report. Barbara Quinn 
and Tina Dorsey produced the report.

April 2014, NCJ 244205
******************************************************

**************************************************
Office of Justice Programs
Innovation * Partnerships * Safer Neighborhoods
www.ojp.usdoj.gov
**************************************************

**********************
3/27/2013/JER/3:30pm
**********************

