U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Programs
Bureau of Justice Statistics

------------------------------------------------------

This file is text only without graphics and many of 
the tables. A Zip archive of the tables in this report 
in spreadsheet format (.csv) and the full report 
including tables and graphics in .pdf format are 
available on BJS website 
at https://www.bjs.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbdetail&iid=6046

This report is one in a series. More recent editions 
may be available. To view a list of all reports in the 
series go to https://www.bjs.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbse&sid=22

------------------------------------------------------

*******************
Special Report
*******************

**********************************************
Repeat Violent Victimization, 2005-14
**********************************************

******************************************************
Barbara A. Oudekerk, Ph.D., and Jennifer L. Truman, 
Ph.D., BJS Statisticians
******************************************************

During the 10-year aggregate period 2005-14, an average of 
3,249,900 persons age 12 or older experienced one or more 
nonfatal violent victimizations (rape or sexual assault, 
robbery, aggravated assault, and simple assault) during the 
year.*** Footnote 1 For offense definitions, see Criminal 
Victimization, 2015 (NCJ 250180, BJS web, October 2016) and 
Terms and Definitions: Victims (BJS web).*** The majority (81%) 
of victims experienced a single violent victimization during 
the year (figure 1).***Footnote 2 Unless otherwise noted, 
findings in this report are significant at the 95% confidence 
level.*** The remaining 19% experienced repeat violent 
victimization, defined as experiencing two or more violent 
victimizations during the year. More violent crime victims 
experienced two to five violent victimizations (14%) than six 
or more violent victimizations (5%).

This report uses 1993 to 2014 data from the National Crime 
Victimization Survey (NCVS) to examine annual prevalence rates 
of nonfatal violent crime for persons age 12 or older who 
experienced a single or repeat (two or more) violent 
victimization. The majority of this report presents aggregate 
estimates for the 10-year period from 2005 to 2014 to describe 
the characteristics of repeat violent crime victims and the 
types of violent crimes they experienced during the year. 
Aggregating years increases the reliability and stability of 
estimates.

*************************************************************
***********
HIGHLIGHTS
**********

* The total nonfatal violent crime prevalence rate decreased 
62% from 1993 to 2014, from 29.3 violent crime victims per 
1,000 persons age 12 or older to 11.1 per 1,000.

* In 2014, the prevalence of persons who experienced a single 
violent victimization (8.9 per 1,000) was 4.2 times higher than 
the rate of repeat violent victimization (2.1 per 1,000).

* In 2014, the 5% of victims who experienced six or more 
violent victimizations accounted for more than a quarter (27%) 
of total violent victimizations that year.

* During 2005-14, about 19% of violent crime victims 
experienced two or more violent victimizations per year.

* During 2005-14, a greater percentage of intimate partner 
violence victims (33%) experienced repeat violent crime than 
victims of violence by other types of offenders.

* During 2005-14, repeat violent crime victims experienced the 
majority of their victimizations by the same type of offender.

* A greater percentage of rape or sexual assault victims (31%) 
experienced repeat violent crime during the year than victims 
of other crime types during 2005-14.

* Among repeat violent crime victims who experienced at least 
one serious crime, most of the crimes committed against them 
were serious crimes.
************************************************************

********************************************
Prevalence of repeat violent victimization 
decreased 62% from 1993 to 2014
********************************************

From 1993 to 2014, the total nonfatal violent crime prevalence 
rate decreased 62%, from 29.3 violent crime victims per 1,000 
persons age 12 or older in 1993 to 11.1 per 1,000 in 2014 
(figure 2). The prevalence of victims who experienced a single 
violent victimization decreased 60%, from 22.4 victims per 
1,000 in 1993 to 8.9 per 1,000 in 2014. Repeat violent 
victimization prevalence rates decreased 69%, from 6.9 per 
1,000 in 1993 to 2.1 per 1,000 in 2014.

From 2005 to 2014, total violent crime prevalence rates 
decreased 19%. This decrease was primarily driven by a 25% 
decline in the prevalence of victims who experienced a single 
violent victimization, from 11.8 victims per 1,000 persons age 
12 or older in 2005 to 8.9 per 1,000 in 2014. The prevalence 
rate of repeat violent victimization did not change 
significantly from 2005 (1.9 victims per 1,000) to 2014 (2.1 
per 1,000).

For each year from 1993 to 2014, the majority of violent crime 
victims experienced a single violent victimization. In 1993, 
the prevalence of persons who experienced a single violent 
victimization (22.4 victims per 1,000 persons age 12 or older) 
was 3.3 times higher than the rate of repeat violence (6.9 per 
1,000). In 2014, the rate of single violent victimization (8.9 
per 1,000) was 4.2 times higher than the rate of repeat violent 
victimization (2.1 per 1,000).

Prevalence rates for total, single, and repeat serious violent 
crime (rape or sexual assault, robbery, and aggravated assault) 
decreased from 1993 to 2014 (figure 3). In 1993, the serious 
violent crime prevalence rate was 12.6 victims per 1,000 
persons age 12 or older, compared to 4.6 per 1,000 in 2014. The 
prevalence of victims who experienced a single serious violent 
victimization during the year declined 62%, from 10.6 victims 
per 1,000 in 1993 to 4.1 per 1,000 in 2014. Similarly, the rate 
of persons who experienced two or more serious violent 
victimizations declined 71%, from 2.0 per 1,000 in 1993 to 0.6 
per 1,000 in 2014. From 2005 to 2014, there were no 
statistically significant changes in single or repeat serious 
violence prevalence rates.

************************************************************
******************************************
Calculating prevalence rates for single 
and repeat violent victimization
*******************************************

Prevalence rates measure the number of unique persons in a 
population who experienced at least one victimization during a 
specified period. Prevalence rates are estimated by dividing 
the number of victims in a specified population by the total 
number of persons in that population. Rates are multiplied by 
1,000 to represent the number of victims per 1,000 persons in 
the population, or by 100 to represent the percentage of the 
population that experienced at least one victimization during 
the specified time (T).

Prevalence rate per 1,000 personsT= (Number of victims in a 
specified populationT) divided by 
(Number of persons in the specified populationT) × 1,000


Percent of persons victimizedT = (Number of victims in a
specified populationT) divided by (Number of persons in
the specified populationT) X 100

This report presents data on the prevalence of violent 
victimization during the calendar year, including whether 
victims experienced a single or repeated violent victimization. 
Persons were repeat violent crime victims if they experienced 
two or more violent victimizations during the year, including 
victims who experienced high-frequency repeat victimization 
(six or more victimizations that were too similar in nature for 
the incidents to be distinguished from one another). 

For further information on calculating prevalence rates from 
the National Crime Victimization Survey data, see Measuring the 
Prevalence of Crime with the National Crime Victimization 
Survey (NCJ 241656, BJS web, September 2013).
************************************************************

************************************************************

**********************************************
Time between first and second victimizations 
among repeat violent crime victims
**********************************************

During 2005-14, the majority (96%) of repeat violent crime 
victims experienced their second victimization less than 6 
months after their first victimization (table 1). More than 
half (56%) of repeat violent crime victims experienced their 
first two victimizations less than 1 month apart or as a high-
frequency repeat victimization (i.e., series victimization). 
Series victimizations are similar in type but occur with such 
frequency that a victim is unable to recall each individual 
event or describe each event in detail. About 4% of repeat 
violent crime victims experienced their second violent 
victimization 6 months or more after their first violent 
victimization.

**********************************************
In 2014, the 5% of victims who experienced 
six or more violent victimizations accounted 
for 27% of violent victimizations
**********************************************

Repeat violent crime victims accounted for fewer than a quarter 
of the total violent crime victims each year from 1993 to 2014 
(figure 4). The multiple victimizations that repeat victims 
experienced accounted for a disproportionate percentage of the 
total number of violent victimizations that occurred each year. 
In 1993, the 24% of violent crime victims who experienced 
repeat victimization accounted for 59% of the total violent 
victimizations committed against all persons age 12 or older 
that year. In 2014, of all violent crime victims, 19% were 
repeat violence victims and accounted for 50% of all violent 
victimizations.

The concentration of victimizations was more pronounced among 
victims who experienced six or more violent crimes during the 
year. In 1993, the 8% of victims who experienced six or more 
violent victimizations accounted for 39% of all violent 
victimizations committed that year (figure 5). In comparison, 
the 5% of victims who experienced six or more violent 
victimizations in 2014 accounted for more than a quarter (27%) 
of total violent victimizations that year.

**********************************************
During 2005-14, repeat violent crime prevalence 
rates were similar for males and females
**********************************************

During 2005-14, a greater percentage of males (1.4%) than 
females (1.2%) experienced at least one violent victimization 
(table 2). This difference was due to a higher percentage of 
males (1.2%) than females (0.9%) who experienced a single 
violent victimization during the year. However, there was no 
significant difference in the percentage of males (0.2%) and 
females (0.2%) who experienced repeat violent victimization.

During 2005-14, a greater percentage of persons ages 12 to 17 
(2.4%) and 18 to 24 (2.2%) experienced at least one violent 
victimization than persons ages 25 to 34 (1.6%) and 35 or older 
(0.9%). This pattern across age groups was consistent with 
single violent victimization prevalence rates. The prevalence 
of repeat violent victimization was highest among persons ages 
12 to 17 (0.5%) and lowest among persons age 35 or older 
(0.2%), compared to other age groups.

A greater percentage of blacks (1.6%) experienced at least one 
violent victimization than whites (1.2%), Hispanics (1.3%), and 
other races (1.2%) during 2005-14. ***Footnote 3 White, black, 
and other race categories exclude persons of Hispanic or Latino 
origin*** These differences were primarily due to a higher 
prevalence of single violent victimization among blacks (1.4%) 
than persons of all other race and Hispanic origin categories. 

During 2005-14, a greater percentage of Hispanics (1.3%) 
experienced at least one violent victimization than whites 
(1.2%) (90% confidence level). This difference was due to a 
greater percentage of Hispanics (1.1%) experiencing single 
violent victimization than whites (1.0%). Hispanics had a 
higher prevalence of single violent victimization (1.1%) and a 
lower prevalence of repeat violent victimization (0.2%) than 
persons who identified as a race other than black or white 
(1.0% for single and 0.3% for repeat violent victimizations).

**********************************************
A greater percentage of intimate partner 
violence victims experienced repeat violence 
than victims of violence by other types 
of offenders
**********************************************

During 2005-14, the majority of violent crime victims 
experienced a single violent victimization during the year, 
regardless of the victim-offender relationship. Victims of 
intimate partner violence (IPV) experienced a greater 
percentage of repeat violent victimization (33%) than victims 
of violence committed by a well-known or casual acquaintance 
(26%), relative (25%), or stranger (17%) (table 3). Victims of 
violence committed by a stranger had the lowest percentage of 
repeat violent crime, compared to victims of violence by all 
other types of offenders.

Examining the relationship between repeat victims and their 
offenders provides information about the diverse types of 
offenders committing violence against each victim. Repeat 
violent crime victims were more likely to experience two or 
more victimizations by the same type of offender than by 
different types of offenders. About a quarter (26%) of IPV 
victims experienced repeated violence by an intimate partner. 
Among victims of violence committed by a well-known or casual 
acquaintance, 19% were victimized at least twice by a well-
known or casual acquaintance. An estimated 17% of victims of 
violence committed by a relative experienced repeat relative 
violence, and 11% of victims of violence committed by a 
stranger experienced repeat stranger violence.

**********************************************
During 2005-14, a greater percentage of male 
than female victims experienced repeat 
victimization by a stranger
**********************************************

On average per year during 2005-14, there were four times more 
female (298,100) than male (74,200) victims of IPV (table 4). 
However, a similar percentage of male (34%) and female (33%) 
victims of IPV experienced repeat violent victimization. Female 
victims of IPV (28%) were more likely (90% confidence level) 
than male victims of IPV (21%) to experience two or more 
violent victimizations committed by an intimate partner.

During 2005-14, a greater percentage of female (27%) than male 
(20%) victims of relative violence experienced repeat violent 
victimization (90% confidence level). A greater percentage (90% 
confidence interval) of these female victims (19%) than male 
victims (13%) also experienced repeated violence by a relative. 
In comparison, during the same period there were more male 
victims (911,300) of stranger violence than female victims 
(509,000). A greater percentage of these male victims (12%) 
than female victims (9%) experienced repeat violent 
victimization committed by a stranger.

**********************************************
During 2005-14, the 33% of IPV victims who 
experienced repeat violence accounted for 
68% of all IPV victimizations
**********************************************

During 2005-14, about 33% of IPV victims experienced repeat 
violent victimization during the year, and these victims 
accounted for more than two-thirds (68%) of all violent crime 
committed against IPV victims (figure 6). The percentage of all 
victimizations attributed to repeat victims was greater among 
victims of IPV (68%) than among victims of violence committed 
by well-known or casual acquaintances (repeat victims accounted 
for 58% of victimizations), relatives (56% of victimizations), 
or strangers (45% of victimizations). This was primarily driven 
by a greater percentage of IPV victims who experienced repeat 
violent victimization than those victimized by other types of 
offenders. 

On average among single and repeat violent crime victims, IPV 
victims (2.1) experienced a greater number of victimizations 
per victim than victims of acquaintance (1.7), relative (1.7, 
90% confidence interval), or stranger (1.5) violence (appendix 
table 10). Repeat violent crime victims averaged about four 
victimizations regardless of the type of offender.

**********************************************
Repeat violent crime victims experienced the 
majority of their victimizations by the same 
type of offender 
**********************************************

Examining the percentage of victimizations committed by each 
type of offender provides information about who committed the 
majority of violence against repeat victims. For example, a 
person who experienced four victimizations, three by an 
intimate partner and one by an acquaintance, is a repeat 
violent crime victim who experienced both IPV and acquaintance 
violence. However, the majority (75%) of these victimizations 
were committed by an intimate partner.

During 2005-14, victims who experienced two or more violent 
crimes in a year experienced the majority of their 
victimizations by the same type of offender (table 5). An 
average annual 519,100 violent victimizations were committed 
against repeat violent crime victims who experienced at least 
one violent crime committed by an intimate partner. 

The majority of those victimizations were committed by intimate 
partners (88%), while a lower percentage was attributed to 
strangers (5%), well-known or casual acquaintances (4%), and 
relatives (2%).

Similarly, of the 1,079,600 violent victimizations committed 
against repeat victims who experienced well-known or casual 
acquaintance violence, 85% were committed by a well-known or 
casual acquaintance during 2005-14. In comparison, 7% of these 
victimizations were committed by strangers, 3% by intimate 
partners, and 2% by relatives. Victims of relative violence who 
experienced repeat violent victimization experienced more 
violent victimizations by relatives (83%) than well-known or 
casual acquaintances (6%), intimate partners (5%), or strangers 
(4%). The majority (81%) of violent victimizations committed 
against victims of stranger violence who were repeat victims 
were also committed by strangers. Another 10% of these 
victimizations were committed by well-known or casual 
acquaintances, with a smaller percentage committed by intimate 
partners (3%) or relatives (2%).

**********************************************
31% of rape or sexual assault victims 
experienced repeat violent victimization 
**********************************************

During 2005-14, the majority of rape or sexual assault (69%), 
robbery (81%), aggravated assault (79%), and simple assault 
(77%) victims experienced a single violent victimization during 
the year (table 6). A greater percentage of rape or sexual 
assault victims (31%) experienced repeat violent victimization 
during the year than victims of robbery (19%), aggravated 
assault (21%), or simple assault (23%). In addition, a greater 
percentage of simple assault victims experienced two or more 
violent crimes during the year than robbery or aggravated 
assault (90% confidence level) victims.

During this period, a greater percentage of rape or sexual 
assault (16%) victims experienced two or more rape or sexual 
assault victimizations than robbery victims who experienced 
repeated robbery (7%) and aggravated assault victims who 
experienced repeated aggravated assault (9%). More than half of 
repeat victims who experienced robbery (55%) or aggravated 
assault (56%) also experienced a simple assault, and 46% of 
repeat victims who experienced rape or sexual assault also 
experienced a simple assault (not shown). Among victims of 
simple assault, 19% experienced two or more simple assaults.

**********************************************
During 2005-14, similar percentages of male 
and female victims of aggravated assault 
experienced repeat violent crime
**********************************************

During 2005-14, on average per year, there were 6.8 times more 
female victims (135,800) of rape or sexual assault than male 
victims (20,100) (table 7). Among these victims, similar 
percentages of male (14%) and female (16%) victims experienced 
a second rape or sexual assault during the year. However, a 
greater percentage of male (45%) than female (29%) rape or 
sexual assault victims experienced two or more violent 
victimizations of any type during the year.

During 2005-14, on average per year, more male victims 
(411,000) experienced at least one aggravated assault than 
female victims (278,400). Similar percentages of male and 
female victims of aggravated assault experienced any repeat 
violent victimization and repeated aggravated assault during 
the year. During the same period, there were more male 
(270,300) than female (159,300) robbery victims on average per 
year. A greater percentage (90% confidence level) of female 
(9%) than male (6%) robbery victims experienced repeat robbery 
during the year, and a greater percentage of female (24%) than 
male (16%) robbery victims experienced two or more total 
violent victimizations during the year. Similar percentages 
of male and female simple assault victims experienced repeat 
simple assault (18% of male and 20% of female victims) and 
repeat violent victimization (23% and 24%) 
during the year.

**********************************************
Repeat victims accounted for a greater 
percentage of total victimizations among 
rape or sexual assault victims than victims 
of other crime types 
**********************************************
 
During 2005-14, the 31% of rape or sexual assault victims who 
experienced repeat violent victimization accounted for 67% of 
total victimizations committed against all rape or sexual 
assault victims (figure 7). Repeat victims accounted for a 
greater percentage of all victimizations among victims of rape 
or sexual assault (67%) than victims of simple assault (repeat 
victims accounted for 56% of victimizations), aggravated 
assault (51% of victimizations), or robbery (50% of 
victimizations). Repeat victims accounted for a greater 
percentage of victimizations among victims of simple assault 
(56%) than aggravated assault (51%) or robbery (50%). 

On average, rape or sexual assault victims experienced 
approximately 2.1 violent victimizations during the year, a 
higher number than robbery (1.6) or aggravated assault (1.6) 
victims (appendix table 14). Simple assault victims experienced 
an average annual 1.7 violent victimizations per victim. Among 
repeat violent crime victims, there were no statistically 
significant differences in the average number of violent 
victimizations per victim across those who experienced rape or 
sexual assault (4.5 victimizations per victim), robbery (4.3), 
aggravated assault (4.0), or simple assault (4.2).

**********************************************
Violent crimes against repeat violent crime victims who 
experienced serious violence were most often the same type of 
crime or simple assault   
**********************************************

During 2005-14, of the victimizations committed against repeat 
violent crime victims who experienced aggravated assault, 61% 
were aggravated assault and 30% were simple assault (table 8). 
Rape or sexual assault accounted for an estimated 64% of the 
victimizations committed against repeat victims who experienced 
rape or sexual assault, followed by simple assault (26%). The 
majority of violent crimes committed against repeat violent 
crime victims who experienced robbery were robberies (60%) or 
simple assaults (31%). Among repeat violent crime victims who 
experienced at least one simple assault during the year, the 
majority (89%) of all victimizations committed against them 
were simple assaults.

**************
Methodology
**************

Survey coverage
*****************

The National Crime Victimization Survey (NCVS) is an annual 
data collection conducted by the U.S. Census Bureau for the 
Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS). The NCVS is a self-report 
survey in which interviewed persons are asked about the number 
and characteristics of victimizations experienced during the 
prior 6 months. The NCVS collects information on nonfatal 
personal crimes (rape or sexual assault, robbery, aggravated 
and simple assault, and personal larceny) and household 
property crimes (burglary, motor vehicle theft, and other 
theft) both reported and not reported to police. In addition to 
providing annual level and change estimates on criminal 
victimization, the NCVS is the primary source of information on 
the nature of criminal victimization incidents.

Survey respondents provide information about themselves (e.g., 
sex, race, Hispanic origin, age, marital status, education 
level, and income) and whether they experienced a 
victimization. For each victimization incident, the NCVS 
collects information about the offender (e.g., sex, race, 
Hispanic origin, age, and victim-offender relationship), 
characteristics of the crime (including time and place of 
occurrence, use of weapons, nature of injury, and economic 
consequences), whether the crime was reported to police, 
reasons the crime was or was not reported, and victim 
experiences with the criminal justice system.

The NCVS is administered to persons age 12 or older from a 
nationally representative sample of households in the United 
States. The NCVS defines a household as a group of persons who 
all reside at a sampled address. Persons are considered 
household members when the sampled address is their usual place 
of residence at the time of the interview and when they have no 
usual place of residence elsewhere. Once selected, households 
remain in the sample for 3 years, and eligible persons in these 
households are interviewed every 6 months either in person or 
over the phone for a total of seven interviews.

All first interviews are conducted in person with subsequent 
interviews conducted either in person or by phone. New 
households rotate into the sample on an ongoing basis to 
replace outgoing households that have been in the sample for 
the 3-year period. Every 6 months, about a sixth of the sample 
rotates out of the study and is replaced by a new sample. The 
sample includes persons living in group quarters, such as 
dormitories, rooming houses, and religious group dwellings. It 
excludes persons living in military barracks and institutional 
settings, such as correctional or hospital facilities, and 
persons who are homeless.

Nonresponse and weighting adjustments
***************************************

In 2014, a total of 158,089 interviews were conducted with 
104,721 persons age 12 or older for the NCVS. About 51% of 
persons were interviewed twice during the year. The response 
rate was 87% for eligible persons.

Victimizations that occurred outside of the United States were 
excluded from this report. In 2014, less than 1% of the 
unweighted victimizations occurred outside of the United 
States.

Estimates in this report use data from the 1993 to 2014 NCVS 
data files, weighted to produce annual prevalence estimates of 
victimization for persons age 12 or older living in U.S. 
households. Because the NCVS relies on a sample rather than a 
census of the entire U.S. population, weights are designed to 
inflate sample point estimates to known population totals and 
to compensate for survey nonresponse and other aspects of the 
sample design.

The NCVS data files include weights for calculating various 
types of annual victimization estimates. Person weights were 
used in this report because they provide an estimate of the 
population represented by each unique person in the NCVS 
sample. Person weights allow for the calculation of annual 
prevalence rates, which estimate the number of unique persons 
age 12 or older who experienced victimization in a given year. 
Annual prevalence rates are calculated using information 
available from persons interviewed during the specified year.
 
This report also presents the total number of victimizations 
committed against violent crime victims. Generally, BJS uses 
the victimization weight in the NCVS data files to produce 
victimization counts and rates. However, person weights are 
preferred when the analysis aims to count the number of unique 
victims or the number of victimizations experienced by unique 
persons, which is the purpose of this report. In addition, 
victimization weights are not designed to link individual 
victimizations to unique persons. Therefore, they are not 
appropriate for this report.

With the victimization weights, the sample is adjusted to the 
full population for each 6-month period of the year. In 
comparison, the person weight adjusts the sample to the full 
population for the year, meaning that for each 6-month period, 
the weights essentially adjust the sample to half the 
population. Therefore, using the victimization weight to 
calculate the number of victims produces a higher prevalence 
estimate than using the person weight. It also may overestimate 
the number of victims because the same unique person can 
represent more victims than persons in the population per year. 
For technical details on how the victimization and person 
weights are constructed, see National Crime Victimization 
Survey Technical Documentation, NCJ 247252, BJS web, September 
2014.

The persons weights used in this analysis account for high-
frequency repeat violent crimes (i.e., series victimizations). 
Series victimizations are similar in type but occur with such 
frequency that a victim is unable to recall each individual 
event or describe each event in detail. Survey procedures allow 
NCVS interviewers to identify and classify these similar 
victimizations as series victimizations and to collect detailed 
information on the most recent incident in the series. The 
weight counts series incidents as the actual number of 
incidents reported by the victim, up to a maximum of 10 
incidents. Victims of series crimes were counted as repeat 
violent crime victims because they experienced more than one 
violent crime during the year. In 2014, about 5% of all victims 
and 25% of all repeat violent crime victims experienced at 
least one series victimization. For this report, person weights 
were used for all estimates of victimizations and victims. 
Person weights allowed BJS to examine of the number of 
victimizations accounted for by repeat violent crime victims 
and produce annual totals that represented the annual U.S. 
populations.

Reporting a victimization in the NCVS
***************************************

Some respondents had a reporting period of 6 months, while 
others reported on 1 year, depending on whether persons were 
surveyed in the NCVS once or twice in a given calendar year. 
All respondents reported on violent victimization that occurred 
during one 6-month period. About half of the sample was 
interviewed twice during each year. Some persons were 
interviewed once during the first half of the year because that 
was their last intended interview. Others may have moved out of 
a sampled household, or their second intended interview for 
that year was not obtained for some other reason. Some persons 
were interviewed once during the second half of the year 
because that was their first intended interview, they were 
persons recently moved into a currently sampled household, or 
they were missing a prior interview from the first half of the 
year for some other reason. Regardless of whether persons had 
one or two interviews during the calendar year, victimizations 
were summed. 

Using the NCVS person weights ensured that a person who 
experienced one or more nonfatal violent victimization within a 
6-month period or in both 6-month periods in a given year was 
counted once in that annual prevalence estimate. An assumption 
underlying estimates of prevalence of repeat violent crime is 
that annual rates do not differ for persons who reported to the 
NCVS in one 6-month period from those who reported in both 6-
month periods in a given calendar year. During 2005-14, the 
majority (96%) of all repeat violent crime victims experienced 
two violent victimizations in less than 6 months (see table 1). 
Among repeat violent crime victims who had a full year to 
report victimization during 2005-14, about 94% experienced 
their second victimization less than 6 months after their first 
victimization (table 9). In addition, rates did not differ 
significantly among persons with one interview compared to 
those with two interviews during the year for prevalence of 
violent crime (12.67 victims per 1,000 persons age 12 or older, 
compared to 12.75 per 1,000) or repeat violent crime (2.40 per 
1,000, compared to 2.36 per 1,000) (table 10). The prevalence 
rates were driven by violence that occurred within a 6-month 
recall period. Therefore, a 6-month compared to 1-year 
reporting period does not significantly impact the estimates.

Standard error computations
*****************************

When national estimates are derived from a sample, as with the 
NCVS, caution should be used when comparing one estimate to 
another estimate or when comparing estimates over time. 
Although one estimate may be larger than another, estimates 
based on a sample are subject to sampling error. The sampling 
error of an estimate depends on several factors, including the 
amount of variation in the responses and the size of the 
sample. When the sampling error around an estimate is taken 
into account, the estimates that appear different may not be 
statistically different.

One measure of the sampling error associated with an estimate 
is the standard error. The standard error can vary from one 
estimate to the next. Generally, an estimate with a small 
standard error provides a more reliable approximation of the 
true value than an estimate with a large standard error. 
Estimates with relatively large standard errors are associated 
with less precision and reliability and should be interpreted 
with caution.

To generate standard errors around numbers and estimates from 
the NCVS, the U.S. Census Bureau produced generalized variance 
function (GVF) parameters for BJS. The GVFs take into account 
aspects of the NCVS's complex sample design and represent the 
curve fitted to a selection of individual standard errors based 
on the Jackknife Repeated Replication technique. The GVF 
parameters were used to generate standard errors for each point 
estimate (e.g., counts, percentages, and rates) in this report.

BJS conducted tests to determine whether differences in 
estimated numbers, percentages, and rates in this report were 
statistically significant once sampling error was taken into 
account. All comparisons in the text were tested for 
significance. The primary test procedure was the Student’s t-
statistic, which tests the difference between two sample 
estimates. Unless otherwise noted, the findings described in 
this report as higher, lower, or different passed a test at the 
0.05 level of statistical significance (95% confidence level). 
Findings that passed a test at the 0.10 level of statistical 
significance are noted as such in the text (i.e., 90% 
confidence level). Caution is required when comparing estimates 
not explicitly discussed in this report.

Data users can employ the estimates and the standard errors of 
the estimates provided in this report to generate a confidence 
interval around the estimate as a measure of the margin of 
error. The following example illustrates how standard errors 
can be used to generate confidence intervals:

According to the NCVS, in 2014, the prevalence rate of 
violent crime among persons age 12 or older was 11.1 victims 
per 1,000 persons (see figure 2). Using the GVFs, it was 
determined that the estimated victimization rate has a 
standard error of 0.82 (see appendix table 2). A confidence 
interval around the estimate was generated by multiplying 
the standard errors by ±1.96 (the t-score of a normal, two-
tailed distribution that excludes 2.5% at either end of the 
distribution). Therefore, the 95% confidence interval around 
the 11.1 estimate from 2014 is 11.1 ± (0.82 × 1.96) or (9.44 
to 12.67). In other words, if the same sampling method was 
used to select different samples and computed an interval 
estimate for each sample for the population in 2014, the 
true population parameter (violent crime prevalence rate) 
would be expected to fall within the interval estimates 95% 
of the time.

In this report, BJS also calculated a coefficient of variation 
(CV) for all estimates, representing the ratio of the standard 
error to the estimate. CVs provide a measure of reliability and 
a means for comparing the precision of estimates across 
measures with differing levels or metrics.

Methodological changes to the NCVS in 2006
********************************************

Methodological changes implemented in 2006 may have affected 
the crime estimates for that year to such an extent that they 
are not comparable to estimates from other years. Prior to 
2006, first NCVS interviews were not included in the analysis 
and instead were used as a reference (bounding interview) for 
subsequent interviews. Beginning in 2006 and continuing through 
2014, responses from households that were in the NCVS for the 
first time are included in the data.
 
In this report, first interviews are included for 2006 to 2014 
and the weights do not adjust for these unbounded interviews. 
Typically, these first interviews produce higher rates of 
victimization, but they represent a small portion of the total 
sample each year. The unbounded interviews contributed less 
than 0.1% to the total violent crime prevalence rates from 2006 
to 2014. Evaluation of 2007 and later data from the NCVS 
conducted by BJS and the U.S. Census Bureau found a high degree 
of confidence that victimization estimates for years 2007 
through 2014 are consistent with and comparable to estimates 
for 2005 and previous years. (For more information on changes 
to the NCVS in 2006, see Criminal Victimization, 2007 (NCJ 
224390, BJS web, December 2008) and annual Criminal 
Victimization reports available on the BJS website.) 

**************************************************************
The Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS) of the U.S. Department of 
Justice is the principal federal agency responsible for 
measuring crime, criminal victimization, criminal offenders, 
victims of crime, correlates of crime, and the operation of 
criminal and civil justice systems at the federal, state, 
tribal, and local levels. BJS collects, analyzes, and 
disseminates reliable and valid statistics on crime and justice 
systems in the United States, supports improvements to state 
and local criminal justice information systems, and 
participates with national and international organizations to 
develop and recommend national standards for justice 
statistics. Jeri M. Murlow is acting director.
This report was written by Barbara A. Oudekerk and Jennifer L. 
Truman.

Grace Kena and Jennifer L. Truman verified the report.

Brigitte Coulton and Jill Thomas edited the report. Steve 
Grudziecki produced the report.

August 2017, NCJ 250567
**************************************************************

***************************************************************
Office of Justice Programs
Building Solutions * Supporting Communities * Advancing Justice
www.ojp.usdoj.gov
***************************************************************

***************************
7/27/2017 JER 2:45pm

***************************

