

U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Programs
Bureau of Justice Statistics

------------------------------------------------------------
This file is text only without graphics and many of the
tables. A Zip archive of the tables in this report in
spreadsheet format (.csv) and the full report including
tables and graphics in .pdf format are available on BJS
website at:http://www.bjs.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbdetail&iid=4556
------------------------------------------------------------

State Corrections Expenditures, FY, 1982-2010

Tracey Kyckelhahn, BJS Statistician

Between 1982 and 2001, total state corrections 
expenditures increased each year, rising from $15.0 
billion to $53.5 billion in real dollars. Between 2002 and 
2010, expenditures fluctuated between $53.4 billion and 
$48.4 billion. Preliminary data from the Census Bureau’s 
Annual Survey of State Government Finances indicated that 
states spent $48.5 billion on corrections in 2010, a 
decline of 5.6% since 2009.  

Corrections expenditures fund community supervision, 
confinement, and rehabilitation of adults and juveniles 
convicted of offenses, as well as confinement of persons 
awaiting trial or adjudication. State corrections 
expenditures also include the costs of operation and 
employment for prisons, probation and parole offices, 
pardon proceedings, correctional administration, and 
intergovernmental transfers.

**************************************

*******************
State expenditures
*******************

In 2010, state expenditures totaled $1.9 trillion dollars 
while state spending on corrections was $48.5 billion. 
Between fiscal years 1982 and 2010, spending on orrections 
represented between 1.9% and 3.3% of total expenditures by 
state governments. Since 2003, corrections expenditures, 
as a share of total spending, fluctuated between 2.5% and 
2.9% of state expenditures (figure 1). 

Between 1982 and 2010, spending on education varied 
between 29% and 33% of total state expenditures, spending 
on public welfare varied between 22% and 25%, spending on 
highways varied between 5.7% and 8.6%, and spending on 
health care and hospitals varied between 6.2% and 7.5%. 
Other expenditures (including air transportation, 
financial administration, police protection, and public 
safety expenditures) ranged between 29% and 32% of state 
expenditures.  

****************************************
States spent about three-quarters of 
the corrections budget on correctional 
institutions 
****************************************

Between 1982 and 2010, spending on correctional 
institutions, such as state prisons and residential work 
release units, represented the largest component of state 
corrections expenditures, ranging from $11.2 billion to 
$41.0 billion.  As a share of total corrections 
expenditures, spending on institutions ranged from 73% to 
80%. (For information on correctional institutions, see 
Methodology.) 

Expenditures related to probation, parole, the 
administration of a correctional agency, the training of 
correctional employees, and nonresidential halfway houses 
and community corrections centers were counted as other 
(noninstitutional) correctional expenditures (figure 2). 
Noninstitutional corrections expenditures ranged from $3.8 
billion to $12.9 billion, and comprised between 20.4% and 
27.3% of total corrections expenditures.

****************************************
Direct expenditures on institutions 
were divided between capital outlay 
and operations 
****************************************

Capital outlay expenditures included spending on 
construction, renovations, and major repair of 
institutions; purchase of land, rights-of-way, and 
existing structures; title searches and related costs; and 
purchase of equipment having a useful life of more than 5 
years. 

Between 1982 and 1991, institutional capital outlays 
increased, reaching a peak of $4.6 billion in 1991 (figure 
3). Capital outlays comprised between 8.5% and 13.6% of 
total corrections expenditures during those years. Between 
1992 and 2001, capital outlays varied between $2.7 billion 
and $4.0 billion, comprising between 5.0% and 10.3% of 
total corrections expenditures. From 2002 to 2010, capital 
outlays made up $2.3 billion or less each year and less 
than 5% of state correctional expenditures.  

Part of capital outlay expenditures represents spending to 
construct new prisons to house additional inmates. Between 
1982 and 2010, spending on institutional capital outlay 
correspond strongly with changes in state prison 
population (correlation coefficient of .75).

At its peak, spending on capital outlay for institutions 
was widespread among states (table 1). Between 1982 and 
1991, 32 states spent at least 20% of their total 
corrections expenditures on capital outlays for 1 year or 
more. From 2002 to 2010, this was true of only two states 
(not shown in table). (See appendix table 3 for state 
comparisons.)

The number of prisoners held in state and private prisons 
increased every year from 371,522 inmates in 1982 to a 
peak of 1,323,557 in 2008 (table 2). This report uses 
custody counts. (See Methodology for a description of 
custody counts and juridiction counts). The population 
decreased in 2009 (1,319,364 inmates) and 2010 
(1,316,858). The annual population growth rate declined to 
less than 3% starting in 2000, after remaining more than 
6% from the mid-1980s to the mid-1990s. The annual 
population growth reached a high of 12% in 1989.

*******************************************
Operational expenditures, as a share of 
total expenditures, grew from 1982 to 2010
*******************************************

Correctional institutions’ operational expenditures 
included compensation of officers and employees and 
supplies, materials, and contractual services exclusive of 
capital outlay. The costs incurred by states to operate 
institutions steadily increased from 1982 to 2000, after 
which they remained steady (figure 4). Due to the decline 
in other components of state corrections expenditures 
between 2000 and 2010, institutions’ operational 
expenditures increased steadily as a share of total 
expenditures from just under two-thirds in the 1980s to 
three-quarters after 2005 (not shown in table or figure).

At the national level, operational expenditures per inmate 
in a state or private prison declined to under $30,000 per 
year starting around 2004, a level last seen in the early 
1980s. At the state level, the median operational 
expenditures per inmate posted a similar trend as the 
national mean, declining to under $30,000 per year in 
2005. From 1982 to 2010, the 25th percentile fluctuated 
between $21,243 and $26,452, and the 75th percentile 
fluctuated between $37,084 and $43,178. 

*******************************************
Changes in state operations expenditures 
from 1999 to 2010
*******************************************

Regression analysis was used to assess increases and 
decreases in state correction expenditures from 1999 to 
2010. For each state, three regressions were run to 
determine trends in expenditures during this time period. 
States were grouped according to patterns of changes, 
including linear decreases and increases and other changes 
in direction (table 3). (See Methodology for a description 
of the technique used to detect change, determine 
statistical significance, and classify the direction of 
the change in per capita expenditures.)

The regression analysis of per capita trends from 1999 to 
2010 included 48 states. Utah and West Virginia were 
excluded due to data quality issues. 

* 11 states showed a linear decrease in current operations 
expenditures per inmate from 1999 to 2010, with an average 
annual decline of $1,093 per inmate (figure 5). 

* 5 states had a linear increase, with an average annual 
increase of $1,277 per inmate.

Among 32 states, the patterns of change in per capita 
expenditures fluctuated from 1999 to 2010 (figure 6). 

* 14 states had a decrease in per capita expenditures, 
followed by an increase. In 12 of the states, the increase 
started in 2005 or later. 

* 1 state had an increase followed by a decrease. 

* 8 states experienced an increase in per capita 
expenditures, followed by a decrease and a subsequent 
increase in expenditures.

* 2 states had a decrease in per capita expenditures 
followed by an increase and then another decrease.

* 7 states experienced either flat per capita expenditures 
or did not have a discernible trend in the analyses 
conducted.

*******************************************
Medical care expenditures increased for 
correctional institutions in most states
*******************************************

Forty-four states provided information on medical 
expenditures for both 2001 and 2008. For all states except 
Texas (down 8.1%) and Illinois (down 1.9%), medical 
expenditures increased during the 7-year period (table 4). 
New Hampshire (up 372%) exhibited the highest increase, 
while Nevada (up 4.5%) had the lowest increase.
  
Thirty-six of the 44 states had an increase in per capita 
medical costs from 2001 to 2008, with seven reporting 
increases of 100% or more: New Hampshire (up 300%), Oregon 
(up 240%), North Carolina (up 199%), Alabama (up 120%), 
Arkansas (up 105%), Montana (up 103%), and Maryland (up 
101%). Eight states reported decreases in medical 
expenditures per inmate: Nevada (down 17.5%), Maine (down 
14.3%), Texas (down 12.7%), Pennsylvania (down 12.4%), 
Oklahoma (down 7.6%), West Virginia (down 5.2%), Illinois 
(down 4.3%), and North Dakota (down 4.0%).

************
Methodology
************

Expenditure data were extracted from the U.S. Census 
Bureau’s Annual Survey of State Government Finances. The 
survey collects expenditure information for federal, 
state, and local governments. This report includes state 
government corrections expenditures and components of 
those expenditures compiled by U.S. Census Bureau 
representatives. Data were collected from government 
audits, budgets, and other financial reports with the 
advice of state officers and employees. The information 
from these reports was placed into expenditure categories 
using the U.S. Census Bureau’s classification system. Data 
were verified with government officials before being 
released. Differences in functional responsibilities from 
state to state may prohibit the comparability of 
expenditure data across all jurisdictions, and caution 
should be exercised when comparing government 
expenditures. The Survey of State Government Finances is 
available on the U.S. Census Bureau’s website at 
http://www.census.gov/govs/. For information about the 
state component of the survey, see 
http://www.census.gov/govs/state.

********************** 
Medical expenditures
**********************

State medical expenditures for correctional institutions 
were compiled using state government accounting 
spreadsheets. The Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS) 
categorized all costs associated with medical care, 
including mental health and dental costs. Medical 
expenditures included medical personnel costs, contract 
medical services, operational costs associated with 
medical units, and capital outlay and supply expenditures 
related to providing medical care. The categorized expense 
data were sent to state budget officers twice for 
verification: once after the initial categorization and 
again for confirmation before publication.

******************************* 
National Prisoner Statistics
******************************* 

Data on custody and private prison counts were from the 
National Prisoner Statistics (NPS) series. The NPS began 
in 1926 under a mandate from Congress and collects annual 
statistics on prisoners at yearend. State departments of 
corrections and the Federal Bureau of Prisons voluntarily 
submit NPS data. The NPS distinguishes between prisoners 
in custody and prisoners under jurisdiction. The NPS 
custody counts include all inmates held within a state’s 
facilities, including inmates housed for other states. The 
custody counts exclude inmates held in local jails and in 
other jurisdictions. Therefore, in this report, inmate 
counts will differ from BJS reports that use jurisdiction 
counts. The NPS also includes information on private 
prisoners, which is included with the custody count in the 
inmate populations used in this report. However, some 
states are unable to distinguish between custody and 
jurisdiction. For information on those states, see 
Jurisdiction notes in the yearly Prisoners series reports 
located on the BJS website. The NPS has historically 
included counts of inmates in the combined jail-prison 
systems of Alaska, Connecticut, Delaware, Hawaii, Rhode 
Island, and Vermont.

Preliminary data
-------------------

Preliminary data were used for fiscal years 2009 and 2010. 
They are subject to change and will be superseded by data 
released approximately a year from their original 
publication. Although every effort is made to obtain 
financial information from state and local government 
entities, financial statements and completed 
questionnaires may not be available at the time the Census 
Bureau closes the processing. Missing data are imputed 
until complete data can be obtained. See the Census 
Bureau’s website for updates on release information: 
http://www.census.gov/govs/state/. 
 
Data from the Census Bureau’s Annual Survey of State 
Government Finances further detail state governments’ 
corrections expenditures, including data on capital outlay 
and current operations expenditures. Data describing 
government expenditures for fiscal years preceding 2010 
were inflation-adjusted to 2010 dollars. 

**************************
Per capita calculations
**************************

Total per capita expenditures were calculated using each 
state’s institutional current operations expenditures 
divided by its custody and private prison population. Per 
capita medical expenditures were calculated using each 
state’s medical expenditures divided by its custody 
population. Current operations expenditures pay for the 
housing of inmates in private prisons and in prisons 
operated by the state, while intergovernmental 
expenditures pay for state inmates under a state’s 
jurisdiction in facilities other than that state’s 
prisons, such as local jails. Given the inability to 
determine how much of a state’s intergovernmental 
expenditures pays for the housing of inmates versus other 
correctional costs, such as probation and parole, as well 
as the difficulty in determining the location of all 
prisoners under a state’s jurisdiction, operational 
expenditures were calculated only for those inmates in 
physical custody, including those in private prisons.
 
To categorize states based on trends in per capita 
expenditures from 1999 to 2010, three regressions were run 
for each state: an equation to detect a linear increase or 
decrease per capita expenditures, an equation with a 
squared term to detect a single change in expenditure 
trends (increase to decrease or decrease to increase), and 
an equation with a cubed term to detect two changes during 
the time period. Two-tailed significance tests were 
conducted at the .05 confidence level.

States were then categorized by the equation that had the 
most number of changes and was significant. For example, 
if a state was significant for both the linear equation 
and the squared equation but not the cubed equation, the 
state was classified by the squared equation. Those states 
which did not test as significant in any of the three 
equations either did not have a statistically significant 
pattern in per capita expenditures or had per capita 
expenditures that remained flat.  Utah and West Virginia 
were removed from the analyses due to data quality 
concerns.

For those states classified as having a linear trend in 
per capita expenditures, the linear term provided the 
annual increase or decrease in expenditures. For those 
states that had significant squared or cubed equations, 
the year(s) at which per capita expenditures changed 
direction was calculated by taking the first derivative of 
the equation and solving for the year(s). 

************************
Adjusting for Inflation
************************

Government expenditures for fiscal years preceding 2010 
were inflation adjusted to 2010 dollars, as appropriate 
for state government spending. Annual chain-type price 
indices for gross domestic product were employed as 
divisors, and unadjusted expenditures were employed as 
dividends to produce inflation adjusted expenditures in 
2010 dollars.

The U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of Economic 
Analysis, developed the price indices used in all 
inflation adjustments, as published in the Economic Report 
of the President. For more information on price indices, 
see the Economic Report of the President (2011), Table B-
7. Chain-type price indices for gross domestic product, 
1962-2010, U.S. Government Printing Office, retrieved from 
http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/ERP-2011/pdf/ERP-2011-
table7.pdf.  

***********************
Terms and Definitions
***********************

Correctional institutions--includes facilities, such as 
prisons, residential work release units, and detention 
centers, in addition to correctional farms, industrial 
schools and training schools. Correctional institutions 
also include the related educational, training, and health 
care programs for inmates, and some hospitals for the 
criminally insane. 
 
Corrections--involve the community supervision, 
confinement, and rehabilitation of adults and juveniles 
convicted of offenses and the confinement of persons 
awaiting trial or adjudication.

Education expenditures--include the financing of schools, 
colleges, and other educational institutions (e.g., for 
blind, deaf, and other handicapped individuals), and 
educational programs for adults, veterans, and other 
special classes. Also included are activities of higher 
education institutions operated by the state, except for 
agricultural extension services and experiment stations 
and hospitals serving the public.

Expenditures--include only external cash payments made from 
any source of funds, including any payments financed from 
borrowing, fund balances, intergovernmental revenue, and 
other current revenue. 
 
Intergovernmental transfers--the sum of payments made from 
one government entity to another, including grants-in-aid, 
shared revenues, payments in lieu of taxes, and amounts 
for services performed by one government for another on a 
reimbursable or cost-sharing basis (e.g., payments by one 
government to another for boarding prisoners). They 
exclude amounts paid to other governments for purchase of 
commodities, property, or utility services.

Direct expenditures--all expenditures except those 
classified as intergovernmental. They include direct 
current expenditures (e.g., salaries, wages, fees, and 
commissions and purchases of supplies, materials, and 
contractual services) and capital outlays (e.g., 
construction and purchase of equipment, land, and existing 
structures). Note that capital outlays are included for 
the year in which the direct expenditure was made, 
regardless of how the funds were raised (e.g., bond issue) 
or when they were paid back.

Highway expenditures--include construction, maintenance, 
and operation of highways, streets, and related 
structures, including toll highways, bridges, tunnels, 
ferries, street lighting, and snow and ice removal.

Health expenditures--include outpatient health services; 
public health administration; research and education; 
categorical health programs; treatment and immunization 
clinics; nursing; environmental health activities, such as 
air and water pollution control; ambulance service, if 
provided separately from fire protection services; school 
health services, if provided by health agencies rather 
than school agencies; and other general public health 
activities, such as mosquito abatement.

Hospital expenditures--include the financing, construction, 
acquisition, maintenance, or operation of hospital 
facilities, provision of hospital care, and support of 
public and private hospitals. Financing of nursing homes 
is included if they are directly associated with a 
government hospital.

Public welfare expenditures--include support of and 
assistance to persons contingent upon their need, such as 
cash assistance paid directly to needy persons under the 
categorical programs (Old Age Assistance, Temporary 
Assistance for Needy Families (TANF), and other welfare 
programs; vendor payments made directly to private 
purveyors for medical care, burials, and other commodities 
and services provided under welfare programs; and 
provision and operation by the government of welfare 
institutions. Other public welfare includes payments to 
other governments for welfare purposes, amounts for 
administration, support of private welfare agencies, and 
other public welfare services.

State custody count--the number of inmates a state holds in 
its facilities. A state may have custody of a prisoner 
over whom another state maintains jurisdiction.  

******************************************************
The Bureau of Justice Statistics is the statistical agency 
of the U.S. Department of Justice. James P. Lynch is 
director.

This report was written by Tracey Kyckelhahn. Thomas H. 
Cohen verified the report.

Catherine Bird and Jill Thomas edited the report, and 
Barbara Quinn produced the report under the supervision of 
Doris J. James.

December 2012, NCJ 239672
******************************************************

******************************************************
Office of Justice Programs * Innovation * Partnerships 
* Safer Neighborhoods * http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov
******************************************************
______________________
12/3/12/JER/12:25pm

