U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Programs
Bureau of Justice Statistics

----------------------------------------------------------
This file is text only without graphics and many of the
tables. A Zip archive of the tables in this report in
spreadsheet format (.csv) and the full report including
tables and graphics in .pdf format are available on BJS
website at: 
http://www.bjs.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbdetail&iid=4802

This report is one in a series. More recent editions may be
available. To view a list of all in the series go to
http://bjs.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbse&sid=47
---------------------------------------------------------

***************
Special Report
***************

State Court Organization, 2011

Ron Malega, Ph.D., and Thomas H. Cohen, J.D., Ph.D., former 
BJS Statisticians

From 1980 to 2011, the number of state trial court judges 
increased 11%, from 24,784 to 27,570 (figure 1). During the 
same period, the U.S. population increased 37%, and arrests 
in the U.S. increased 19%. Because of these increases, the 
ratio of judges per 100,000 U.S. residents declined 23%, 
from 13.2 in 1980 to 10.2 in 2011. In this report, judge 
refers to any judicial officer granted authority to preside 
over court proceedings. 

Data for this report were drawn from the Bureau of Justice 
Statistics’ (BJS) State Court Organization (SCO) report 
series. The SCO reports provide state-level data on court 
types, jurisdictional levels of state courts, the number of 
judges and support staff, funding sources, judicial 
education standards, and procedures for selecting judges. 
BJS previously released four comprehensive reports on state 
court organization covering survey years 1980, 1987, 1993, 
1998, and 2004. The most recent SCO data collection explored 
the organizational structure and operations of state courts 
in all 50 states and the District of Columbia during 2011.

************
Highlights
************

* The organizational structure of the nation’s trial and 
appellate courts changed modestly from 1980 to 2011.

* Six states added intermediate appellate courts between 
1980 and 1998: Minnesota, Mississippi, Nebraska, North 
Dakota, Utah, and Virginia.

* From 1980 to 2011, the number of states with more than 
three types of limited jurisdiction trial courts declined 
from 31 to 21.

* The number of states with one or no limited jurisdiction 
trial courts increased from 14 in 1980 to 21 in 2011. 

* From 1980 to 2011, the number of state appellate court 
judges increased 69%, and the number of state trial judges 
increased 11%. 

* All judges in general jurisdiction trial courts had some 
legal qualification in 2011, compared to 59% of judges in 
limited jurisdiction trial courts.

* In 2011, 52% of appellate court judges were appointed to 
their initial terms, while 75% of trial court judges were 
elected to their initial terms.

* In 2011, two-thirds of state administrative court offices 
had full responsibility for judicial education and court 
technical assistance. 

* All general jurisdiction trial courts juries were required 
to reach unanimous verdicts for felony or misdemeanor cases 
in 2011, compared to 47% for civil cases.

************************************************************

*************************************
Jurisdictional level of state courts
*************************************

States organize their court systems differently (figure 2). 
In general, each state uses some or all of the following 
four jurisdictional levels to organize its court system:

* Limited jurisdiction courts (LJCs)--also called inferior 
courts or lower courts, have jurisdiction on a restricted 
range of cases, primarily lesser criminal and civil matters, 
including misdemeanors, small claims, traffic, parking, and 
civil infractions. They can also handle the preliminary 
stages of felony cases in some states.

* General jurisdiction courts (GJCs)--often called major 
trial courts, have primary jurisdiction on all issues not 
delegated to lower courts, most often hearing serious 
criminal or civil cases. Cases are also designated to GJCs 
based on the severity of the punishment or allegation or on 
the dollar value of the case.

* Intermediate appellate courts (IACs)--hear appeals on 
cases or matters decided in GJCs and LJCs. IACs may also 
hear appeals from administrative agencies. Depending on the 
state, IACs represent the first--and often only--appeal 
because they exercise both mandatory and discretionary 
review of the cases they hear.

* Courts of last resort (COLRs)--also called state supreme 
courts, have final authority over all appeals filed in state 
courts. Most states have one COLR, but Oklahoma and Texas 
both have separate courts for civil and criminal appeals. 
Depending on the state, a COLR may have either a mandatory 
or discretionary docket for cases it will hear.

* California has a unified court system consisting of one 
type of GJC (i.e., superior court) and a two-tier system of 
appeals courts (i.e., court of appeals and supreme court). 

California’s court system does not use LJCs. In comparison, 
Georgia has a more fragmented court structure consisting of 
seven different types of LJCs (i.e., civil, state, juvenile, 
county recorders, magistrate, probate, and municipal), one 
type of GJC (i.e., superior court), and a two-tier system of 
appeals courts (i.e., court of appeals and supreme court). 
Such variations in state court structure are often reflected 
in court funding sources. Many LJCs are funded and operated 
at the local level (e.g., county), while GJCs are likely to 
be managed and funded at the state level.
************************************************************

**********************************
State court organization changed 
gradually from 1980 to 2011
**********************************

Six states--Minnesota, Mississippi, Nebraska, North Dakota, 
Utah, and Virginia--added intermediate appellate courts 
(IACs) between 1980 and 1998. No states established IACs 
after 1998. In 2011, forty states had two-tier systems of 
intermediate and final review consisting of IACs and courts 
of last resort (COLRs) (table 1). While most states used one 
COLR and one IAC, some states used multiple COLRs or IACs. 
For example, Oklahoma and Texas used two COLRs and one IAC. 
Alabama, Indiana, New York, Pennsylvania, and Tennessee used 
two IACs. Eleven states relied exclusively on COLRs for 
final review: Delaware, the District of Columbia, Maine, 
Montana, Nevada, New Hampshire, Rhode Island, South Dakota, 
Vermont, West Virginia, and Wyoming.

In 2011, 46 states used general jurisdiction courts (GJCs) 
and limited jurisdiction courts (LJCs). Over the past three 
decades, states have decreased their use of LJCs. Thirty-one 
states had three types of LJCs in 1980, compared to 21 
states in 2011. The number of states with one or no LJCs 
increased from 14 to 21 during the same period. California, 
Illinois, Iowa, Minnesota, and the District of Columbia 
operated without LJCs in 2011. See map 1 and map 2 for the 
appellatte and trial court structures for 2011.

************************************
The unification of trial courts in 
some states reduced the percentage 
of judges serving in LJCs 
************************************

The movement towards unification in some state courts has 
reduced the number of LJC judges. The percentage of trial 
court judges serving in LJCs, compared to GJCs, declined by 
12 percentage points from 1980 to 2011 (table 2). In 
addition, the number of GJC judges increased 57% from 1980 
to 2011, while the number of LJC judges declined 6% (table 
3). These trends were primarily a result of California’s 
court unification during the 1990s, which eliminated all 
LJCs and reclassified those judges to GJCs. 

The distribution of appellate court judges between IACs and 
COLRs also changed from 1980 to 2011. During the past three 
decades, the number of IAC judges increased by about 400 
judges, while the number of COLR judges remained stable. 
Much of growth in IAC judges can be attributed to the six 
states that established IACs between 1980 and 1998. The 
number of judges serving in state COLRs is often mandated by 
state constitutions; therefore, the number of COLR judges 
remained relatively stable during the same period, 
decreasing by two judges (1%).

**********************************
Three-quarters of all trial court 
judges needed some legal 
qualifications to serve as judge 
**********************************

The legal qualifications necessary to serve as a judge for a 
GJC compared to an LJC vary by state. In 2011, all GJC trial 
judges needed some type of legal qualification to serve as a 
judge (table 4). In comparison, 59% of LJC trial judges were 
required to obtain some type legal qualification to serve as 
a judge. ***Footnote 1 Examples of legal qualifications less 
than a law degree include taking a judicial education course 
prior to office or passing a legal certification exam other 
than the state bar***. Possessing a law degree was the most 
commonly required legal qualification to serve as a judge. 
Sitting GJC judges were nearly 3 times more likely than LJC 
judges to need a law degree. GJC judges were about 2 times 
more likely than LJC judges to need state bar membership or 
have had an active legal practice.

*************************************
Trial court judges were more likely 
than appellate court judges to be 
elected into the first term 
*************************************

In 2011, 52% of appellate court judges were appointed for 
their initial terms by judicial nominating committees, 
governors, legislators, or other methods (table 5). Of the 
appellate judges who were required to be elected to their 
initial terms, 59% ran in partisan elections. Eighty-one 
percent of all appellate court judges were required to run 
in some type of election to retain their positions. The 
majority of appellate judges (52%) that ran for office did 
so in retention elections rather than partisan or 
nonpartisan elections. ***Footnote 2 In a retention 
election, a judge runs unopposed and is removed from office 
if a majority of votes are cast against retention. In a 
partisan election, a judge is listed with party affiliation, 
while in a nonpartisan election, the judge is listed on the 
ballot with no party affiliation***. Only 3% of appellate court 
judges served life terms in 2011.  

Among trial court judges, 75% were required to be elected to 
their initial terms. Of those trial court judges who ran in 
an election, 45% ran in partisan elections. For subsequent 
terms, 90% of all trial court judges were required to run in 
an election to retain their positions. Among trial court 
judges required to run in an election for subsequent terms, 
48% ran in nonpartisan elections. Only 1% of trial court 
judges served life terms in 2011.

************************************************************

*****************************
Varied routes to judgeship
*****************************

How judges come to the bench varies from state to state and 
may even vary within a state by type of court (e.g., trial 
compared to appellate court). States most often use one or 
more of the following methods to select judges:

* Appointment: Depending on the state, judges may be 
appointed by the governor, legislature, or a COLR chief 
justice. Some states use nominating committees, which 
provide the appointing body with a limited number of 
candidates from which to choose a judge (map 3).

* Partisan election: Judges may run in a contested election 
in which candidates must declare their political party 
affiliation (map 4).

* Nonpartisan election: Judges may run in a contested 
election but do not declare political party affiliation.

* Retention election: Sitting judges may retain their office 
through an uncontested retention election at the end of each 
term. Judges maintain their bench if the majority votes that 
they should be retained in office.
************************************************************

**************************************
Fewer states used partisan elections 
to fill appellate and general 
jurisdiction trial court judgeships
**************************************

Twelve states used partisan elections to fill appellate 
court judgeships for their initial terms in 1987, compared 
to 8 states in 2011 (table 6). Four states at the appellate 
court level moved away from using partisan elections. 
Tennessee changed from partisan election to appointment by 
the governor, while Arkansas, Mississippi, and North 
Carolina changed to nonpartisan elections.

Several states also moved away from using partisan elections 
to retain appellate court judges. In 1987, 10 states used 
partisan elections for the retention of appellate court 
judges, compared to 5 states in 2011. Arkansas, Mississippi, 
and North Carolina changed from partisan elections to 
nonpartisan elections for retention terms. New Mexico and 
Tennessee changed from partisan to uncontested retention 
elections. 

Fourteen states used partisan elections to fill initial 
terms of GJC trial judges in 1987, compared to 11 states in 
2011. Arkansas, North Carolina, and Mississippi all changed 
to nonpartisan elections to fill the initial terms of GJC 
judges. 

The number of states using a partisan election for the 
retention of GJC judges declined by 4 states from 1987 to 
2011. Arkansas, Mississippi, and North Carolina changed from 
partisan elections to nonpartisan elections for retention 
terms, while New Mexico changed from partisan to uncontested 
retention elections. 

**************************************
On average, judges serving in COLRs 
had the longest terms
**************************************

The length of judicial term varies by state, type of court, 
and method of selection. Excluding states where judges 
served life terms, judges serving in COLRs had the longest 
average length of judicial term (8 years) (table 7). The 
average term for appellate and trial court judges was 7 
years. Judges serving in COLRs had the largest range in 
judicial term (12 years), while judges serving in IACs had 
the least variation (9 years).

**************************************
Salaries for trial court judges were 
most often funded by the state
**************************************

Funding sources for GJCs and LJCs varied by type of 
expenditure. At least 50% of trial courts received their 
primary funding for the salaries of court administrators, 
research attorneys, court reporters, and judges from state 
funding sources (table 8). In comparison, expenditure items 
that were funded mostly at the county level included court 
security (57%), building property expenses (64%), pretrial 
services (61%), and Americans with Disabilities Act 
compliance (56%). While the majority of court expenditures 
were funded through the state, county, or a combination, 12% 
of state courts’ primary funding for court-ordered treatment 
expenditures came from other sources, such as federal funds 
or local fees.

**************************************
Two-thirds of state administrative 
offices of the courts had full 
responsibility for providing technical 
assistance and judicial education
**************************************

In every state, a central office is responsible for the 
administrative functions of the state’s trial court system. 
Administrative offices of the courts (AOCs) provide a wide 
range of services to support state courts. Of the 48 states 
and the District of Columbia reporting information, all 
state AOCs reported having at least some responsibility for 
providing research planning (table 9). Forty-eight state 
AOCs reported having at least some responsibility for 
providing information technology, state court statistics, 
serving as the liaison to legislature, and providing 
technical assistance. Thirty-three state AOCs had full 
responsibility for providing the courts with technical 
assistance and judicial education, and eleven state AOCs 
provided some type adult probation services to the courts 
(map 5).

**************************************
Jury size and verdict requirements 
varied by court jurisdiction and 
case type
**************************************

For GJCs, all states and the District of Columbia required a 
12-person jury when trying felony cases (table 10). Fifteen 
states required such courts to have a 6-person jury when 
hearing misdemeanor cases. All states and the District of 
Columbia required juries in GJCs to reach a unanimous 
verdict for felony and misdemeanor trials.*** Footnote 3 
3Kentucky’s GJC does not have authority to adjudicate 
misdemeanor jury trials***. For civil cases, 23 states and 
the District of Columbia required juries in GJCs to reach a 
unanimous verdict. 

Twenty-five states allowed LJCs to try misdemeanor cases. 
All 25 states except Delaware, Ohio, and Texas used 6-person 
juries. In Oklahoma, the LJC judge decided if the jury 
needed to reach a unanimous verdict in misdemeanor cases. 
Twenty-seven states allowed LJCs to try civil cases. All 27 
states, except Delaware, North Carolina, Ohio, and Texas, 
used 6-person juries. Eleven states required a unanimous 
verdict, while judges in Oklahoma decided if the jury needed 
to reach a unanimous verdict in civil cases.

**************
Methodology
**************

Data for the 1980, 1987, 1993, 1998, 2004, and 2011 State 
Court Organization (SCO) reports were collected by the 
National Center for State Courts (NCSC) with funding 
provided by the Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS). Data 
collections prior to 2011 were mail surveys to state court 
administrators in all 50 states, the District of Columbia, 
Puerto Rico, and U.S. territories. The 2011 SCO collected 
information from this same set of state court 
administrators, but the 2011 collection was primarily web-
based with paper surveys made available for respondents that 
preferred or needed a traditional response mode. All SCO 
data collections obtained court information at the state and 
jurisdictional levels, depending on the type of information 
collected. A survey aimed at state court administrators was 
designed to collect information on court organization, 
administration, and operation. Separate surveys designed to 
collect descriptive information (e.g., budget and staffing) 
were sent to appellate courts and trial courts. While 
respondents provided most of the information to complete the 
survey, staff at NCSC also compiled information on specific 
laws, legal procedures, and legal practices that applied 
statewide.

Data for this report were drawn from the five previously 
released SCO reports and the 2011 web-based interactive 
application tool. BJS summarized select data from the SCO 
2011 Interactive Application (accessed in February 2012) to 
produce the narrative, tables, maps, and figures found 
within the report. This report also used select standardized 
SCO data from 1980 to 2011, created by BJS staff, to analyze 
trends in state court organization over three decades. The 
topics presented in this report reflect many of the themes 
common to the SCO data collections and highlight some of the 
long-standing issues relevant to state court systems. This 
report presents information for all 50 states and the 
District of Columbia. It excludes information on Puerto Rico 
and the U.S. territories.

For more information, see State Court Organization, 1980, 
NCJ 76711, BJS website, May 1982; State Court Organization, 
1993, NCJ 148346, BJS website, January 1995; State Court 
Organization, 1998, NCJ 178932, BJS website, June 2000; and 
State Court Organization, 2004, NCJ 212351, BJS website, 
August 2006. For analysis of trends, see State Court 
Organization, 1987–2004, NCJ 217996, BJS website, October 
2007. Data for the individual 1998 and 2004 State Court 
Organization reports may be downloaded through the Inter-
University Consortium for Political and Social Science 
Research (ICPSR) website at 
http://www.icpsr.umich.edu/icpsrweb/landing.jsp. The 2011 
within-year data set and the standardized trend data sets 
for 1980 through 2011 used in this report are available for 
download through the ICPSR website.

************************************************************
The Bureau of Justice Statistics, located in the Office of 
Justice Programs, U.S. Department of Justice, collects, 
analyses, and disseminates statistical information on crime, 
criminal offenders, victims of crime, and the operation of 
justice systems at all levels of government. William J. 
Sabol is acting director. 

This report was written by Ron Malega, Ph.D., and Thomas H. 
Cohen, J.D., Ph.D., former BJS Statisticians. Tara Martin 
provided verification.

Vanessa Curto and Jill Thomas edited the report, and Tina 
Dorsey produced the report.

November 2013, NCJ 242850
************************************************************

***************************************************
Office of Justice Programs
Innovation * Partnerships * Safer Neighborhoods
www.ojp.usdoj.gov
****************************************************

*********************
11/13/13 JER 9:45am
*********************
