U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Programs
Bureau of Justice Statistics 

-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Note to readers of the ASCII version:
This file is text only without graphics and many of the tables. 
A Zip archive of the tables in this report in spreadsheet format 
(.wk1) and the full report including tables and graphics in
.pdf format are available from: 
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/abstract/sd97.htm.

This report is one in a series.  More recent
editions may be available.  To view a list of
all in the series go to
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/pubalp2.htm#sd 


-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Sheriffs' Departments 1993    
February 2000, NCJ 173428


Andrew L. Goldberg
and Brian A. Reaves, Ph.D.
BJS Statisticians 
     
--------------------------------------------------
Highlights

Personnel

* As of June 1997, sheriffs' departments had an estimated
263,427 full-time employees, including about 175,000 sworn
personnel.  Total employment was up by an average 4.4% per year
since 1993, compared to 3.1% per year from 1987 to 1993.   

* Racial and ethnic minorities com- prised 19% of full-time
sworn officers in sheriffs' departments in 1997.  This compared
to 16.9% in 1993, 15.5% in 1990, and 13.4% in 1987.

* Nearly all officers worked for departments that used
criminal record checks (99%), background investigations (98%),
driving record checks (95%), and medical exams (92%) to screen
applicants.  Psychological (75%), aptitude (69%), and physical
agility (59%) tests were also widely used.     

* In 1997, 1% of departments required a 4-year degree of new
deputy recruits and 7% a 2-year degree.  Overall, 11% of
departments required new deputy recruits to have completed at
least some college course work in 1997, up from 7% in 1993.

* Field and classroom training requirements for new deputy
recruits averaged more than 800 hours combined.  Three-fourths
of departments required deputies to complete inservice training
as well, with a median annual requirement of 20 hours.

Expenditures and pay

* Sheriffs' departments had total operating expenditures of
$13.1 billion during fiscal 1997, 10% more than in 1993 after
adjusting for inflation.  Expenditures averaged $73,000 per
sworn officer, and $49 per resident.

* Starting salaries for deputies averaged about $26,000, ranging
from an average of $19,400 in the smallest counties to $30,200
in the largest.  Nationwide, 48% of sheriffs' deputies worked
for a department that authorized collective bargaining.

Operations

* A large percentage of sheriffs' departments performed basic
law enforcement functions such as providing routine patrol
services (98%), responding to citizen calls for service (95%),
investigating crimes (91%), and enforcing traffic laws (84%).  

* Most sheriffs' departments had drug enforcement
responsibilities (87%), and just over half of them, employing
80% of all officers, had drug asset forfeiture receipts during
fiscal 1997.  About a third had officers assigned full-time to a
drug enforcement unit, and half had officers assigned to a
multiagency drug task force.  

* In addition to traditional law enforcement duties, nearly all
sheriffs' departments were responsible for performing
court-related functions such as serving civil process (98%) and
providing court security (95%).   Eighty percent operated a jail.

* About 5 in 6 sheriffs' departments participated in a 9-1-1
emergency telephone system during 1997, compared to 4 in 6
during 1993.  In 1997, 51% of departments had enhanced 9-1-1
systems (capable of pinpointing the source of a call
automatically) compared to 36% in 1993. 

Community policing

* Thirty-four percent of sheriffs' departments serving a
population of 250,000 or more had a formal written community
policing plan.  Overall, about 3 in 4 sheriffs' officers worked
for a department with some type of community plan.

* Thirty-five percent of departments serving a population of
100,000 or more had a community policing unit with full-time
personnel.  Another 16% had personnel who were designated to
perform community policing activities but were not part of a
separate unit.

* During the 3-year period ending June 30, 1997, about half of
sheriffs' departments trained at least some of their in-service
officers (55%) and new officer recruits (47%) in community
policing.  Twenty-nine percent reported all new recruits
received such training.

* About 5 in 6 sheriffs' departments met with community groups
during the 12-month period ending June 30, 1997.  More than a
fourth had formed problem-solving partnerships through written
agreements (29%).  

* An estimated 38% of sheriffs' departments, employing 63% of
all officers, had deputies assigned full-time as school resource
officers.  Nationwide,  about 2,900 deputies worked as school
resource officers during 1997.  

Equipment

* Ninety-five percent of sheriffs' departments, employing 98% of
all sheriffs' officers, authorized the use of semiautomatic
sidearms in 1997.  These percentages represented increases over
the 1993 figures of 82% and 91%.

* In 1997 nearly all sheriffs' departments authorized the use of
nonlethal weapons by officers.  From 1993 to 1997, the
percentage authorizing pepper spray increased from 56% to 87%
while the percentage authorizing batons remained at about 80%. 

* Thirty-nine percent of sheriffs' departments required all of
their regular field officers to wear protective body armor while
on duty in 1997, up from 30% in 1993.

* Nationwide, sheriffs' departments operated approximately
100,000 cars during 1997, or about 54 per 100 officers.   About
a third of these cars were unmarked.

* Nearly a third of sheriffs' depart- ments were using boats in
1997, including about half of those serving a population of
50,000 or more.  Small percentages used airplanes (4%) or
helicopters (4%).

Computers and information 
systems

* Ninety-three percent of sheriffs' departments used computers
in 1997, compared to 82% in 1993.  In 1997, 29% of departments,
employing 66% of all officers, used mobile computers or
terminals in the field compared to 17% and 50% in 1993.

* In 1997, about 3 in 4 sheriffs' departments maintained
computerized information on warrants (75%), arrests (74%) and
incident reports (74%).  About 3 in 5 had files on calls for
service (60%), criminal histories (60%), and stolen property (59%).

* In nearly 1 in 8 departments, at least some officers could
access vehicle and driving records by computer while in the
field.  This was the case in about half of the departments
serving a population of 250,000 or more. 

* About 7 in 8 sheriffs' departments transmitted criminal
incident field data  to a central information system through
paper reports in 1997.  The remainder used other methods such as
laptop download, disk transfer, wireless transmission, or
telephone lines. 

Written policy directives

* Nearly all sheriffs' departments (93%) had a written policy on
pursuit driving.  Most (57%) limited vehicle pursuits according
to specific criteria such as speed or offense.  About 30% had a
policy that left the decision to the officer's discretion.  Five
percent discouraged all vehicle pursuits.

* Ninety-one percent of sheriffs' departments, employing 99% of
all officers, had a written policy on the use of deadly force. 
Eighty-four percent, employing 89% of all officers, had a policy
on the use of nonlethal force.  

Eighty-five percent of sheriffs' departments had a policy on
handling domestic disputes.  Most also had a policy on handling
juveniles (83%) and mentally ill persons (67%). 

-----------------------End of highlights----------------------------

The LEMAS survey

During 1997, the Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS), as a part of its 
Law Enforcement Management and Adminstrative Statistics (LEMAS) program, 
surveyed a nationally representative sample of the nearly 19,000 State 
and local law enforcement agencies operating nationwide.  Previous 
LEMAS surveys were conducted in 1987, 1990, and 1993.

This report presents data from the 1997 survey describing the
more than 3,000 sheriffs' departments and offices operating in
the United States in terms of their personnel, expenditures and
pay, operations, community policing initiatives, equipment,
computers and information systems, and written policies. 
Comparisons are made with prior years where appropriate.

Sheriffs' departments are operated by county or independent city
governments.  Because sheriffs are typically elected officials,
some agencies are known as offices.  The term departments is
used universally in this report as a matter of convenience.

The 1997 LEMAS survey questionnaire was mailed to 3,597 State
and local law enforcement agencies, including all 968 agencies
with 100 or more sworn officers (see Methodology for a
description of the sample).  The overall response rate was
94.9%.  Among sheriffs' departments, 915 of 1,001 surveys were
returned for a 91.4% response rate.  

This report and its companion report (Local Police Departments
1997 NCJ-173429), summarize data collected from agencies of all
sizes. Detailed agency-by-agency tabulations from the 1997 LEMAS
survey were previously published for agencies with 100 or more 
officers (see Law Enforcement Management and Administrative 
Statistics, 1997, NCJ-171681).

Personnel

As of June 30, 1997, sheriffs' departments had an estimated
263,427 full-time employees (table 1).  They employed an
additional 20,025 persons on a part-time basis.  About 175,000,
or 66%, of full-time sheriffs' department employees were sworn
officers.

Sheriffs' departments employed a fourth of all State and local
sworn officers nationwide.  Their 88,754 nonsworn employees
comprised about a third of all nonsworn State and local law
enforcement employees.

There were about 39,000, or 17.4%, more full-time employees in
sheriffs' departments in 1997 than in 1993. (figure 1).  For all
State and local law enforcement agencies, the increase in number
of employees from 1993 to 1997 was about 107,000, or 12.8%. 

When only sworn personnel are considered, employment by
sheriffs' departments increased by 19,000, or 12.1%, from 1993
to 1997.  Overall, the number of sworn personnel employed by
State and local law enforcement agencies in 1997 was up by
68,000, or 10.9%, compared to 1993.

Nationwide, 363 sheriffs' departments employed at least 100
sworn personnel (11.8%), including 17 with 1,000 or more
officers (0.6%) (table 2).  Nearly 900 departments employed
fewer than 10 officers (28.4%), including 35 with just one sworn
officer (1.1%). 

About a third of all full-time sheriffs' officers were employed
by a department with 500 or more officers, and about two-thirds
were employed by one with at least 100 officers. Sheriffs'
departments that employed fewer than 10 officers accounted for
2.4% of all sheriffs' officers nationwide. 

Twenty-five largest sheriffs' departments 
by number and function of full-time sworn 
personnel, 1997

As of June 1997, the largest sheriff's department was the Los
Angeles County (CA) Sheriff's Department with 8,021 full-time
sworn personnel.  About half of these officers were assigned to
the area of law enforcement field operations, making it at least
4 times larger than any other law enforcement operation among
sheriffs' departments.  The agency had about 2,200 officers
working in its jails and about 1,400 assigned to court-related
duties.  The agency also had about 4,500 full-time civilian
employees. 

Cook County (IL) operated the second largest sheriff's
department; however, just 11% of its officers were assigned to
law enforcement field operations.  Just over half worked in
jail-related positions, and slightly more than a third primarily
performed court-related duties.

Among the 25 largest sheriffs' departments, 10 had more officers
assigned to field operations than any other function, while 15
had the largest number assigned to jail operations.

Seventeen agencies had officers assigned to court operations,
with the percentage ranging from 4% to 36%.

Although 51% of all sheriffs' departments served a jurisdiction
with fewer than 25,000 residents, these departments employed
just 10% of all sheriffs' officers nationwide (table 3).  About
half of all sheriffs' officers served a jurisdiction with
250,000 or more residents, including more than a fifth in
jurisdictions with a population of 1 million or more.  

On average, sheriffs' departments nationwide had 85 full-time
employees including 57 sworn personnel (table 4). Sheriffs'
departments in jurisdictions with a population of 1 million or
more had an average of 1,916 full-time employees, including 1,226 
sworn officers and 690 civilian employees.  In contrast, sheriffs' 
departments in jurisdictions with fewer than 10,000 residents 
employed an average of 6 full-time sworn officers, and 3 full-
time civilians. 

Gender and race of officers

Of the estimated 174,673 full-time sworn personnel employed by
sheriffs' departments in 1997, about 16% were women (table 5). 
The percentage of female officers varied slightly across
population sizes, ranging from about 20% in jurisdictions with a
population of 500,000 to 999,999, to about 12% in jurisdictions 
with a population of under 25,000.  

In 1997, 19% of full-time sheriffs' officers were members of a
racial or ethnic minority, with the percentage of minority officers 
higher than this in jurisdictions with a population of 500,000 
or more.  

Blacks accounted for about 12% of all sheriffs' officers in
1997, with departments serving a population of 500,000 or more
employing the highest percentage of black officers (17%).  About
6% of sheriffs' officers nationwide were Hispanic, with
departments serving a population of 1 million or more having the
most Hispanic officers (13.5%).  

In 1997 there were 27,216 female sheriffs' officers, about
4,600, or 20%, more than in 1993.  During this time female
representation among sheriffs' officers increased from 14.5% to
15.6% (figure 2).  The number of sheriffs' officers who were
members of a racial or ethnic minority in 1997 (33,181)
represented an increase of about 7,000, or 26%, over 1993
levels.  Minority representation increased from 16.9% to 19%
during this time.

The estimated 20,588 full-time black officers employed by
sheriffs' departments in 1997 represented an increase of about
5,000, or 32%, compared to 1993.  This resulted in an increase
in the percentage of officers who were black from 10% to 11.8%. 
There were an estimated 10,342 Hispanic officers employed by
sheriffs' departments in 1997.  This was 15% more than in 1993
(8,979). The percentage of sheriffs' officers represented by
Hispanics in 1997 (5.9%) was about the same as in 1993 (5.8%).

Screening of officer applicants 

Sheriffs' departments employed a variety of screening methods
when hiring new officers (table 6).  Nearly all used interviews
(98%), criminal record checks (96%), background investigations
(93%), and driving record checks (90%).  About three-fourths of
departments used medical exams (73%), including about 90% of
those serving 100,000 or more residents.  About half used
psychological screening (52%), including more than 80% of those
serving 250,000 or more residents.

Just under half of all sheriffs' departments used drug tests
(44%) and mental aptitude tests (43%) as screening devices.  A
majority of the departments serving a population of 50,000 or
more residents used these methods.

About a third of departments used a physical agility test to
screen officer applicants, including 89% of those serving 1
million or more residents.  In contrast, just a third of the
departments serving from 10,000 to 99,999 residents, and a
fourth of those serving fewer than 10,000 residents did so.

Education and training requirements

Nearly all (97%) sheriffs' departments had an education
requirement for new deputy recruits (table 7).  The typical
minimum requirement was a high school diploma or equivalent
(86%).  About 11% of departments had some type of college
requirement, usually a 2-year degree (7%).  Just 1% required new
deputy recruits to have a 4-year college degree.

Eleven percent of sheriffs' officers nationwide were employed by
a department that had some type of college requirement for new
deputy recruits, compared to 7% in 1993. 

On average, sheriffs' departments required 538 training hours of
new deputy recruits, with about two-thirds  of it in the
classroom (table 8).   Departments serving a population of
500,000 to 999,999 (1,003 hours) required more than twice as
much as those serving a population of under 25,000.

When departments are weighted according to number of officers,
it is estimated that the average new deputy recruit in 1997 was
required to undergo more than 800 hours of training, with about
three-fifths of it in the classroom. 

In addition to entry-level requirements, about three-fourths of
sheriffs' departments required officers to complete in-service
training.  The median annual requirement was 20 hours.   

From 1990 to 1997, the median number of training hours required
of new deputy recruits increased in all population categories
(figure 3).  The largest increase was among departments serving
100,000 to 499,999 residents -- from 496 hours to 680 hours; and
among departments serving 500,000 or more residents -- from 800
hours to 870 hours. 

Six percent of sheriffs' departments, employing about a third of
all sheriffs' officers, operated a training academy.  Two-thirds
of the departments serving  1 million or more residents did so,
compared to less than 10% of those   serving a population under
100,000.

Population         Percent with
served             training academy
 
  All sizes              6%
 
1,000,000 or more       68%
500,000-999,999         29
250,000-499,999         28
100,000-249,999         13
50,000-99,999            6
25,000-49,999            4
10,000-24,999            2
Under 10,000             1
 
Expenditures and pay

Operating expenditures

The total operating expenditure of sheriffs' departments during
fiscal 1997 was about $13.1 billion, 22% more than in 1993
(table 9).  Controlling for inflation, the net increase in
spending was 10%. (These figures do not include capital
expenditures such as equipment purchases or construction
projects).  Sheriffs' departments accounted for about a fourth
of the $50.7 billion in total operating expenditures for State
and local law enforcement agencies during fiscal 1997. 

               Agency operating
               expenditures (in billions)
                  1997        1993
 
   Total          $50.7       $41.9
 
Local police      $29.2       $24.3
Sheriff            13.1        10.7
State police        5.2         4.2
Special police      3.2         2.8

Nationwide, operating expenditures averaged about $4.25 million
per  department for fiscal 1997, ranging from an average of
about $114 million for departments serving a population of 1
million or more, to $342,000 among those serving fewer than
10,000 residents.

The overall operating cost per resident was $49, with
departments in jurisdictions with a population of less than
10,000 costing the most to operate, $60 per resident. 

Nationwide, sheriffs' departments cost an estimated $73,000 per
sworn officer to operate for fiscal 1997, ranging from $93,300
per officer in jurisdictions with 1 million or more residents to
about  half that amount in jurisdictions with a population of
10,000 to 24,999.  

When both sworn and nonsworn employees are included, the average
operating expenditure for sheriffs' departments was $48,000 per
employee for the year, with a high of about $59,000 per employee
in jurisdictions with 500,000 or more residents.  Overall,
employee salaries and benefits accounted for about $4 of every
$5 in operating expenditures.

Salaries

The overall average base starting salary for sheriffs was
$44,400 in 1997 (table 10). Starting salaries for sheriffs
ranged from $98,900 in jurisdictions with 1 million or more
residents to $31,300 in jurisdictions with a population of less
than 10,000.

The average base starting salary offered by sheriffs'
departments to entry-level deputies was about $21,500 in 1997. 
This was 11% more than in 1993, but the net increase after
controlling for inflation was just 0.2%.

Departments serving 50,000 or more residents had an average
starting salary that was higher than the overall average,
ranging from $22,600 in those serving 50,000 to 99,999 residents
to $30,200 in those serving with 1 million or more residents. 
The average starting salary for deputies in departments serving
a population of less than 10,000 was 10% below the overall
average.

When departments are weighted according to number of officers,
the estimated average base starting salary for entry-level
deputies in 1997 was $25,800.  This increased by $2,000 for
those with 1 year of experience. 

Salaries for the positions of sergeant or equivalent increased
with jurisdiction size in a pattern similar to that for
entry-level officers.  Overall, the average starting salary for
sergeants was $27,700, ranging from $43,700 in the largest
jurisdictions to $23,900 in the smallest jurisdictions.  When
departments are weighted according to size, the estimated
average base starting salary for sergeants was $35,300.

Except for the largest agencies, base starting salaries for
entry-level officers were generally lower in sheriffs' 
departments than in comparably sized local police departments
(figure 4). The greatest difference was found among agencies
with at least 25 officers but fewer than 250 -- more than $5,000
per year on average.  

Sheriffs' departments with at least 250 but fewer than 1,000
officers had starting salaries that averaged $2,600 lower than
local police departments; however, sheriffs' departments employing 
1,000 or more sworn personnel offered a starting salary to entry-level 
officers that was similar to that found in local police departments.

Special pay

Nationwide, 17% of all sheriffs' departments offered education
incentive pay to qualifying officers, including over half of
those serving a population of at least 250,000 residents (table
11).  Most of the departments serving a population of 250,000 or
more offered education incentive pay, and nearly half of all
sheriffs' officers nationwide worked for a department that
offered it.

Hazardous duty pay was available in just 5% of all sheriffs'
departments; however, about a third of the departments in
jurisdictions with a population of 500,000 or more offered it. 
Nationwide, about a fourth of all sheriffs' officers were
employed by a department that offered hazardous duty pay.

Nineteen percent of sheriffs' departments, employing 38% of all
sheriffs' officers nationwide, offered merit pay to qualifying
officers.  More than half of the departments serving a
population between 500,000 and 999,999 offered merit pay to
officers compared to a tenth of those serving fewer than 10,000
residents.

Seventeen percent of all sheriffs' departments offered shift
differential pay to their full-time officers.  Half of the
departments in jurisdictions with at least 1 million residents
and about two-fifths of those serving 250,000 to 999,999
residents had shift differential pay.  Nationwide about a third
of all sheriffs' officers were employed by a department with
shift differential pay. 

Work-related policies

About three-fifths of sheriffs' departments, employing
two-thirds of all officers, had a written policy pertaining to
the maximum number of hours that officers can work (table 12). 
Departments serving a population of at least 250,000 but less
than 1 million (78%) were the most likely to maintain such a
policy.

Seventy-two percent of all departments, employing 90% of all
officers, had a written policy on off-duty employment.  More than 
90% of the departments serving a population of 1 million or more or 
a population of 50,000 to 99,999 had such a policy, compared to about 
half of the departments serving a population of less than 10,000.

Unions and collective bargaining

Thirty-eight percent of all sheriffs' departments authorized
police union membership by their sworn personnel, including a
majority of those in jurisdictions with 250,000 or more
residents (table 13).  Nationwide, about half of all sheriffs'
officers were employed by a department that authorized them to
belong to a police union.

Thirty percent of all departments, employing 38% of all officers
nationwide, authorized membership in a nonpolice union. 
Seventy-four percent of all departments authorized officer
membership in a police association.  These departments employed
82% of all sheriffs' officers nationwide. 

Nationwide, 31% of all sheriffs' departments, employing 48% of
all officers, authorized collective bargaining for sworn
personnel (table 14).  About two-thirds of the departments
serving a population of 250,000 to 999,999 and three-fourths of
those serving a population of 1 million or more authorized
collective bargaining for officers.  Just 1 in 6 departments in
jurisdictions with fewer than 10,000 residents did so. 

Nonsworn personnel in sheriffs' departments were slightly less
likely to have collective bargaining rights than sworn
employees.  Overall, 26% of departments, employing 43% of all
nonsworn personnel, authorized collective bargaining for such
employees. 

Operations

Patrol and response

Ninety-eight percent of sheriffs' departments provided routine
patrol services in their jurisdiction during 1997 (table 15). 
Only in jurisdictions with 500,000 or more residents, did less
than 90% of the departments have routine patrol responsibilities.

Typically, sheriffs' departments provide patrol and other law
enforcement services to unincorporated areas of a county, and to
incorporated areas not served by local police.  Nationwide, 95%
of all sheriffs' officers were employed by a department that
provided routine patrol services.

Nearly all sheriffs' departments used automobiles (98%) for
routine patrol.  Eighteen percent of departments routinely used
some form of marine patrol (18%), including about two-fifths of
those serving a population of 250,000 or more.  About 1 in 6
departments used foot patrols on a routine basis, while less
than 1 in 10 used bicycles (6%), motorcycles (4%), or horses
(2%) for routine patrol.

More than a third of sheriffs' departments provided foot patrol
during special events although they did not perform such patrols
on a routine basis.  Horse (14%) and marine (12%) units were the
next most likely types of patrol to be used during special
events, but not on a routine basis.  

               Percent of
Type of        agencies using for
patrol         special events only
Foot                  37%
Horse                 14
Marine                12
Bicycle                6
Motorcycle             5
Automobile             1

Ninety-five percent of sheriffs' departments reported they had
primary responsibility for responding to citizen calls for
service (table 16).  The percentage of departments that responded to 
service calls was 97% or higher in all population categories less 
than 100,000.  

Three-fourths of sheriffs' departments had responsibility for
dispatching calls for service to officers in the field, with
departments serving a population of less than 25,000 the most
likely to provide dispatch services.

9-1-1 emergency telephone system

In 1997, 84% of sheriffs' departments participated in an 9-1-1
emergency  telephone system whereby one of their units could be
dispatched as a result of a citizen call to 9-1-1 or its
equivalent (table 17).  At least 70% of the departments in each
population category were 9-1-1 participants in 1997, including
about 90% of those serving 25,000 to 499,999 residents.   

Three-fifths of sheriffs' department 9-1-1 systems were enhanced, 
capable of pinpointing the location of a caller automatically.  More 
than two-thirds of departments serving a population of 100,000 to 
499,999 had enhanced 9-1-1, compared to about a third of those serving 
a population of less than 10,000. This latter category was the only 
one where a majority of 9-1-1 systems used by sheriffs' departments
were not enhanced.

The 84% participation rate in 9-1-1 among sheriffs' departments
in 1997 was a significant increase from 1993 when 65% of all
sheriffs' departments were 9-1-1 participants, and twice the
percentage of departments with 9-1-1 participation in 1990 (42%)
(figure 5).  

The half of sheriffs' departments participating in an enhanced
9-1-1 system in 1997 represented a sizable increase over 1993,
when just over a third were participants, and was nearly 5 times
the proportion reporting such a capability in 1990.

In 1997, 88% of all sheriffs' officers worked for a department
with 9-1-1, and 66% worked for one with enhanced 9-1-1.  The
comparative percentages for 1993 were 79% and 60%, respectively. 

Crime investigation

Overall, 91% of sheriffs' departments had primary responsibility
for investigating at least some types of crimes.  Eighty-seven
percent had primary responsibility for investigating violent
crimes such as murder, rape, robbery, or assault (table 18). 
Departments serving a population of less than 100,000 were more
likely to be responsible for such investigations than those in
larger jurisdictions.

Eighty-eight percent of sheriffs' departments had primary
responsibility for  investigating property crimes such as 
burglary, larceny, or motor vehicle theft.  As with violent
crimes, departments serving fewer than 100,000 residents were
the most likely to handle property crime investigations.  

Seventy-two percent of sheriffs' departments were responsible
for arson investigations, with those serving a population of
less than 250,000 the most likely to handle such incidents.  

Forty-two percent of sheriffs' departments were responsible for
investigating environmental crimes, ranging from about half of
those serving a population of less than 10,000 to about a fourth
of serving 250,000 to 499,999 residents.

Investigative support functions

About two-thirds of sheriffs' departments were responsible for
fingerprint processing (65%) (table 19).  This included at least
61% of the departments in each population category.

Overall, few sheriffs' departments were responsible for
providing crime lab services (6%) or conducting ballistics tests
(2%).  Departments in jurisdictions with a population of 1
million or more were the most likely to be responsible for these
functions: 47% were responsible for crime lab services and 29%
for ballistics testing. 

Drug and vice enforcement

An estimated 87% of all sheriffs' departments had primary
responsibility for drug enforcement in their jurisdiction (table
20).  More than 90% of departments in jurisdictions with a
population of less than 25,000 were  responsible for drug
enforcement, compared to 59% of those in jurisdictions with
500,000 to 999,999 residents.

About half of all sheriffs' departments had primary vice
enforcement responsibilities.  A majority of the departments in
jurisdictions with a population of 25,000 or more performed this
function.

About a third of sheriffs' departments operated a special unit
for drug enforcement with one or more full-time officers
assigned (table 21).  Three-fourths of department serving a population 
of 1 million or more had a full-time drug enforcement unit, as did 
about half of the departments serving a population of 250,000 to 999,999.
Departments serving a population of less than 10,000 (14%) were
the least likely to have a full-time drug enforcement unit. 

The number of officers assigned full-time to drug enforcement
units totaled over 3,500 nationwide.  Another 900 were assigned
on a part-time basis.  Departments serving a population of 1
million or more assigned an average of 25 full-time officers
each, compared to an average of 2 in those serving a population
of less than 50,000. 

Drug testing of employees in sheriffs' 
departments, 1997

About three-fifths of sheriffs' departments had some type of
program that authorized the testing of regular field and patrol
officers for illegal drug use.  These departments employed 84%
of all sheriffs' officers.

Departments serving a population of 100,000 or more were the
most likely to have a drug testing program for 
officers, with percentages in these categories ranging from 77%
to 87%.  Departments serving a population of less than 10,000
(45%) were the least likely to test any officers for drug use.

In 23% of departments, employing 27% of all officers, all
field/patrol officers were subject to drug testing.  Twenty
percent of departments, employing 35% of all officers, used a
random selection method for choosing those to be tested.  

A fourth of departments had a policy authorizing drug tests of
officers suspected of using illegal drugs.  These departments
employed 42% of all sheriffs' officers.

Just over half of sheriffs' departments included civilian
employees under some type of drug testing program.  These
departments employed about two-thirds of all nonsworn sheriffs'
department personnel.  About a third of departments had either
mandatory drug testing (18%) of nonsworn employees or used a
random selection method (16%).  A fourth of departments,
employing 40% of all nonsworn employees, had a testing program
that authorized testing of civilian employees who were suspected
of using illegal drugs.

Drug task force participation

In 1997 half of sheriffs' departments, employing two-thirds of
all officers, assigned 1 or more officers to a multi-agency drug
enforcement task force (table 22).  About 2,900 officers were
assigned full-time, and 1,100 on a part-time basis.  The number
of full-time task force officers ranged from 10 in departments
serving 1 million or more residents to 1 in those serving fewer
than 10,000 residents.

Drug asset forfeiture

Just over half (54%) of all sheriffs' departments, employing
four-fifths of all sheriffs' officers, had asset forfeiture
receipts during the 12-month period ending June 1997 (table 23).
A majority of departments serving a population of 25,000 or
more, including nearly all of those serving 1 million or more
residents, had drug asset forfeiture receipts.  Collectively,
sheriffs' departments received an estimated $158 million in
money, goods, and property from drug asset forfeiture programs.

The overall median amount received from asset forfeiture
programs by sheriffs' departments in fiscal 1997 was $10,000. 
By population category,  median total receipts ranged from more
than $300,000 among departments serving a population of 1
million or more to $3,000 among those serving fewer than 10,000
residents.   

Sheriffs' departments received $878 in money, goods, and
property from drug asset forfeiture programs for every officer
employed (figure 6).  Departments with at least 50 but fewer
than 250 full-time officers, received the most -- more than
$1,500 per officer.  

The largest departments (1,000 or more officers), and the
smallest departments (fewer than 25 officers) had asset
forfeiture receipts of about $500 per officer.  Departments with
250 to 999 officers had the lowest receipts per officer -- about
$350.

Traffic and vehicle-related functions

About 5 in 6 sheriffs' departments were responsible for the
enforcement of traffic laws (84%), and about three-fourths
handled accident investigations (73%) (table 24).  Approximately
two-thirds (69%) were responsible for directing and controlling
traffic.

At least 60% of the departments in each population category had
traffic-related responsibilities, with departments in the
smallest jurisdictions the most likely to handle these
functions.  Ninety-two percent of those serving a population of
less than 10,000 were responsible for traffic enforcement. 
About 85% of these departments  handled accident investigations
and 76%, traffic direction and control.

About a third of sheriffs' departments had primary
responsibility for parking enforcement; including about 4 in 10
departments serving a population of 250,000 or more residents. 
About 1 in 8 departments provided school crossing services. 

Court-related functions

To a much greater extent than their local police counterparts, 
sheriffs' departments were responsible for functions related to court
operations  (see box on page 14).  Nearly all sheriffs'
departments had primary responsibility for serving civil process
(98%), executing arrest warrants (97%), and providing court
security (95%) (table 25).  Only in jurisdictions with a
population of 1 million or more did fewer than 90% of the
departments have responsibility for these functions.

At least 96% of the departments in each population category of
less than 500,000 were responsible for serving civil process. 
Nationwide, 93% of all sheriffs' officers were employed by a
department that handled process serving. 

At least 98% of the sheriffs' departments in each population
category under 100,000 were responsible for executing arrest
warrants.  Overall, 94% of all sheriffs' officers were employed
by a department handled this function.

At least 94% of the departments in each population category in
each of less than 1 million provided court security services. 
Ninety-two percent of all sheriffs' officers were employed by a
department responsible for court security. 

Detention-related functions

Sheriffs' departments were also much more likely than local
police departments to operate a jail.  A jail is a locally
administered confinement facility that holds inmates beyond
arraignment, usually for more than 48 hours.  

About 4 in 5 sheriffs' departments were operating at least one
jail during 1997 (table 26).  In jurisdictions with a population
of 10,000 to 99,999, more than 4 in 5 sheriffs' departments
operated a jail, a slightly higher proportion than in other
population categories.  Ninety percent of sheriffs' officers
nationwide were employed by a department that operated one or
more jails.

Most of the 567,000 jail inmates held in the United States as of
midyear 1997 were in jails administered by sheriffs'
departments.  The Nation's jail population increased by about
24% from 1993 to 1997. 

Eighteen percent of sheriffs' departments operated at least 1
temporary holding facility for adults that was separate from a
jail (table 27).  The median of the maximum holding times for
these facilities was 14 hours. 

More than 60% of the departments in jurisdictions with a
population of 250,000 or more were operating a temporary adult
lockup facility.  Less  than a fifth of the departments serving
a population of less than 100,000 had such a facility.

For adult lockup facilities, the median total capacity was 14
persons, ranging from 250 in jurisdictions with 1 million or
more residents to 5 in jurisdictions with 25,000 to 49,999
residents.   The total adult capacity of sheriffs' lockups
nationwide was about 40,000. 

Ten percent of sheriffs' departments had at least 1 juvenile
lockup facility. Overall, the median total capacity of juvenile
lockup facilities was 4 persons, with an median maximum holding
time of 8 hours.  Departments serving a population of less than
25,000 (8%) were the least likely to operate a temporary lockup
facility for juveniles.  Nationwide, sheriffs' lockups for
juveniles had a total capacity of 3,100.

Special operations functions

A majority (58%) of sheriffs' departments had primary
responsibility for search and rescue operations in their
jurisdiction during 1997 (table 28).  Departments performing
search and rescue operations employed nearly two-thirds of all
sheriffs' officers. 

A third of sheriffs' departments were responsible for tactical,
or Special Weapons and Tactics (SWAT) operations, including a
majority of those serving a population of 50,000 or more. 
Departments performing tactical operations employed two-thirds
of all sheriffs' officers.

About a fourth of all sheriffs' departments had responsibility
for underwater recovery.  This included half of departments
serving a population of 1 million or more, and about two-fifths
of those serving a population of at least 50,000 but less than 1
million.

Eight percent of sheriffs' departments handled bomb disposal in
1997.  Half of the departments serving a population of 1 million
or more residents, two-fifths of those serving 500,000 to
999,999 residents, and a third of those serving 250,000 to
499,999 residents had bomb disposal responsibilities.

Special public safety functions

Another important area of responsibility for sheriffs'
departments in 1997 involved the performance of special functions 
related to public safety.   For example, about a third of departments 
had primary responsibility for animal control (table 29).  This 
included about two-fifths of departments serving a population of less
than 10,000, and about a third of those serving a population of
10,000 to 99,999.

A fifth of all sheriffs' departments were responsible for civil
defense functions, ranging from 29% of those serving fewer than
10,000 residents to 7% of those serving 1 million or more
residents.  

About a fifth of sheriffs' departments  provided emergency
medical services, including a fourth of those departments
serving fewer than 25,000 residents.  Eight percent of sheriffs'
departments provided fire services in 1997.  None of the
departments in jurisdictions with 500,000 or more residents were
responsible for providing fire services.

Community policing

Community policing is a philosophy that promotes and supports
organizational strategies to address the causes and reduce the
fear of crime and social disorder through problem-solving
tactics and community partnerships.  A fundamental shift from 
traditional reactive policing, community policing stresses the 
prevention of crime before it occurs.  The implementation of a 
community policing plan supports and empowers front-line officers,
decentralizes command, and encourages innovative problem solving.

In 1997 about 1 in 7 sheriffs' departments had a formally
written community policing plan (table 30).  About a third of
departments serving 250,000 or more residents had a formally
written plan, compared to less than a tenth of the departments
in jurisdictions with  fewer than 25,000 residents.  Departments
with a formal, written community policing plan employed 33% of
all sheriffs' officers.

In all population categories, a majority of sheriffs'
departments had either a formal, written community policing plan
or an informal, unwritten plan (figure 7).  About three-fourths
of all sheriff's  officers worked for a department with some type 
of community policing plan.

In the largest jurisdictions, about a third of the community
policing plans were  unwritten, and a third were formally
written.  As population size decreased, the proportion of plans
that were informal increased.  Nearly half of the departments
serving fewer than 25,000 residents had no community policing
plan, formally written or not.

Community policing training

During the 3-year period ending June 30, 1997, nearly half of
sheriffs' departments, employing three-fifths of all officers,
trained at least some new officer recruits in community
policing-skills such as problem solving; Scanning, Analysis, Response, 
Assessment (SARA); and developing community partnerships (table 31).
At least half of the departments in each population category of
25,000 or more trained some or all new officer recruits in
community policing.  

Nearly a third of departments trained all new recruits in
community policing.  More than two-fifths of the departments
serving a population of 500,000 to 999,999 or 100,000 to 249,999
provided such training to all recruits.  

A sixth of departments trained all in-service sworn personnel in
community policing during the 3-year period ending June 30,
1997.  More than half (55%) provided community policing-training
to at least some in-service officers.  These departments employed
nearly three-fourths of all sheriffs' officers.  Departments
serving 1 million or more  residents (75%) were the most likely
to have trained at least some in-service officers in community
policing. 

Specially designated community 
policing personnel

In 1997, 15% of sheriffs' departments, employing 45% of
sheriff's officers nationwide, operated a community policing
unit with 1 or more officers assigned full-time (table 32). 
More than half of the departments serving a population of 1
million or more residents had a full-time community policing
unit.  About two-fifths of the departments serving 250,000 to
999,999 residents had a full-time unit.

About a fifth of sheriffs' departments did not have a full-time
community policing unit, but had designated certain personnel to
perform community policing activities.  Another sixth did not a
have a full-time unit or specially designated community policing
personnel, but had established policies or procedures to address
problems and tasks related to community policing.  This was most
likely to be the case in departments serving fewer than 10,000
residents (24%).

Nearly half (47%) of sheriffs' departments had no community
policing unit, personnel, policies or procedures.  This included a 
majority of the departments serving fewer than 10,000 residents, 
generally those serving the most rural areas. 

Overall, a third of departments had full-time sworn personnel
serving as community policing officers, whether as part of a
separate unit or not (table 33).  In some jurisdictions, these
officers are known as community relations officers, community
resource officers, or by some other name that reflects the
community policing approach they employ.  Nationwide, sheriffs'
departments employed more than 3,600 community policing officers
or their equivalent. 

A majority of departments serving a population of 250,000 or
more had full-time community policing officers.  Those in 
jurisdictions with 1 million or more residents employed 25 such 
officers on average, while those serving fewer than 50,000 residents 
had an average of 2 each.

About 3 in 8 sheriffs' departments had  full-time school
resource officers (table 34).  These officers use a community
policing approach to provide a safe environment for students and
staff.  In addition to handling calls for service within the
school, they work closely with school administrators and staff
to prevent crime and disorder by monitoring crime trends,
problem areas, cultural conflicts, and other areas of concern. 
Overall, sheriffs' departments had about 2,900 full-time sworn
personnel assigned as school resource officers in 1997.

Nearly two-thirds of the departments serving a population of 1
million or more had school resource officers, with an average of
11 each.  Just a sixth of the departments serving a population
of less than 10,000 had school resource officers, with an
average of 1 such officer each.

Community-oriented policies 
and programs

Half of sheriffs' departments, employing three-fourths of all
sheriffs' officers, gave patrol officers responsibility for
specific geographic areas or beats (table 35).  This included
about two-thirds of the departments serving a population of 100,000 
or more.

Just 15% of departments, employing 43% of all officers, assigned
cases to investigators by geographic area, although about half
of the departments serving a population of 500,000 or more did
so.

About a fifth of sheriffs' departments, employing a third of all
officers, actively encouraged patrol officers to become involved
in problem-solving projects.  The percentage of departments
encouraging this activity ranged from 39% in the largest
jurisdictions to 14% in the smallest.  Eleven percent of
departments, employing 24% of all officers, included
problem-solving projects in the performance evaluation criteria
for patrol officers.

Many sheriffs' departments maintained written policy directives
to guide officers in dealing with special situations and
populations in the community.  For example, 85% of departments,
employing 88% of all officers, had a written policy to guide
officers in dealing with domestic disputes (table 36). No less
than 73% of the departments in any population category had a
written policy for this type of situation.  In special
situations such as domestic disputes, some departments allow for
officer discretion in making an arrest.  About 3 in 5
departments, employing 2 in 3 officers, had some type of written
policy pertaining to discretionary arrest power.

Eighty-three percent of departments, employing 91% of all
officers, had a written policy pertaining to the handling of
juveniles, and 67%, employing 75% of all officers, had one for
dealing with mentally ill persons.  Less than a fourth of
departments had a policy for dealing with the homeless, with no
more than 25% in any population category having such a policy. 

Nearly three-fourths of sheriffs' departments had a written
policy for handling citizen complaints, including about 9 in 10
departments serving a population of 250,000 or more.

About 3 in 10 sheriffs' departments enhanced their proactive
role in solving community problems during the 12-month period
ending June 30, 1997, by forming problem-solving partnerships
with community groups, local agencies, or others through written
agreements (table 37).  This included about half of the
departments serving a population of 250,000 or more, and at
least a fifth of the departments in every other population
category. 

Nearly a fourth of departments offered training to citizens on
community policing topics such as community mobilization and
problem solving during the 12-month period ending June 30, 1997.
About three-fifths of the departments serving a population of 1
million or more offered such training.

A fifth of departments operated at least 1 community substation
during the 12-month period ending June 30, 1997.  This included
three-fifths of the departments serving 1 million or more
residents, and nearly half of those serving 100,000 to 999,999
residents.

About 5 in 6 departments met with  community groups on a regular
basis during the 12-month period ending June 30, 1997.  These
departments employed 91% of all sheriffs' officers.  About
three-fourths of all officers were employed by a department that
met with neighborhood (78%) or school (76%) groups (figure 8). 
About two-thirds worked for a department that met with business
groups (64%) and about half for one that met with youth service
organizations (52%).  Just under half were employed by
departments meeting with advocacy (47%) or religious (45%)
groups.  

About a fourth of sheriffs' departments, employing two-fifths of
all officers, used citizen surveys to obtain information during
the year ending June 30, 1997 (table 38).  This included about
two-fifths of the departments serving 250,000 to 999,999
residents.  Examples of survey topics included satisfaction with
law enforcement services (18%), citizen perceptions of crime
problems (15%), and personal crime experiences (10%).

A majority of the departments conducting surveys used the data
to provide information to officers (74%), and/or to prioritize 
crime-related problems (59%) (figure 9).  About two-fifths of 
these departments used survey data for resource allocation (41%) 
and the formulation of agency policy and procedures (39%).  About 
a fifth used survey data for the redistricting of patrol beats or 
reporting areas. 

Citizen access to crime statistics

About a third of sheriffs' departments, employing just over half
of all officers, provided citizens in their jurisdiction with
routine access to crime statistics and/or crime maps (table 39).
Three-fifths of departments serving a population of 1 million
or more provided citizens with routine access to crime
statistics as did nearly half of those serving a population of
at least 250,000 but less than 1 million.  Just a fourth of the
departments serving a population of less than 10,000 did so.

In most cases, departments provided access to crime statistics
at the county or city level (33%).  Small percentages of
departments provided routine access to crime statistics by
neighborhood (7%), patrol beat (6%), district or precinct (5%),
or by street or block (4%).  Departments serving 1 or million or
more residents were the most likely to provided crime statistics
at these more detailed levels.     

As of June 1997, about 5 in 6 departments with routine access to
crime statistics provided it to citizens who inquired in person
(figure 10).  About half made crime statistics available through
the newspaper (54%) or telephone (51%), and a fourth through the
use of radio.   Other means through which departments made crime
statistics available included television (14%), newsletters
(14%), and the Internet (5%).

Equipment

Sidearms

In 1997, 95% of sheriffs' departments, employing 98% of all
sheriffs' officers, authorized the use of some type of
semiautomatic sidearm (table 40).  These figures represent
increases compared to 1993, when 82% of departments, employing
91% of all officers, authorized semiautomatics.    

As in 1993, the 9mm semiautomatic was the most popular type of
sheriffs' sidearm, with two-thirds of sheriffs' departments
authorizing its use by officers.  About three-fifths of
departments authorized .40-caliber semiautomatic sidearms, and
half the .45-caliber versions.  Just under a fifth of
departments authorized 10mm and .380- caliber semiautomatics.

Just over half (54%) of departments authorized the use of
revolvers by officers, with .357-caliber (44%) and .38-caliber
(28%) revolvers the types most commonly authorized.

A majority (64%) of sheriffs' departments supplied sidearms to
officers, and another 4% provided a cash allowance to officers for 
the purchase of sidearms.  About three-fourths of all sheriffs' 
officers were employed by a department that either supplied sidearms 
(71%) or provided a cash allowance for their purchase (5%).  

Body armor

In 1997, 48% of all sheriffs' departments required at least some
of their regular field officers to wear protective armor while
on duty (table 41).  These agencies employed about half of all
sheriffs' officers.   Eighty-five percent of sheriffs'
departments, employing 90% of all officers, supplied protective
body armor to their regular field officers.  An additional 4%,
employing 8% of all officers, provided a cash allowance for
armor.

The percentage of sheriffs' departments requiring all regular
field officers to wear body armor increased from 30% in 1993 to
39% in 1997.  Such an increase was seen in all population
categories (figure 11).  The largest increase was in
jurisdictions with 500,000 or more residents, where 45% of
sheriffs' departments required all officers to wear armor in
1997, compared to 28% in 1993.  The next largest increases
occurred in jurisdictions with 25,000 to 99,999 residents (from
36% to 46%) and those with fewer than 25,000 residents (from 26%
to 35%).  The percentage of all sheriffs' officers employed by a
department with such a policy increased from 35% in 1993 to 40%
in 1997. 

Nonlethal weapons 

In 1997 nearly all sheriffs' departments authorized officers to
use one or more types of nonlethal weapons. Chemical agents,
such as pepper spray, were the type of nonlethal weapon most
commonly authorized for personal use by officers (table 42). 
Eighty-seven percent of all departments authorized the use of 
pepper spray, with the lowest percentage among those serving a
population of less than 10,000 (76%).  Other types of chemical
agents authorized by sheriffs' departments for personal use by
officers included CS (4%) and tear gas (3%). 

From 1993 to 1997 significant increases in the percentage of
departments authorizing the use of pepper spray were recorded in
all population categories (figure 12).  In departments serving a
population of 500,000 or more, 93% of departments authorized its
use in 1997, compared to 72% in 1993.  The increases in other
population categories were as follows:  100,000 to 499,999 (from
70% to 90%); 25,000 to 49,999 (from 55% to 92%); under 25,000
(from 52% to 82%).  In 1997 an estimated 90% of sheriffs'
officers were employed by a department that authorized the use
of pepper spray, compared to 64% in 1993.

The second most frequently authorized type of nonlethal weapon
was the baton; authorized by 80% of all departments. 
Departments authorizing batons employed 92% of all officers. 
The collapsible baton (59%) was authorized by more departments
than traditional (38%) or PR-24 (36%) batons. 

Nationwide, about two-thirds of sheriffs' officers worked for a
department that authorized them to use a collapsible baton
(68%), and about half for a department that authorized the
traditional (52%) or PR-24 (48%) baton.

About a fifth of sheriffs' departments authorized the use of
flash/bang grenades, including a majority of those serving a
population of 250,000 or more.  About 1 in 8 departments,
employing about a fourth of all officers, authorized the use of
electrical devices, such as tasers or stun guns. 

Just 5% of all departments authorized the use of carotid holds,
choke holds, or neck restraints; however, more than  a third of
those serving a population of 1 million or more (36%) authorized
officers to use these actions. 

A large majority of sheriff's' departments had written policy
directives pertaining to the use of force by officers (table
43).  About 9 in 10 had a written policy on the use of deadly
force, including all departments serving a population of 50,000
to 499,999.  Departments with a deadly force policy employed 99%
of all sheriffs' officers. 

Eighty-four percent of all departments, employing 89% of all
officers, had a written policy pertaining to the use of
nonlethal force.  Departments serving a population of less than
10,000 were the least likely to have a written policy on the use
of force, lethal (77%) or nonlethal (69%).

Vehicles

Nationwide, sheriffs' departments operated 54 cars per 100 sworn 
personnel (table 44).  By population category, the ratio of cars to 
officers ranged from 30 cars per 100 officers in jurisdictions with 
1 million or more residents to 88 per 100 in jurisdictions with fewer 
than 10,000 residents.  

About a third of the cars operated by sheriffs' departments were
unmarked (35%).  The percentage of cars that were unmarked
ranged from more than 40% in jurisdictions with a population of
250,000 or more, to 19% in jurisdictions with a population of
less than 10,000.

Eighty-eight percent of sheriffs' departments, employing 81% of all 
sheriffs' officers, allowed sworn personnel to take marked vehicles 
home (table 45).  The percentage of departments allowing officers to 
take vehicles home ranged from 57% in jurisdictions with 500,000 or more
residents to more than 90% in jurisdictions with a population of
less than 25,000.  

In a large majority of the sheriffs' departments that allowed
marked vehicles to be taken home, officers were allowed only to
drive their vehicle to and from work.  Overall, about a fourth
of departments allowed officers to operate a marked vehicle for
personal errands, with those in jurisdictions with 1 million or
more residents (4%) the least likely to have such a policy. 

Fifty-seven percent of sheriffs' departments, employing 72% of
all sheriffs' officers, maintained a restrictive pursuit driving
policy (table 46).  This type of policy restricts vehicle
pursuits according to specific criteria such as type of offense
or maximum speed.  A restrictive policy was the most common type
of vehicle pursuit policy in all population categories except
the smallest.

Departments in jurisdictions with fewer than 10,000 residents
were more likely to have a judgmental pursuit policy  (48%), one
that leaves pursuit decisions to the officer's discretion,
than a restrictive policy (38%).  Overall, 28% of departments,
employing 15% of all officers, had a judgmental policy.  Seven
percent of departments, employing 6% of all officers, did not
have a pursuit driving policy. 

An estimated 31% of sheriffs' departments, employing 59% of all
sheriffs' officers, operated at least 1 boat during 1997.  This
included about half of those serving a population of 50,000 or
more (table 47).  About a fourth of the departments in
jurisdictions with a population of least 10,000 but less than
50,000 operated 1 or more boats.  

Just 4% of all departments operated airplanes or helicopters;
however, about 3 in 10 departments in jurisdictions with a
million or more residents operated at least one airplane and
about 4 in 10 operated a helicopter.  About a third of sheriffs'
officers were employed by a department with at least one
airplane or helicopter. 

Animals

An estimated 46% of sheriffs' departments maintained 1 or more
dogs for use in activities related to law enforcement (table
48).  

A majority of the departments in each  population category of
25,000 or more used dogs, compared to less than a fourth of
those serving fewer than 10,000 residents.  Nationwide,
sheriffs' departments maintained about 3,000 dogs for activities
related to law enforcement, and departments using dogs employed
about three-fourths of all sheriffs' officers.

Just 3% of all sheriffs' departments used horses for law
enforcement purposes, with those in jurisdictions with 1
million or more residents (22%) the most likely to be
maintaining at least 1 horse.  Sheriffs' departments
collectively maintained approximately 670 horses, and those
using horses employed 11% of all sheriffs' officers.

Computers and information systems

Types of computers used for 
administrative functions

An estimated 93% of all sheriffs' departments were using 1 or more 
types of computers for administrative purposes in 1997 (table 49), 
compared to 82% in 1993.  Well over 90% of the departments in 
jurisdictions with 25,000 or more residents were using computers, 
including all departments serving a population of 250,000 to 499,999.  
The percentage of sheriffs' officers nationwide that were employed
by a department using computers increased from 96% in 1993 to
99% in 1997.  

In 1997 about three-fourths of sheriffs' departments used
personal computers, compared with two-thirds in 1993.
At least 90% of the departments in each population category of
50,000 or more used personal computers.  Overall, sheriffs'
departments using personal computers in 1997 employed 93% of all
sheriffs' officers.  

About three-fifths of all departments were using a mainframe
computer in 1997 compared to just under half in 1993.  More than
70% of the departments in each population category of 50,000 or
more were using a main-frame in 1997. About two-fifths of the
departments serving a population of under 10,000 used mainframe
computers.  

About 1 in 5 departments were using a minicomputer, including
more than 3 in 5 departments serving a population of 500,000 or
more.  Departments using mainframes employed 81% of all officers
in 1997, and those using minicomputers, 47%.

Computer functions

Sheriffs' departments used computers for various administrative
functions in 1997.  For example, 82% of all departments,
employing 91% of all officers, used computers for record-keeping
(table 50).  

About two-thirds of departments used computers for criminal
investigations (65%), including 86% of those serving 250,000 to
499,999 residents.  Departments using computers for
investigations employed 81% of all officers. 

Forty-six percent of all departments, employing 72% of all
officers, utilized computers for dispatch.  A majority of the
departments serving a population of 25,000 or more used
computer-aided dispatch.

Forty-three percent of departments used computers for crime
analysis, including more than half of those serving 25,000 or
more residents.  Departments using computers for crime analysis
employed two-thirds of all officers.  Nearly a sixth of
departments used computers for crime mapping, including about
half of those serving a population of 1 million or more.

Nearly a third of departments used computers to access the
Internet, including a majority of those serving a population of
100,000 or more.

Thirty percent of sheriffs' departments used computers for fleet
management  and 25% used them for resource allocation.  A
majority of departments serving 250,000 or more residents used
computers for these purposes.

For each of the functions included in the LEMAS survey, the
percentage of sheriffs' departments that were using computers to
perform that function was greater in 1997 than in 1993.

Computerized files

About three-fourths of sheriffs' departments were maintaining
computerized files on warrants (75%), arrests (74%) and incident
reports (74%) during 1997 (table 51).  About three-fifths had
computerized files on calls for service (60%), criminal
histories (60%), stolen property (59%), and stolen vehicles
(58%).  

Other types of computerized information files maintained by at 
least a third of all sheriffs' departments in 1997 included 
personnel (47%), incident-based crime data (47%), inventory (45%), 
traffic citations (44%), evidence (44%), summary-based crime data 
(42%), summonses (41%), and traffic accidents (38%). 

Less than a third of sheriffs' departments maintained the
following types of computerized files during 1997: drivers
license information (32%), payroll (32%), field interviews
(31%), alarms (27%), vehicle registration (25%), and crime
analysis (linked) (19%) (table 52).  

About three-fourths of the departments serving a population of
250,000 or more had computerized payroll information.  A
majority of the departments in jurisdictions with a population
of 1 million or more maintained computerized files on field
interviews and alarms.  

For each subject area covered by the LEMAS survey, sheriffs' officers 
were more likely to be employed by an agency that maintained that 
information in a computerized format in 1997 than in 1993 (figure 13).  
For example, the percentage of officers working for a department
with computerized calls for service information increased from
66% to 79%.  The increases for selected other types of
information were as follows:  warrants (from 82% in 1993 to 87%
in 1997) arrests (80% to 86%); criminal histories (69% to 78%);
stolen property (60% to 65%).

Fifteen percent of sheriffs' departments, employing 53% of all
sheriffs' officers, had either exclusive or shared ownership of
an Automatic Fingerprint Identification System (AFIS) that
included a file of digitized prints (table 53).  A majority of
the departments serving a population of 250,000 or more had
exclusive or shared ownership of an AFIS system, compared to 7%
of those serving a population of less than 10,000.

Nine percent of sheriffs' departments used an AFIS terminal with
access to a remote system.  These departments employed 42% of
all sheriffs' officers.   

Use of computers in the field

Nearly a third of sheriffs' departments, employing two-thirds of
all officers, were using in-field computers or terminals during
1997 (table 54).  This included about three-fourths of the
departments serving 250,000 or more residents. 

Laptops were the most common type of in-field computer, used by
about a fourth of departments.  Departments using laptops
employed half of all sheriffs officers.

Nearly half of departments serving a population of 500,000 were
using car-mounted data terminals.  Overall, 5% of departments,
employing 31% of all officers, used them. 

Smaller percentages of departments used car-mounted computers
(2%) or hand-held terminals (1%).  Departments using these
technologies employed less than 10% of all officers. 

The 29% of sheriffs' departments using in-field computers or
terminals in 1997, was nearly twice the percentage in 1993
(17%), and nearly 6 times that in 1990.  Likewise, the 66% of
sheriffs' officers working for a department with in-field
computers or terminals in 1997 was considerably higher than in
1993 (50%) and 1990 (28%).  

From 1990 to 1997, increases in local police use of in-field
computers and terminals occurred in jurisdictions of all sizes
(figure 14).  During this period, in-field computer use among
departments serving 500,000 or more residents increased from 43%
to 74%; among departments serving 100,000 to 499,999 residents,
from 13% to 59%; among departments serving 25,000 to 99,999
residents, from 6% to 33%; and among departments serving fewer
than 25,000 residents, from 2% to 17%. 

A fourth of sheriffs' departments used in-field computers or
terminals for writing incident reports, including more than
two-fifths of those serving a population of 1 million or more
(table 55).  About an eighth used them for some of their
in-field communications, including about a third of those
serving 250,000 or more residents.

In nearly an eighth of sheriffs' departments at least some
officers used in-field computers to access vehicle or driving
records in 1997 (table 56).  This included three-fifths of the
departments serving a population of 1 million or more. 

Eight percent of sheriffs' departments used in-field computers
to access criminal histories, including more than a third of the 
departments serving 500,000 or more residents. Seven percent of 
departments used in-field computers to access calls for service 
information, including a fourth of those in jurisdictions with a 
population of 500,000 or more. 

Eighty-seven percent of sheriffs' departments used paper reports
to transmit criminal incident reports from the field to its
central information system (table 57).  All departments serving
a population of 1 million or more residents used paper reports. 
More than 80% of the departments in each of the other population
categories used paper reports. 

Other methods used by sheriffs' departments for transmitting
criminal incident reports from the field included computers and
data devices (7%), and telephone or wireless transmissions (6%). 

Ninety percent of sheriffs' departments, used paper reports to
transmit traffic incident reports from the field.  All 
departments serving a population of 500,000 to 999,999 used
paper reports for traffic incidents. 

Among the other methods of transmitting traffic incident reports
to a central information system, computer and data devices were
used by 5% of departments, and telephones or wireless
transmissions by 4%.   

Methodology

The Law Enforcement Management and Administrative Statistics
(LEMAS) survey collects data from a nationally representative
sample of the approximately 19,000 publicly funded State and
local law enforcement agencies in the United States.  

This report presents data from the 1997 survey describing the
more than 3,000 sheriffs' departments operating in the United
States in terms of their personnel, expenditures and pay,
operations, community policing initiatives, equipment, computers
and information systems, and written policies.  Comparisons are
made with prior years where appropriate.  All sheriffs'
departments are operated by either a county or independent city
government.

The 1997 LEMAS survey questionnaire was mailed to 3,597 State
and local law enforcement agencies.  The overall response rate
was 94.9%.  Among sheriffs' departments, 915 of 1,001 surveys
were returned for a 91.4% response rate.

All 968 State and local law enforcement agencies in the United
States with 100 or more sworn officers (as reported in the 1996
BJS Census of State and Local Law Enforcement Agencies) received
the full-length LEMAS survey questionnaire.  This included 306
sheriffs' departments.  These self-representing (SR) agencies
were supplemented by a nationally representative sample of
agencies with fewer than 100 sworn officers. 

Nonself-representing (NSR) agencies were chosen using a
stratified random sample with cells based on the type of agency
(local police, sheriff, or special police), size of population
served, and number of sworn officers.  The 2,629 NSR agencies,
including 695 sheriffs' departments, received 1 of 2 shorter
versions of the questionnaire  that was mailed to the SR
agencies.

The initial mailing of the questionnaire was conducted in July
1997.  The pay period containing June 15, 1997, was used as the
reference date for personnel-related questions and June 30,
1997, for other questions.  The data were collected by the
Bureau of the Census for the Bureau of Justice Statistics.

After two followup mailings and additional telephone calls as
needed, a final total of 3,412 agencies responded to the LEMAS 
questionnaire, including 909 SR agencies and 2,503 NSR agencies.  
The final database includes responses from 2,012 local police 
departments, 915 sheriffs' departments, 356 special jurisdiction 
police departments, 80 Texas constable offices, and the 49 primary 
State police departments.

The base weight for all SR agencies is 1.  For NSR sheriffs'
departments, it is 4.  For NSR local police departments, the
base weights are determined by  number of sworn officers
employed as reported in the 1996 BJS Census of State and Local
Law Enforcement Agencies.  For agencies with 0 to 6 sworn
officers, the base weight is 15.55; for 7 to 13 officers, it is
9.65; for 14 to 23 officers, it is 7.09; for 24 to 39 officers,
it is 4.95; for 40 to 62 officers, it is 3.38; and for 63 to 99
officers, the base weight is 2.14.

Special police are similarly weighted based upon the number of
sworn officers.  For agencies with 0 to 9 officers, the base
weight is 9.85; for 10 to 24 officers, it is 4.90; for 25 to 49
officers, it is 2.75; and for 50 to 99 officers, it is 1.52. 
The final weight associated with every agency, both SR and NSR,
is the product of the base weight and a factor that adjusted for
any nonresponding agencies in each cell.  This agency
nonresponse factor was based on number of sworn officers for SR
agencies and on number of agencies for NSR agencies. 

Some responding agencies did not fully complete the LEMAS
questionnaire.  When an agency did not supply a response to an
item, a donor agency was randomly selected from responding
agencies in the same sample cell.  The donor agency's value for
the item was placed into the nonresponding agency's response
field with an indicator that the value had been imputed. 
Complete documentation regarding sampling procedures and
nonresponse adjustments is available upon request. 

Because the data from agencies with fewer than 100 sworn
personnel were collected from a sample, the results are subject
to sampling error.  All statements of comparison in this report
have been tested to ensure that observed differences between
values are significant at 2 standard errors (the 95-percent
confidence level) or higher.

Data on the number of employees and on the amount of agency
expenditures in this report are not comparable with figures
based on the BJS Survey of Criminal Justice Expenditure and
Employment series.  In the latter, these data are presented by
governmental function, whereas in the LEMAS survey, expenditures
are classified by type of agency.  For example, what might be
attributed to sheriffs' departments in the LEMAS survey would be
apportioned among various functions, such as police protection
and corrections, in the expenditure and employment series. 
Also, the LEMAS figures for operating expenditures include
employee benefits, but the figures from the expenditure and
employment series do not.  

U.S. Department of Justice
Bureau of Justice Statistics

Jan M. Chaiken, Ph.D.
Director

Andrew L. Goldberg and Brian A. Reaves, BJS statisticians
prepared this report.  Timothy C. Hart provided statistical 
review. Thomas Hester and Tina Dorsey provided production 
assistance.  Jayne Robinson provided final production for
printing, under the supervision of Thomas Hester.

Debra Cohen, Ph.D., Joseph B. Kuhns III, Tammy Rinehart, Karin
Schmerler, and Meg Townsend of the Department of Justice's
Office of Community Oriented Policing Services (COPS) developed
the community policing content of the 1997 LEMAS questionnaire. 
Funding for the community policing section of the questionnaire
was provided by the COPS Office.  Additional information on the
COPS Office is available on the Internet at:
http://www.usdoj.gov/cops.

The 1997 LEMAS data were collected and processed by the
Governments Division of the Bureau of the Census under the
supervision of Stephanie Brown and Stephen Owens.  Census Bureau
project staff included Carolyn Gates, Henrietta Herrin, Martha
Haselbush, Martha Greene, and Patricia Torreyson.  Sample
selection and imputation procedures were done by Yukiko Ellis
and Suzanne Dorinski of the Economic Statistical Methods and
Procedures Division of the Census Bureau under the supervision
of Carma Hogue.

Data presented in this report may be obtained from the National
Archive of Criminal Justice Data at the University of Michigan,
1-800-999-0960.  The report and data are available on the
Internet at: http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs
                                   



End of file
1/28/00 ih


