U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Programs
Bureau of Justice Statistics

-------------------------------------------------------
This file is text only without graphics and many of the
tables. A Zip archive of the tables in this report in
spreadsheet format (.csv) and the full report including
tables and graphics in .pdf format are available on BJS
website at: 
http://www.bjs.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbdetail&iid=5114
-------------------------------------------------------

Special Report	

Socio-emotional Impact of Violent Crime

Lynn Langton, Ph.D., and Jennifer Truman, Ph.D., BJS Statisticians

In 2009–12, 68% of victims of serious violent crime—rape or sexual 
assault, robbery, or aggravated assault—reported experiencing socio-
emotional problems as a result of their victimization. For this report, 
socio-emotional problems are defined as the experience of one or more 
of the following: feelings of moderate to severe distress; significant 
problems with work or school, such as trouble with a boss, coworkers, 
or peers; or significant problems with family members or friends, 
including more arguments than before the victimization, an inability to 
trust, or not feeling as close after the victimization.

Victims who experienced severe distress as a result of a violent 
victimization were more likely to report the crime to police and 
receive victim services than victims with no distress or mild distress 
(figure 1). About 12% of severely distressed victims reported the crime 
to police and received victim services, compared to 1% of victims with 
no distress. However, more than a third of victims reporting severe 
distress and nearly half of those with moderate distress did not report 
to the police or receive any assistance from victim service providers. 
In addition, 50% of victims who experienced severe distress and 
reported to police did not receive victim services. It is not known if 
they were directed to or offered these services.

****************************************************

************
Highlights
************

* This report describes the relationship between violent victimization 
and the victim’s experience of socio-emotional problems, defined as 
high levels of emotional distress, increased relationship problems, or 
disruptions at school or work. Data are from the National Crime 
Victimization Survey.

* Overall, 68% of victims of serious violence experienced socio-
emotional problems as a result of their victimization.

* Regardless of the type of violence experienced, a greater percentage 
of victims of intimate partner violence than stranger violence 
experienced socio-emotional problems.

* Twelve percent of victims who experienced socio-emotional problems 
received victim services, compared to 5% of victims reporting no socio-
emotional problems. 

* More than a third of victims reporting severe distress and nearly 
half of those with moderate distress did not report to the police or 
receive any assistance from victim services.

* About three-quarters of victims of rape or sexual assault (75%), 
robbery (74%), violence involving a firearm (74%), and violence 
resulting in medical treatment for injuries (77%) experienced socio-
emotional problems.

* A greater percentage of female than male victims experienced socio-
emotional problems, regardless of the type of violence or victim–
offender relationship.

* The majority (91%) of violent crime victims with socio-emotional 
problems experienced one or more emotional symptoms for a month or 
more. Most (61%) experienced one or more physical symptoms for a month 
or more.
****************************************************

This report presents findings on the relationship between the 
characteristics of violent incidents and victims and the experience of 
socio-emotional problems. In addition to physical injury and financial 
loss, victims might experience high levels of emotional distress, 
increased relationship problems, and significant disruptions and 
problems at school or work. The report also examines certain help-
seeking behaviors of victims suffering from socio-emotional problems as 
a result of violent victimization.

Data are from the Bureau of Justice Statistics’ (BJS) National Crime 
Victimization Survey (NCVS). The NCVS collects information on nonfatal 
crimes reported and not reported to police against persons age 12 or 
older from a nationally representative sample of U.S. households. 
Questions pertaining to the socio-emotional consequences of 
victimization were first added to the survey in July 2008. This report 
aggregates data during the 4-year period from 2009 to 2012, referred to 
throughout the report as 2009–12. Aggregating data increases the 
reliability and stability of estimates and facilitates comparisons of 
detailed victimization characteristics.

****************************************************

**************************************
Measures of socio-emotional problems
**************************************

For this report, socio-emotional problems are defined as the experience 
of moderate to severe distress, problems with work or school, problems 
in relationships with family or friends, or a combination of the three. 
(See Methodology for wording of the three questions included in the 
measure of socio-emotional problems.) Although these measures can be 
examined individually and are presented separately in appendix tables 
1, 3, 5, and 7, the three measures are strongly associated (p < .01). 

Among violent crime victims who experienced relationship problems or 
problems with work or school, 80% also reported moderate to severe 
distress (figure 2). Among those who experienced both relationship and 
work or school problems, nearly 90% reported feeling moderate to severe 
distress. Because of the strong relationship between these three 
variables, for much of the report they are combined and examined as one 
measure of whether the victim experienced any socio-emotional problems.
****************************************************

******************************************
About 70% of rape or sexual assault 
and robbery victims experienced moderate 
to severe distress resulting from 
their victimization
******************************************

In 2009–12, a greater proportion of rape or sexual assault (71%) and 
robbery (70%) victims experienced moderate to severe distress, compared 
to victims of aggravated (57%) and simple (46%) assault (figure 3). 
Among victims of rape or sexual assault (46%) and robbery (42%), the 
largest proportion reported experiencing severe distress. About 1 in 10 
rape or sexual assault (11%) and robbery (11%) victims reported no 
distress as a result of the victimization. These incidents include both 
threats or attempts and completed crimes. In general, victims of 
completed crimes experienced more moderate to severe distress than 
victims of attempted or threatened crimes (See appendix table 10).

******************************************
More serious violent victimizations 
ommitted by an intimate partner (60%) or 
relative (65%) resulted in severe distress 
than those committed by a stranger (31%)
******************************************

The relationship between the victim and offender is related to whether 
a victim experiences socio-emotional problems. In 2009–12, nearly twice 
the proportion of victims of serious violence—rape or sexual assault, 
robbery, and aggravated assault—committed by an intimate (60%) and a 
relative (65%) indicated that their victimization was severely 
distressing, compared to victims of serious violence by a known 
offender (36%) and a stranger (31%) (figure 4). About 17% of serious 
violence committed by a stranger and 7% of victims of intimate partner 
violence (IPV) felt no distress as a result of their victimization.

******************************************
Physical and emotional symptoms associated 
with socio-emotional problems
******************************************


A victim with socio-emotional problems may experience a range of 
emotional and physical symptoms. The majority of violent crime victims 
with socio-emotional problems experienced one or more emotional 
symptoms (91%) and one or more physical symptoms (61%) for at least a 
month (table 1). Among all victims of violent crime, the two most 
widely experienced emotional symptoms were feeling worried or anxious 
(72%) and feeling angry (70%) for a month or more. The most common 
physical consequence of experiencing socio-emotional problems was 
having trouble sleeping for a month or more (47%). Victims of serious 
violence with socio-emotional problems were more likely to experience 
one or more emotional and physical symptoms than victims of simple 
assault with socio-emotional problems.

The percentage of victims who experienced one or more emotional 
symptoms for at least a month resulting from the socio-emotional 
problems did not vary with victim–offender relationship. However, a 
greater percentage of IPV victims (74%) experienced one or more 
physical symptoms as a result of the socio-emotional problems, compared 
to victims of violence committed by a known offender (61%) or a 
stranger (53%). Regardless of the victim–offender relationship, feeling 
worried or anxious, feeling angry, and having trouble sleeping were 
among the most common emotional and physical symptoms. 

******************************************
About 85% of victims of simple assault 
by an intimate partner experienced 
socio-emotional problems
******************************************

For the remainder of this report, victims are characterized as having 
socio-emotional problems if they experienced one or more of the 
following: moderate to severe distress, problems with family or friend 
relationships, or problems at work or school as a result of the 
victimization. In 2009–12, 57% of all violent crime victims experienced 
socio-emotional problems as a result of the victimization (table 2). 
About three-quarters of victims of rape or sexual assault (75%), 
robbery (74%), violence involving a firearm (74%), and violence 
resulting in medical treatment for injuries (77%) reported socio-
emotional problems. In comparison, about half of victims of simple 
assault (51%), which does not involve serious physical injuries or a 
weapon, experienced socio-emotional problems from the victimization. 

Across all types of violence, more than 80% of IPV victims reported 
socio-emotional problems. Regardless of the type of violence, a greater 
percentage of IPV victims than victims of violence committed by a 
stranger experienced socio-emotional problems. For instance, about 85% 
of victims of simple assault committed by an intimate partner 
experienced socio-emotional problems, compared to 34% of victims of 
simple assault committed by a stranger. Among the more serious types of 
violence, a higher percentage of victims of violence committed by a 
stranger experienced problems than victims of simple assault committed 
by a stranger. More than 70% of victims of violence committed by a 
stranger involving a firearm (71%) or resulting in medical treatment 
for injuries (73%) experienced socio-emotional problems. However, these 
percentages were still lower than the 88% of IPV victimizations 
involving a firearm and the 95% of IPV victimizations involving medical 
treatment for injuries that resulted in socio-emotional problems. 

******************************************
Presence of a weapon or an injury during 
serious violence was not consistently 
associated with more socio-emotional 
problems
******************************************

A higher percentage of victims of robbery involving both an injury and 
weapon (85%) experienced socio-emotional problems, compared to victims 
of robbery that did not involve an injury or weapon (70%) (table 3). 
However, when the robbery involved a weapon or injury but not both, 
there was no significant difference in the percentage of victims with 
socio-emotional problems, compared to victims of robbery involving no 
weapon or injury.

This pattern was not consistent for aggravated assault or rape or 
sexual assault. About 70% of victims of aggravated assault involving 
both an injury and weapon reported socio-emotional problems. When the 
aggravated assault involved an injury but not a weapon, 83% of victims 
experienced socio-emotional problems. Additionally, there was no 
significant difference in the percentage of victims with socio-
emotional problems among those who experienced rape or sexual assault 
involving both an injury and weapon (65%) or neither an injury nor a 
weapon (70%).

******************************************
More victims reported socio-emotional 
problems when violence occurred at the 
victim’s home than at other locations 
******************************************

Where the violent victimization occurred also affected the likelihood 
of a victim experiencing socio-emotional problems. Overall, a greater 
percentage of victims who were victimized at their home (80%) reported 
socio-emotional problems than victims of violence in other locations 
(table 4). The relationship between the location of the crime and the 
experience of socio-emotional problems varied depending on the 
relationship between the victim and offender. Among victims of violence 
committed by a stranger, a greater percentage experienced socio-
emotional problems when the incident took place at their home (77%), 
compared to incidents that occurred in other locations (23% to 60%). In 
comparison, a similar percentage of IPV victims reported socio-
emotional problems regardless of whether the violence occurred at the 
victim’s home (87%), at the home of a friend or relative (80%), or in a 
commercial or public place (88%). Violence in the home was more 
distressing when the offender was an intimate partner (87%), compared 
to a stranger (77%). This relationship held for other location types, 
including at the home of a friend or relative or in a commercial or 
public place. 

******************************************
12% of victims who experienced socio-
emotional problems received assistance 
from a victim service provider
******************************************


Experiencing socio-emotional problems may impact whether a victim 
chooses to seek formal help, such as reporting to police or receiving 
victim services. While a victim’s experience of socio-emotional 
problems may have been impacted by reporting to police, engaging in the 
criminal justice system, or seeking victim services, the questions used 
in this report were intended to capture the response to the 
victimization rather than to these other sources.

Overall, a greater percentage of victims of violence who experienced 
socio-emotional problems (54%) reported their victimization to police 
than victims who did not experience socio-emotional problems (38%) 
(table 5). This was true for victims of violence committed by other 
known offenders and strangers. Among IPV victims, a similar percentage 
who did (60%) and did not (55%) experience socio-emotional problems 
reported the victimization to police.

A greater percentage of victims of violence who experienced socio-
emotional problems (12%) received assistance from victim services than 
victims who did not experience problems (5%). This relationship held 
for victims of violence by intimate partners and other known offenders. 
More than 40% of victims of overall violence (42%) and violence by 
other known offenders (49%) and strangers (41%) who experienced socio-
emotional problems did not report their victimization to the police or 
receive assistance from victim services.

******************************************
More females than males experienced 
socio-emotional problems as a result of 
their victimization
******************************************

Regardless of the type of violent crime experienced, a greater 
percentage of females than males reported socio-emotional problems 
(table 6). Overall, 72% of female victims of violent crime experienced 
socio-emotional problems, compared to 44% of male victims. Among 
victims of serious violence, 79% of females and 58% of males 
experienced socio-emotional problems.

Marital status appeared to be related to experiences of socio-emotional 
problems among victims of total violence and serious violence. More 
victims of all violent crime who were widowed (74%) or divorced or 
separated (67%) experienced socio-emotional problems than those who 
were never married (53%) or married (55%). This pattern also held for 
victims of serious violent crime. However, when marital status was 
included in a multivariate model controlling for other victim and 
incident characteristics, the relationship between marital status and 
socio-emotional problems was no longer significant (see table 10).

The victim’s age was associated with the experience of socio-emotional 
problems for certain types of crime. A greater percentage of all simple 
assault victims ages 35 to 54 (58%) and 55 or older (63%) experienced 
socio-emotional problems, compared to victims ages 12 to 17 (45%) and 
ages 18 to 34 (46%). A similar percentage of serious violence victims 
ages 12 to 17 (66%), ages 18 to 34 (66%), and ages 35 to 54 (70%) 
experienced socio-emotional problems. 
In general, race or Hispanic origin and education level was not 
consistently associated with whether a victim experienced socio-
emotional problems. A similar percentage of non-Hispanic whites (57%), 
non-Hispanic blacks (58%), Hispanics (54%), and other races (56%) 
experienced socio-emotional problems as a result of their violent 
victimization. Likewise, no differences were detected in the percentage 
of victims of violence who experienced socio-emotional problems by 
level of education. For example, 58% of victims of violent crime with 
an education level of less than high school experienced socio-emotional 
problems, compared to 57% of victims with a high school or college 
degree. 

******************************************
Females experienced more socio-emotional 
problems than males regardless of the 
victim–offender relationship 
******************************************

Whether the offender was an intimate partner, someone else known to the 
victim, or a stranger, a greater percentage of female than male victims 
experienced socio-emotional problems as a result of their victimization 
(table 7). For both males and females, a greater proportion reported 
socio-emotional problems when the offender was an intimate partner 
rather than a known offender or stranger.

Older victims were also more likely to experience socio-emotional 
problems than younger victims, regardless of the victim–offender 
relationship. In 2009–12, a greater percentage of IPV victims ages 35 
to 54 (89%) experienced socio-emotional problems than those ages 18 to 
34 (81%). Among victims of violent crime by known offenders, persons 
ages 35 to 54 (68%) and age 55 or older (75%) experienced more socio-
emotional problems than persons ages 12 to 17 (55%) and ages 18 to 34 
(54%). For victims of violent crime by strangers, a greater percentage 
of victims age 55 or older (53%) experienced socio-emotional problems 
than victims ages 12 to 17 (41%) and ages 18 to 34 (41%).

Marital status appeared to be related to experiencing socio-emotional 
problems among victims of violence by intimate partners and other known 
offenders. For instance, more victims of IPV who were divorced or 
separated (89%) experienced socio-emotional problems as a result of 
their victimization than victims who were never married (81%). However, 
when marital status was included in a multivariate model controlling 
for other victim and incident characteristics, victim-offender 
relationship was significantly related to socio-emotional problems 
while marital status was not (see table 10).

The proportion of victims who experienced socio-emotional problems also 
varied by level of education among IPV victims. A greater percentage of 
IPV victims with a college education experienced socio-emotional 
problems (88%) than IPV victims with a high school education (79%). 
Among victims of violence committed by a stranger, a slightly greater 
percentage of victims with less than a high school education (50%) 
experienced socio-emotional problems than those with a college 
education (41%). However, similar percentages of victims of violence by 
other known offenders experienced socio-emotional problems, regardless 
of their level of education.

Regardless of the relationship between victim and offender, the 
proportion of violent crime victims who experienced socio-emotional 
problems did not vary by the race or Hispanic origin of the victim. 
Among IPV victims, whites (87%), blacks (80%), and other races (86%) 
experienced similar proportions of socio-emotional problems. Victims of 
violent crime by other known offenders experienced similar amounts of 
socio-emotional problems, regardless of their race or Hispanic origin. 

******************************************
Victims who lived in households headed by 
a single female experienced more socio-
emotional problems than victims living 
in other households 
******************************************

Characteristics such as household composition, income, and location of 
residence may be related to a victim experiencing socio-emotional 
problems. A greater percentage of victims of violent crime who lived in 
households headed by a single female with (67%) and without children 
(79%) experienced socio-emotional problems than those who lived in 
households headed by a single male with (47%) and without children 
(45%) (table 8). This relationship also held true for victims of both 
serious violence and simple assault. Households headed by married 
adults with (53%) and without children (56%) experienced similar 
proportions of socio-emotional problems as a result of their violent 
victimization. The same occurred for victims of both serious violence 
and simple assault.

For victims of serious violent crime, a greater percentage of persons 
with an income of $24,999 or less experienced socio-emotional problems 
(72%) than persons with an income of $75,000 or more (58%). Among 
victims of simple assault, a greater percentage of persons with an 
income of $24,999 or less experienced socio-emotional problems (60%) 
than those with greater incomes (45% to 52%).
 
Generally, no statistical differences were detected by location of 
residence as to whether victims of violent crime experienced socio-
emotional problems. A similar percentage of persons living in urban 
areas (57%) experienced socio-emotional problems, compared to those 
living in suburban areas (56%) and those living in rural areas (62%). 
However, a smaller percentage of victims of simple assault living in 
urban (50%) and suburban (50%) areas experienced socio-emotional 
problems than victims living in rural areas (59%).

******************************************
About 9 in 10 IPV victims who lived in 
households headed by single females 
experienced socio-emotional problems
******************************************

A similar percentage of victims of IPV who lived in households headed 
by single females both with (87%) and without children (94%) and by 
single males with children (95%) experienced socio-emotional problems 
(table 9). These percentages were greater than IPV victims who lived in 
households headed by single males without children (66%). IPV victims 
who lived in households headed by married adults with no children (91%) 
experienced a greater percentage of socio-emotional problems than those 
who lived in households with children (70%). For victims of violent 
crime by a known offender, a greater percentage of persons who lived in 
households headed by a single female without children (75%) experienced 
socio-emotional problems than those living in households headed by a 
single male without children (52%). Households headed by married adults 
without children (69%) experienced more socio-emotional problems than 
those with children (57%) when the violent victimization was committed 
by a known offender. Among victims of violence by strangers, persons 
who lived in households headed by single females experienced greater 
socio-emotional problems than households headed by males. 

Income was associated with the experience of socio-emotional problems 
among IPV victims, and violence by other known offenders and strangers. 
IPV victims who had an income of $75,000 or more experienced more 
socio-emotional problems (96%), compared to IPV victims in other income 
brackets. For victims of violent crime by a known offender, a greater 
percentage of persons with an income of $24,999 or less experienced 
socio-emotional problems (65%) than persons with an income of $75,000 
or more (52%). Among victims of violent crime by a stranger, a greater 
percentage of persons with an income of $24,999 or less experienced 
socio-emotional problems (55%) than those with greater incomes. 
In general, no differences were detected in the proportion of victims 
who experienced socio-emotional problems by victim–offender 
relationship and location of residence. A similar percentage of IPV 
victims living in urban areas experienced socio-emotional problems 
(83%), compared to those living in suburban (86%) and rural areas 
(85%). As with IPV , victims of violence by other known offenders 
experienced similar proportions of socio-emotional problems, regardless 
of their location of residence. However, among victims of violence by 
strangers, a smaller percentage of victims living in suburban areas 
(39%) experienced socio-emotional problems than victims in rural areas 
(51%).

******************************************
After controlling for other variables, IPV 
victims were five times more likely to 
experience socio-emotional problems than 
victims of violence by strangers
******************************************

To assess the unique contribution of incident and victim 
characteristics to the probability of experiencing socio-emotional 
problems, a logistic regression analysis was used. The analysis 
produced estimates of the association between each independent variable 
(the victim and incident characteristics) and the dependent variable 
(the likelihood of experiencing socio-emotional problems) after 
accounting for other variables in the model. See Methodology for more 
information about logistic regression techniques.

In general, the logistic regression analysis revealed similar patterns 
in the probability of a victim experiencing socio-emotional problems as 
shown in the tables discussed in this report. Among the variables 
examined, the victim–offender relationship—specifically victimization 
by an intimate partner—had the greatest relative impact on the 
likelihood of experiencing socio-emotional problems (table 10). IPV 
victims were more than five times more likely to experience socio-
emotional problems than victims of violence committed by a stranger 
(odds ratio 5.4). Victims of violence by other known offenders were two 
times more likely to experience socio-emotional problems than victims 
of violence committed by a stranger (2.0).
 
Characteristics of the violent incident also had an impact on the 
likelihood of experiencing socio-emotional problems. Victims of robbery 
were 2.7 times more likely to experience socio-emotional problems than 
victims of simple assault. Victims who suffered an injury during the 
victimization were two times more likely to experience socio-emotional 
problems than victims who were not injured. When a weapon was present, 
victims were 1.7 times more likely to experience socio-emotional 
problems than when a weapon was not involved. 

After accounting for characteristics of the incident and victim–
offender relationship, certain victim characteristics were also still 
related to the experience of socio-emotional problems. Female victims 
were about 2.6 times more likely than males to experience socio-
emotional problems. Victims ages 35 to 54 (1.5) and age 55 or older 
(2.1) were significantly more likely than victims ages 12 to 17 to 
experience socio-emotional problems. Other characteristics, such as 
race, marital status, and education, had little independent impact on 
the probability of experiencing socio-emotional problems.

**************
Methodology
**************

Survey coverage
***************** 

The National Crime Victimization Survey (NCVS) is an annual data 
collection conducted by the U.S. Census Bureau for the Bureau of 
Justice Statistics (BJS). The NCVS is a self-report survey in which 
interviewed persons are asked about the number and characteristics of 
victimizations experienced during the prior 6 months. It collects 
information on nonfatal personal crimes (rape or sexual assault, 
robbery, aggravated and simple assault, and personal larceny) and 
household property crimes (burglary, motor vehicle theft, and other 
theft) both reported and not reported to police. 

In addition to providing annual level and change estimates on criminal 
victimization, the NCVS is the primary source of information on the 
nature of criminal victimization incidents. Survey respondents provide 
information about themselves (e.g., age, sex, race and Hispanic origin, 
marital status, education level, and income) and whether they 
experienced a victimization. For each victimization incident, the NCVS 
collects information about the offender (e.g., age, race and Hispanic 
origin, sex, and victim–offender relationship), characteristics of the 
crime (including time and place of occurrence, use of weapons, nature 
of injury, and economic consequences), whether the crime was reported 
to police, reasons the crime was or was not reported, and victims’ 
experiences with the criminal justice system.
 
The NCVS is administered to persons age 12 or older from a nationally 
representative sample of households in the United States. The NCVS 
defines a household as a group of members who all reside at a sampled 
address. Persons are considered household members when the sampled 
address is their usual place of residence at the time of the interview 
and when they have no usual place of residence elsewhere. Once 
selected, households remain in the sample for 3 years, and eligible 
persons in these households are interviewed every 6 months either in 
person or over the phone for a total of seven interviews. Generally, 
all first interviews are conducted in person. New households rotate 
into the sample on an ongoing basis to replace outgoing households that 
have been in sample for the 3-year period. The sample includes persons 
living in group quarters such as dormitories, rooming houses, and 
religious group dwellings, and excludes persons living in military 
barracks and institutional settings such as correctional or hospital 
facilities, and individuals who are homeless.

**************************************
Nonresponse and weighting adjustments 
**************************************

In 2012, 92,390 households and 162,940 persons age 12 or older were 
interviewed for the NCVS. Each household was interviewed twice during 
the year. The response rate was 87% for households and 87% for eligible 
persons. Victimizations that occurred outside of the United States were 
excluded from this report. In 2012, less than 1% of the unweighted 
victimizations occurred outside of the United States and were excluded 
from the analyses. Estimates in this report use data from the 1993 to 
2012 NCVS data files, weighted to produce annual estimates of 
victimization for persons age 12 or older living in U.S. households. 
Since the NCVS relies on a sample rather than a census of the entire 
U.S. population, weights are designed to inflate sample point estimates 
to known population totals and to compensate for survey nonresponse and 
other aspects of the sample design.

NCVS data files include both person and household weights. Person 
weights provide an estimate of the population represented by each 
person in the sample. Household weights provide an estimate of the U.S. 
household population represented by each household in the sample. After 
proper adjustment, both household and person weights are also typically 
used to form the denominator in calculations of crime rates. 

Victimization weights used in this analysis account for the number of 
persons present during an incident and for high frequency repeat 
victimizations (or series victimizations). Series victimizations are 
similar in type but occur with such frequency that a victim is unable 
to recall each individual event or describe each event in detail. 
Survey procedures allow NCVS interviewers to identify and classify 
these similar victimizations as series victimizations and to collect 
detailed information on only the most recent incident in the series. 
The weight counts series incidents as the actual number of incidents 
reported by the victim, up to a maximum of 10 incidents. Including 
series victimizations in national rates results in large increases in 
the level of violent victimization; however, trends in violence are 
generally similar regardless of whether series victimizations are 
included. In 2012, series incidents accounted for about 1% of all 
victimizations and 4% of all violent victimizations. Weighting series 
incidents as the number of incidents up to a maximum of 10 incidents 
produces more reliable estimates of crime levels, while the cap at 10 
minimizes the effect of extreme outliers on the rates. Additional 
information on the series enumeration is provided in the report Methods 
for Counting High Frequency Repeat Victimizations in the National Crime 
Victimization Survey (NCJ 237308, BJS web, April 2012).

**************************************
Items used to measure socio-emotional 
problems
**************************************

For this report, three NCVS questions were used as a measure of socio-
emotional problems. Socio-emotional problems were defined as the 
experience of one or more of the following: feelings of moderate to 
severe distress; significant problems with work or school, such as 
trouble with a boss, coworkers, or peers; or significant problems with 
family members or friends, including more arguments than before the 
victimization, an inability to trust, or not feeling as close after the 
victimization. The specific NCVS questions that went into this measure 
were: 

* Being a victim of crime affects people in different ways. Next I 
would like to ask you some questions about how being a crime victim may 
have affected you. Did being a victim of this crime lead you to have 
significant problems with your job or schoolwork, or trouble with your 
boss, coworkers, or peers?

* Did being a victim of this crime lead you to have significant 
problems with family members or friends, including getting into more 
arguments or fights than you did before, not feeling you could trust 
them as much, or not feeling as close to them as you did before?

* How distressing was being a victim of this crime to you? Was it not 
at all distressing, mildly distressing, moderately distressing, or 
severely distressing?

**************************************
Item nonresponse on questions about 
socio-emotional problems
**************************************
 
In 2009–12, about 14% of violent crime victims were not administered 
the questions related to socio-emotional problems and were excluded 
from the report analyses. These victimizations were originally 
classified as property crimes, which are eliminated from the section on 
socio-emotional problems by design, but were later reclassified as 
violent victimizations when it became apparent that the victim was 
present during the incident. A comparison of the characteristics of 
violent crime victims who were and were not administered the socio-
emotional problems questions was conducted to assess whether 
significant differences exist between the two groups (table 11).

Although there were some differences between the groups, the analysis 
did not show evidence that inclusion of the victims who did not receive 
the questions would significantly impact the findings. Among the 
differences identified, a greater percentage of victims excluded from 
the analysis were black (21%) and from suburban areas (54%), compared 
to victims who were included in the analysis. There also appeared to be 
variations in the victim–offender relationship and income 
distributions, but these were due to differences in the percentage of 
unknown information between the two groups. Unless all members of the 
excluded group responded to the questions in the same way—a highly 
improbably scenario—the within group patterns of distress would not 
change significantly. 

**************************************
Standard error computations 
**************************************

When national estimates are derived from a sample, as with the NCVS, 
caution must be used when comparing one estimate to another or when 
comparing estimates over time. Although one estimate may be larger than 
another, estimates based on a sample have some degree of sampling 
error. The sampling error of an estimate depends on several factors, 
including the amount of variation in the responses and the size of the 
sample. When the sampling error around an estimate is taken into 
account, the estimates that appear different may not be statistically 
different.
 
One measure of the sampling error associated with an estimate is the 
standard error. The standard error can vary from one estimate to the 
next. Generally, an estimate with a small standard error provides a 
more reliable approximation of the true value than an estimate with a 
large standard error. Estimates with relatively large standard errors 
are associated with less precision and reliability and should be 
interpreted with caution. 

To generate standard errors around numbers and estimates from the NCVS, 
the Census Bureau produced generalized variance function (GVF) 
parameters for BJS. GVFs account for aspects of the NCVS complex sample 
design and represent the curve fitted to a selection of individual 
standard errors based on the Jackknife Repeated Replication technique. 
The GVF parameters were used to generate standard errors for each point 
estimate (such as counts, percentages, and rates) in this report. 

BJS conducted tests to determine whether differences in estimated 
numbers and percentages in this report were statistically significant 
once sampling error was taken into account. Using statistical programs 
developed specifically for the NCVS, all comparisons in the text were 
tested for significance. Student’s t-statistic was the primary test 
procedure, which tests the difference between two sample estimates.

Data users can use the estimates and the standard errors of the 
estimates provided in this report to generate a confidence interval 
around the estimate as a measure of the margin of error. The following 
example illustrates how standard errors can be used to generate 
confidence intervals:

* In 2009–12, according to the NCVS, 57% of victims of violent crime 
experienced socio-emotional problems as a result of the victimization 
(see table 2). Using GVFs, it was determined that the estimated 
percentage has a standard error of 1.6 (see appendix table 14). A 
confidence interval around the estimate was generated by multiplying 
the standard errors by ±1.96 (the t-score of a normal, two- tailed 
distribution that excludes 2.5% at either end of the distribution). 
Therefore, the 95% confidence interval around the 57% estimate from 
2012 is 57 ± (1.6 X 1.96) or (54 to 60). 

In others words, if different samples using the same procedures were 
taken from the U.S. population in 2009–12, 95% of the time 54% to 60% 
of all violent victims would report experiencing socio-emotional 
problems. In this report, BJS also calculated a coefficient of 
variation (CV) for all estimates, representing the ratio of the 
standard error to the estimate. CVs provide a measure of reliability 
and a means for comparing the precision of estimates across measures 
with differing levels or metrics. In cases where the CV was greater 
than 50%, or the unweighted sample had 10 or fewer cases, the estimate 
was noted with a “!” symbol. (Interpret data with caution. Estimate 
based on 10 or fewer sample cases, or the coefficient of variation is 
greater than 50%.)

**************************************
Impact of interview recency on level 
of distress
**************************************

The time elapsed from the victimization to the NCVS interview may be 
associated with the level of distress that a victim reported. To 
examine this, the distribution of level of distress was examined for 
victimizations that occurred less than 1 month to 5 months or more 
prior to the interview. The level of distress reported by victims did 
not appear to be related to the recency of the interview (figure 5). A 
similar percentage of victims of violent incidents reported moderate to 
severe distress regardless of the number of months from the 
victimization to the interview. For example, 26% of victims who were 
interviewed less than 1 month after their victimization reported severe 
distress, compared to 28% of victims who were interviewed 5 months 
after their victimization.

**************************************
Logistic regression statistical 
techniques
**************************************

The analyses conducted in table 10 employed the technique of logistic 
regression for categorical binary outcomes, which produces coefficients 
estimating the relationship between independent variables on the 
probability of the dependent outcome. In this case, logistic regression 
was used to determine what characteristics are statistically 
significant for predicting a dichotomous outcome, a victim experiencing 
socio-emotional problems or not experiencing socio-emotional problems, 
and if these relationships persist after controlling for other 
characteristics. The selected victim and incident characteristics 
examined were sex, race and Hispanic origin, age, marital status, 
education level, type of crime (e.g., serious violence or simple 
assault), and victim–offender relationship. A logistic model was 
iteratively run under a backwards selection technique until only 
predictors that were significant at the 95% level of confidence 
remained. 

The coefficients produced were transformed into an odds ratio to show 
the effect of a change in a given independent variable. The odds ratio 
compared whether the probability that a victim experienced socio-
emotional problems was the same for two groups (e.g. males and females) 
conditional on the victim having the mean value of all other predictors 
in the model. The formula for calculating an odds ratio is--

exp (B)

where exp equals the base of the natural logarithm e (a constant equal 
to 2.71828) and B equals the logistic regression coefficient for a 
given independent variable. An odds ratio greater than 1 indicates that 
the characteristic is associated with an increased likelihood that the 
victim experienced socio-emotional problems. Characteristics with 
larger odds ratios have a larger effect on the probability of 
experiencing socio-emotional problems than characteristics with smaller 
odds ratios. For example, in appendix table 22, the coefficient for 
serious violence is 0.9. The exponentiated logistic regression 
coefficient of 0.9 produces an odds ratio of 2.5. The odds ratio of 2.5 
for serious violence is the ratio of the odds of victims of serious 
violence experiencing socio-emotional problems to the odds of a victim 
of simple assault (the reference or comparison group), after accounting 
for the effect of all of the other predictor variables in the model. 
That is, the odds ratio of 2.5 indicates that the odds of a victim of 
serious violence experiencing socio-emotional problems is 2.5 times 
higher than a victim of simple assault (the comparison group).
 
The logistic regression analyses were conducted with SPSS Complex 
Samples using weighted data and accounting for the NCVS complex sample 
design. Prior to conducting the regression analyses, all variables were 
tested to ensure that multicollinearity was not a problem for the 
models. The variances and standard errors were then computed using the 
Taylor Series Linearization method. Wald F-statistics were calculated 
to test for statistical significance of the effects of each victim and 
incident characteristic. The Wald F-statistics were used to test the 
null hypothesis that all regression coefficients are equal to zero for 
each characteristics (i.e., the probability of experiencing socio-
emotional problems is the same across all categories of the selected 
characteristics), conditional on all other victim or incident 
characteristics being including in the model.

****************************************************
The Bureau of Justice Statistics of the U.S. Department of Justice is 
the principal federal agency responsible for measuring crime, criminal 
victimization, criminal offenders, victims of crime, correlates of 
crime, and the operation of criminal and civil justice systems at the 
federal, state, tribal, and local levels. BJS collects, analyzes, and 
disseminates reliable and valid statistics on crime and justice systems 
in the United States, supports improvements to state and local criminal 
justice information systems, and participates with national and 
international organizations to develop and recommend national standards 
for justice statistics. William J. Sabol is acting director.

This report was written by Lynn Langton and Jennifer Truman. Sofi 
Sinozich and Erika Harrell verified the report.

Lockheed Martin and Jill Thomas edited the report. Barbara Quinn 
produced the report.

September 2014, NCJ 247076
****************************************************

*************************************************
Office of Justice Programs
Innovation * Partnerships * Safer Neighborhoods
www.ojp.usdoj.gov
*************************************************

**********************
9/2/2014/JER/1:15
**********************

