U.S. Department of Justice
Bureau of Justice Statistics

------------------------------------------------------------
Note to readers of the ASCII version:
This file is text only without graphics and tables. 
A Zip archive of the tables and graph data points in this
report in spreadsheet format (.wk1) and the full report
including tables and graphics in .pdf format are available
from
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/abstract/so00.htm.

This report is one in a series.  More recent
editions may be available.  To view a list of
all in the series go to
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/pubalp2.htm#sd 


------------------------------------------------------------
-----
Sheriffs' Offices 2000
January 2003, NCJ 196534


Matthew J. Hickman
and Brian A. Reaves, Ph.D.
BJS Statisticians

Lawrence A. Greenfeld
Director

The Office of Community Oriented Policing Services (COPS)
provided partial funding for the 2000 Census.  Debra Cohen
and Matthew Scheider of COPS assisted with questionnaire
development  More information on COPS can be obtained at
their website <www.usdoj.gov/cops>.

Data were collected and processed by the U.S. Census Bureau,
with assistance from BJS.  Census Bureau staff, under the
supervision of Latrice Brogsdale-Davis and Charlene Sebold
included Theresa Reitz, Martha Greene, Patricia Torreyson,
Bill Bryner, and Paula Kinard.

Sample design and selection and imputation procedures were
conducted by Suzanne Dorinski and Yukiko Ellis of the
Economic Statistical Methods and Programming Division of the
Census Bureau under the supervision of Carma Hogue.

Data presented in this report may be obtained from the
National Archive of the Criminal Justice Data at the
University of Michigan, 1-800-999-0960.  The report and data
are available on the Internet at: <www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs>.

Contents 

Highlights     
The LEMAS survey         
Personnel 
Budget and pay 
Operations     
Community policing       
Equipment 
Computers and information systems  
Special arrest policies   
Methodology   

Personnel

*As of June 2000, sheriffs' offices had 293,823 full-time
employees, including about 165,000 sworn personnel. 
Employment was up an average of about 4% per year since
1990.   

*Racial and ethnic minorities comprised 17.1% of full-time
sworn personnel in 2000, up from 15.5% in 1990.  Females
comprised 12.5% of officers in 2000, down from 15.4% in
1990.

*From 1990 to 2000, the number of African American officers
increased by 1,600, or 12% and Hispanic officers by 3,400,
or 51%. During this period, the number of female officers
decreased by 1,200, or 5.5%.

*Nearly all officers worked for an agency using criminal
record checks (97%), background investigations (97%),
personal interviews (96%), driving record checks (94%), and
medical exams (90%) to screen applicants.  Drug tests (81%)
were also common.   

*In 2000, 11% of sheriffs' offices, employing 13% of sworn
personnel, required new deputy recruits to have completed at
least some college, up from 4% in 1990.

*State-mandated field and academy training requirements for
new deputies  averaged about 670 hours combined.  Additional
training beyond state requirements averaged about 380 hours. 
Budget and pay

*Sheriffs' offices had total operating budgets of $17.7
billion during fiscal 2000, 45% more than in 1990 after
adjusting for inflation.  Operating budgets in 2000 averaged
$107,900 per sworn officer, and $65 per resident.

*In 2000, starting salaries for sheriffs' deputies ranged
from an average of about $21,700 in the smallest
jurisdictions to about $32,900 in the largest.  Almost half
(45%) of all sheriffs' officers worked for an agency that
authorized collective bargaining.  

Operations

*Nearly all sheriffs' offices used automobiles for routine
patrol.  In addition, 23% used foot patrol routinely.  An
estimated 13%, including half of those serving 1 million or
more residents, used bicycle patrol on a regular basis.

*In 2000, 87% of sheriffs' offices, employing 90% of sworn
personnel, participated in a 9-1-1 emergency system compared
to 42% and 68% in 1990.  In 2000, 66% of offices, employing
82% of sworn personnel, had enhanced 9-1-1, compared to 11%
and 36% in 1990.

*About 3 in 10 sheriffs' offices had officers assigned full
time to a special unit for drug enforcement, with 3,300
officers so assigned nationwide.  Two-fifths of sheriffs'
offices had officers assigned to a multi-agency drug task
force, with a total of 2,900 officers assigned full time
nationwide.

*Fifty-three percent of sheriffs' offices, employing 78% of
sworn personnel, had drug asset forfeiture receipts during
1999.  Collectively, offices had about $137 million in
receipts, or $834 per sworn officer employed.

*Almost all sheriffs' offices had responsibility for
executing arrest warrants (99.7%), providing court security
(97%), and serving civil process (99%).  About 8 in 10 had
responsibility for operating a jail.

Community policing

*Fifty-five percent of sheriffs' offices, employing 74% of
sworn personnel, had a community policing plan of some type. 
An estimated 13% of offices, employing 36% of sworn
personnel, had a formal, written plan.  

*Sixty-two percent of sheriffs' offices, employing 76% of
sworn personnel, used full-time community policing officers
in 2000.  Collectively, there were about 16,500 such
officers.

*Thirty-one percent of sheriffs' offices, employing 51% of
sworn personnel, trained all new recruits in community
policing.  Fifty-two percent of offices, employing 69% of
sworn personnel, trained at least some in-service personnel
in community policing.

*About 8 in 10 sheriffs' offices regularly met with
community groups during 2000.  About a third of those
serving 100,000 or more residents conducted a citizen
academy.

*About a fifth of all sheriffs' offices, including more than
a third of those serving 100,000 or more residents, upgraded
technology in 2000 to support community policing efforts. 

*Forty-eight percent of sheriffs' offices, employing 71% of
all sworn personnel, used full-time school resource officers
in 2000. Collectively, these agencies employed about 5,300
such officers.

Equipment

*Ninety-seven percent of sheriffs' offices authorized the
use of semiautomatic sidearms in 2000.  This increased from
74% in 1990. 

*An estimated 89% of sheriffs' offices, employing 89% of all
sworn personnel, authorized use of chemical agents such as
pepper spray during 2000, up from 52% and 63%  in 1990.

*In 2000, 52% of sheriffs' offices, employing 53% of all
sworn personnel, required all field officers to wear
protective body armor, compared to 21% and 23% in 1990.

*Nationwide, sheriffs' offices in 2000 operated an estimated
106,000 cars, or about 6 cars for every 10 officers
employed.  About a third of these cars were unmarked. 

*About half of all sheriffs' offices used dogs for law
enforcement work, including more than two-thirds of those
serving a population of 50,000 or more.  Four percent of
sheriffs' offices used horses, including 25% of those
serving 1 million or more residents.

*Fifty-three percent of all sheriffs' offices regularly used
video cameras in 2000.  Forty percent used them in patrol
cars.  Seven percent of sheriffs' offices used video cameras
for traffic enforcement.

Computers and information systems

*From 1990 to 2000, the percentage of sheriffs' offices
using in-field computers increased from 6% to 32%.  Offices
using in-field computers employed 61% of all sworn personnel
in 2000, up from 28% in 1990.

*The percentage of sheriffs' offices using computers for
Internet access rose from 31% in 1997 to 67% in 2000. 
During 2000, about 8 in 10 offices serving 50,000 or more
residents had this capability.

*From 1997 to 2000, the percentage of sheriffs' officers
employed by an agency with in-field computer access to
vehicle records increased from 40% to 45%; driving records;
38% to 42%; calls for service histories, 24% to 33%; and
criminal histories, 29% to 33%.

*In 2000, 80% of sheriffs' offices used paper reports as the
primary means to transmit criminal incident field data to a
central information system, down from 87% in 1997.  During
the same period, use of computer and data devices increased
from 7% to 14%.

Written policy directives

*Nearly all sheriffs' offices (92%) had a written policy on
pursuit driving. Almost half restricted vehicle pursuits
according to specific criteria such as speed or offense. 
About a third had a policy that left the decision to the
officer's discretion.  Five percent discouraged all vehicle
pursuits.

*Ninety-two percent of sheriffs' offices, employing 98% of
all sworn personnel, had a written policy on the use of
deadly force.  Eighty-five percent, employing 94% of sworn
personnel, had a policy on nonlethal force. 

*Eighty-nine percent of sheriffs' offices, employing 91% of
sworn personnel, had a special policy regarding arrest for
domestic assaults.  Sixty-eight percent had a mandatory
arrest policy, and 17% had a pro-arrest policy. 

*Eighty-four percent of sheriffs' offices, employing 85% of
sworn personnel, had a special policy regarding arrest for
violations of protection orders.  Sixty-two percent had a
mandatory arrest policy, and 18% had a pro-arrest policy.

The LEMAS survey

During 2000, the Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS), as a
part of its Law Enforcement Management and Administrative
Statistics (LEMAS) program, surveyed a nationally
representative sample of State and local law enforcement
agencies operating nationwide.  Previous LEMAS surveys were
conducted in 1987, 1990, 1993, 1997, and 1999.

This report presents data from the 2000 survey describing
the more than 3,000 sheriffs' offices operating in the
United States in terms of their personnel, expenditures and
pay, operations, community policing initiatives, equipment,
computers and information systems, and written policies. 
Comparisons are made with prior years where appropriate.

Sheriffs' offices typically serve counties and independent
cities.  Although sheriffs' offices may have countywide jail
and court-related responsibilities, their law enforcement
jurisdiction may exclude county areas served by a local
police department.  In certain counties, some municipalities
contract with the sheriff's office for law enforcement
services.  In counties and independent cities with a
separate police department, the sheriffs' office may not
have any primary law enforcement jurisdiction.

The 2000 LEMAS survey questionnaire was mailed to 3,132
State and local law enforcement agencies.  The overall
response rate was 97.4% (see Methodology for a description
of the sample).  

This report, and its companion report (Local Police
Departments 2000, NCJ-196002), summarize data collected from
agencies of all sizes.  Trend data on the police departments
serving the 62 largest U.S. cities were previously published
in the BJS Special Report, Police Departments in Large
Cities:  1990-2000, NCJ-175703.

Personnel

As of June 30, 2000, sheriffs' offices had 293,823 full-time
employees.  They also employed about 23,000 persons on a
part-time basis.  Approximately 165,000, or 56%, of
full-time local police employees were sworn personnel (those
with general arrest powers).

Sheriffs' offices employed 23% of all State and local sworn
officers nationwide.  Their 129,112 full-time civilian
employees comprised 41% of all nonsworn State and local law
enforcement employees.

There were about 90,000, or 44%, more full-time sheriffs'
office employees in 2000 than in 1990.  When only sworn
personnel are considered, employment by sheriffs' offices
increased by about 23,300, or 16.5%, from 1990 to 2000.  

Overall, the number of part-time sheriffs' office employees
increased by about 6,300, or 39%, from 1990 to 2000.  When
only sworn personnel are considered, part-time employment by
sheriffs' offices was up by about 1,100, or 12.1%, from 1990
to 2000.

Nationwide 351 sheriffs' offices employed at least 100 sworn
personnel (11.4%), including 12 with 1,000 or more full-time
officers (0.4%). A total of 844 offices employed fewer than
10 full-time sworn personnel (27.5%).
 
Nearly a fifth of all full-time sheriffs' deputies were
employed by an agency with 1,000 or more sworn personnel,
and nearly two-thirds were employed by one with at least 100
sworn personnel.  Agencies that employed fewer than 10
full-time sworn personnel accounted for about 3% of all
sheriffs' deputies nationwide.

Although only a sixth of sheriffs' offices served a
jurisdiction with 100,000 or more residents, such agencies
employed about two-thirds of all sworn personnel.  About a
fifth of sworn personnel were employed in jurisdictions with
1 million or more residents.

Sheriffs' offices in jurisdictions with a population of 1
million or more had an average of 1,646 full-time employees,
including 905 sworn personnel. In contrast, offices in
jurisdictions with fewer than 10,000 residents had an
average of 6 full-time sworn personnel and 5 nonsworn
employees.

Part-time employees were more common among sheriffs' offices
serving larger jurisdictions, ranging from an average of 2
in the smallest jurisdictions to 38 in the largest.  The
highest average number of sworn part-time employees was 11,
among sheriffs' offices serving 500,000 to 999,999
residents. 

Overall, 40% of full-time sworn personnel in sheriffs'
offices had regularly assigned duties that included
responding to calls for service.  By population category,
the proportion of sworn personnel responding to calls ranged
from 3 in 10 among offices serving 500,000 or more
residents, to about 3 in 4 among those serving fewer than
10,000 residents.

As of June 30, 2000, sheriffs' offices collectively employed
88% of the maximum number of full-time sworn personnel
authorized by their budgets. The lowest actual-to-authorized
ratio for full-time sworn personnel was among offices
serving 1 million or more residents (84%). 

Gender and race of officers

Of the 164,711 full-time sworn personnel employed by
sheriffs' offices in 2000, an estimated 12.5% were women. 
The percentage of female officers ranged from more than 13%
in jurisdictions with a population of 100,000 or more to
about 7% in those with fewer than 10,000 residents. 

In 2000, 17.1% of the full-time sworn personnel in sheriffs'
offices were members of a racial or ethnic minority. 
Minority officers comprised almost a third of the total in
jurisdictions with 1 million or more residents.

Blacks or African Americans accounted for 9.4% of all sworn
personnel in 2000. This included more than 11% of the sworn
personnel in jurisdictions with a population of 500,000 or
more.

An estimated 6.1% of sworn personnel were Hispanic or
Latino, with the highest representation among offices
serving a population of 1 million or more (15.4%).

In 2000 the estimated 20,589 female officers represented a
decrease of about 1,200, or 5.5%, from 1990.  During this
time female representation among sworn personnel decreased
from 15.4% to 12.5%.

The 28,166 sworn personnel who were members of a racial or
ethnic minority in 2000 represented an increase of about
6,250, or 28%, since 1990.  From 1990 to 2000, minority
representation among sworn personnel in sheriffs' offices
increased from 15.5% to 17.1%.

The estimated 15,483 full-time black or African American
officers employed in 2000 represented an increase of about
1,600, or 12%, compared to 1990.  However, there was a
slight decrease during this period in the percentage of all
sworn personnel who were black -- from 9.8% to 9.4%.

There were an estimated 10,047 Hispanic or Latino sworn
personnel in sheriffs' offices as of June 2000.  This was
about 3,400, or 51%, more than in 1990.  From 1990 to 2000,
the percentage of sworn personnel who were Hispanic or
Latino rose from 4.7% to 6.1%.  

From 1990 to 2000 the number of other minority groups such
as Asians, Pacific Islanders, and American Indians increased
by 86% to about 2,600 officers.  These groups comprised 1.6%
of sworn personnel in 2000 compared to 1.0% in 1990.

Screening of officer applicants 

Sheriffs' offices employed a variety of screening methods
when hiring new deputies.  Nearly all used personal
interviews (94%), and a majority used medical exams (75%)
and drug tests (61%).  About half used psychological
evaluations (47%), including about four-fifths of those
serving 250,000 or more residents.  

About a third of sheriffs' offices used physical agility
tests and written aptitude tests.  Less common was the use
of personality inventories (21%), polygraph exams (18%), or
voice stress analyzers (4%).

In addition to interviews, tests, and examinations, nearly
all sheriffs' offices screened recruits through criminal
record checks (97%), background investigations (95%), and
driving record checks (91%).  

Nearly all sheriffs' deputies were employed by agencies that
screened recruits with criminal record checks (97%),
background investigations (97%), personal interviews (96%),
driving record checks (94%), and medical exams (90%).  About
8 in 10 were employed by agencies that used drug tests
(81%), and about 2 in 3 by those that used psychological
evaluations (68%).

Education and training requirements

Nearly all (97%) sheriffs' offices had an education
requirement for new deputy recruits.  The typical minimum
requirement was a high school diploma (86%).  Eleven percent
of offices required some college education, including 6%
with a  2-year degree requirement.
The percentage of sworn personnel employed by an agency with
a college requirement for new deputies in 2000 (13%) was
about 3 times that of 1990 (4%).   From 1990 to 2000, the
percentage of sworn personnel employed by an agency with a
degree requirement increased from 3% to 5%.

In 2000, new deputy recruits in sheriffs' offices serving a
population of 100,000 or more were required to complete an
average of about 1,400 hours of academy and field training. 
In contrast, those in jurisdictions with fewer than 10,000
residents were required to complete an average of about 780
hours.  Overall, an average of 64% of training hours were
State mandated, with the remainder an agency requirement.

The average annual in-service training requirement for
non-probationary officers was 62 hours, including 26
State-mandated hours.

Overall, 13% of sheriffs' offices operated a training
academy, including about two-thirds of those serving a
population of 500,000 or more.  Nationwide, 44% of all sworn
personnel were employed by an agency that operated an
academy.

Budget and pay








Operating budgets

The total operating budget of sheriffs' offices during
fiscal 2000 was about $17.7 billion.  This was 95% more than
in 1990.  Controlling for inflation, the net increase in the
total operating budget was 45%. (These figures do not
include budgets for capital expenditures such as equipment
purchases or construction projects.)  Sheriffs' offices
accounted for 27% of the $65.7 billion in total operating
budgets for State and local law enforcement agencies during
fiscal 2000.  

Nationwide, operating budgets were about $5.8 million per
sheriffs' office for fiscal 2000, ranging from about $123
million for those serving a population of 1 million or more,
to $412,000 among those serving fewer than 10,000 residents. 


The overall operating cost per resident was $65, with
offices serving a population of less than 10,000 costing the
most to operate, $74 per resident.  Offices serving 25,000
to 99,999 residents had the lowest per resident cost --about
$58. 

Nationwide, sheriffs' offices cost an estimated $107,900 per
sworn officer to operate for fiscal 2000, ranging from
$160,100 per officer in jurisdictions with a population of 1
million or more, to $66,900 per officer in jurisdictions
with a population under 10,000.  

When both sworn and nonsworn employees are included, the
average operating budget for sheriffs' offices was about
$59,000 per employee for the year.  Operating costs ranged
from $83,100 per employee in jurisdictions with 1 million or
more residents to $37,000 per employee in those with fewer
than 10,000 residents. 

After controlling for inflation, per officer operating costs
for 2000 were $24,000, or 28.7%, higher than in 1990.  The
largest increase, from $103,600 to $149,100, was recorded in
jurisdictions with 500,000 or more residents.  The smallest
increase, from $90,000 to $103,100, was in jurisdictions
with 100,000 to 499,999 residents.  
 Salaries

The overall average base starting salary for sheriffs was
$49,400 in 2000.  Average starting salaries for sheriffs
ranged from $99,300 in jurisdictions with 1 million or more
residents to $33,800 in those with a population under
10,000.

By agency, the average base starting salary offered to
entry-level deputies in 2000 was $23,700.  Starting salaries
ranged from $21,700 in jurisdictions with fewer than 10,000
residents to $32,900 in those with a population of 1 million
or more.   When size of agency is factored in, it is
estimated that new entry-level deputies started at an
average salary of about $28,700.

Salaries for first-line supervisors (sergeant or equivalent)
increased with jurisdiction size in a pattern similar to
that for entry-level deputies.  Overall, the average
starting salary for sergeants was $30,500, ranging from
$45,500 in the largest jurisdictions to $25,900 in the
smallest.  When size of agency is considered, it is
estimated that sergeants in sheriffs' offices started at an
average salary of about $38,800 during 2000.

From 1990 to 2000 average starting salaries increased 36%
for entry-level deputies (from $17,400 to $23,700). 
However, after controlling for inflation,  salaries rose
only 1.7%. By population category, the largest increase was
in jurisdictions with fewer than 25,000 residents, where
salaries rose an average of 6.2% after adjusting for
inflation, from $20,715 to $22,008.
  
Small increases also occurred in jurisdictions with 100,000
to 499,999 residents, from $26,064 to $27,215 (4.4%); and
jurisdictions with 25,000 to 99,999 residents, from $23,308
to $24,103 (3.4%).  In jurisdictions with 500,000 or more
residents, starting salaries for deputies declined 0.6%,
from $32,035 to $31,849.

Special pay

Nationwide, 24% of all sheriffs' offices, including a
majority of those serving a population of 250,000 or more,
offered tuition reimbursement to officers.  About half (51%)
of sworn personnel nationwide worked for an agency that
offered it. 
 
Nineteen percent of sheriffs' offices, employing 40% of
sworn personnel nationwide, offered merit pay to qualifying
officers.  About two-fifths of offices serving a population
of 100,000 or more had merit compensation.

An estimated 18% of sheriffs' offices offered education
incentive pay to qualifying officers, including a majority
of those serving a population of 1 million or more.
Forty-five percent of sworn personnel worked for an agency
that offered this type of incentive pay. 

Eighteen percent of sheriffs' offices offered shift
differential pay to full-time sworn personnel.  This
included about half of the offices serving a population of
250,000 or more.  Nationwide, 34% of sworn personnel were
employed by a agency with shift differential pay.

Ten percent of sheriffs' offices offered special skills pay,
including 4 in 10 offices serving a population of 1 million
or more and about 3 in 10 offices serving a population of
250,000 to 999,999.  Overall, 32% of sworn personnel worked
for an agency that offered special skills pay.

Hazardous duty pay was available in 8% of all sheriffs'
offices, employing 29% of all sworn personnel.  About a
third of offices serving a population of 500,000 or more
offered this pay.

Work-related policies 

Fifty-five percent of sheriffs' offices, employing 70% of
all sworn personnel, had a written policy on the maximum
number of hours that officers can work.  About 5 in 6
offices serving a population of 500,000 to 999,999 residents
maintained such a policy.

Eighty-one percent of sheriffs' offices, employing 94% of
all sworn personnel, had a written policy pertaining to
off-duty employment by officers.  More than 9 in 10 offices
serving a population of 50,000 to 999,999 had such a policy. 

Unions and collective bargaining

Nationwide, 30% of all sheriffs' offices, employing 45% of
all sworn personnel, authorized collective bargaining for
officers.  About 4 in 5 offices serving 1 million or more
residents authorized collective bargaining for officers, as
did about 3 in 5 offices serving 250,000 to 999,999
residents.  
 
Nonsworn sheriffs' employees were about as likely to have
bargaining rights as sworn ones.  Overall, 25% of sheriffs'
offices, employing 44% of all nonsworn personnel, authorized
collective bargaining for civilian employees. 

The average starting salary for entry-level officers was 24%
higher in departments that authorized collective bargaining
than in those that did not authorize it.  Departments with
collective bargaining for officers had higher average
entry-level salaries in all population categories.  In 
jurisdictions with fewer than 25,000 residents the
difference was about $4,500, 25,000 to 99,999 residents,
$5,200; 100,000 to 499,999 residents, $1,900; and 500,000 or
more residents, $2,400. 

Operations

Patrol and response

In 2000 nearly all (98%) sheriffs' offices used automobiles
to provide routine patrol services in their jurisdiction. 
In addition, nearly a quarter used foot patrol units (23%)
and marine patrols (22%) on a routine basis.  This included
more than two-fifths of those serving a population of 1
million or more.  Sheriffs' offices with routine foot
patrols employed 37% of all sworn personnel, and those with
routine marine patrols, 49%.

Thirteen percent of sheriffs' offices had routine bike
patrols, including about half of those serving 500,000 or
more residents.  Forty-five percent of sworn personnel were
employed by an agency using bicycle patrol units on a
routine basis.  

The percentage of sheriffs' offices using foot and bicycle
patrols increased after 1997, when 16% were using foot
patrols, and 6% were using bicycle patrols.  From 1997 to
2000, the percentage using one or both of these patrol types
increased from 20% to 30%.

Just 7% of all sheriffs' offices used motorcycle patrol on a
routine basis during 2000.  However, nearly half of those
serving 500,000 or more residents did so.  Sheriffs' offices
using motorcycle patrols employed 39% of all sworn
personnel.  

Five percent of sheriffs' offices routinely scheduled horse
patrol units.  Nearly a third (31%) of the offices serving 1
million or more residents used this type of patrol.

Nearly all sheriffs' offices (96%) were responsible for
responding to citizen calls for service.  Agencies in
jurisdictions with 1 million or more residents (62%) were
the least likely to perform this function.  Seventy-eight
percent of sheriffs' offices handled the dispatching of
calls.  This included more than 80% of those serving fewer
than 50,000 residents.

9-1-1 emergency telephone system

In 2000, 87% of sheriffs' offices participated in an
emergency telephone system whereby one of their units could
be dispatched as a result of a call to 9-1-1 or its
equivalent. Two-thirds of sheriffs' offices had enhanced
9-1-1 systems, capable of automatically displaying
information such as a caller's phone number and address, as
well as any special instructions that may have been
provided.

The 87% participation rate in 9-1-1 during 2000 was a
substantial increase from 1990 when 42% of sheriffs' offices
were 9-1-1 participants.  In 2000, 90% of sworn personnel
were employed by an office with 9-1-1.

The 66% of sheriffs' offices participating in an enhanced
9-1-1 system in 2000 also represented a large increase over
1990 when 11% were participants. In 2000, 82% of sworn
personnel were employed by an agency with enhanced 9-1-1.

Among existing sheriffs' 9-1-1 systems, there were about 3
times as many with enhanced capabilities in 2000 (76%) as in
1990 (24%).  The percent of systems that were enhanced was
up significantly in all population categories (Highlights
figure on page iv).  

In jurisdictions with fewer than 25,000 residents, the
percent of systems with enhanced capabilities went from 14%
in 1990 to 65% in 2000; 25,000 to 99,999 residents, from 24%
to 80%; 100,000 to 499,999 residents, from 53% to 94%;
500,000 or more residents, from 72% to 96%.  

Crime investigation

Overall, 93% of sheriffs' offices regularly investigated at
least some types of crimes during the 12-month period ending
June 30, 2000.  Eighty percent handled homicide
investigations.  This included about 9 in 10 offices serving
a population of 25,000 to 99,999.  

Seventy-six percent of sheriffs' offices conducted arson
investigations.  This included about 8 in 10 offices serving
10,000 to 249,999 residents.  Less than half of sheriffs'
office serving 1 million or more residents handled arson
investigations.

Drug enforcement activities

Ninety-five percent of sheriffs' offices regularly performed
drug enforcement functions.  More than 90% 
of the offices in each population category below 250,000 had
drug enforcement responsibilities.  Offices with drug
enforcement responsibilities employed 93% of all sworn
personnel.

Twenty-nine percent of sheriffs' offices operated a special
unit for drug enforcement with one or more officers assigned
full-time.  About half of offices serving 100,000 or more
residents had a full-time drug enforcement unit.  

An estimated 3,270 sheriffs' deputies were assigned full
time to drug enforcement units nationwide.  The average
number of officers assigned ranged from 23 in jurisdictions
with 1 million or more residents to 1 or 2 in population
categories under 50,000.

Drug task force participation

In 2000 an estimated 40% of sheriffs' offices had one or
more officers assigned full time to a multi-agency drug
enforcement task force.  Seventy percent of sworn personnel
worked for an agency that assigned officers to a task force. 


Nationwide, about 2,900 sheriffs' deputies were assigned
full time to a drug task force.  The average number assigned
ranged from 12 in jurisdictions with a population of 1
million or more 1 in those with fewer than 25,000 residents.

Drug asset forfeiture receipts

Fifty-three percent of all sheriffs' offices received money,
property, or goods from a drug asset forfeiture program
during 1999.  These offices employed 78% of all sworn
personnel.  About 7 in 10 offices serving a population of
50,000 or more had drug asset forfeiture receipts.

The overall median amount received from drug asset
forfeiture programs by sheriffs' offices during 1999 was
$14,700.  By population category, the median amount received
ranged from $300,000 among jurisdictions with a population
of 1 million or more to $5,000 among those with fewer than
10,000 residents.  

Collectively sheriffs' offices received an estimated $137
million in money goods, and property during 1999 -- the
equivalent of about $834 per sworn officer employed. 
Offices with 100 to 249 full-time sworn personnel received
the most -- about $1,341 per officer.  Next highest were
offices with 25 to 49 ($1,021 per officer), 1,000 or more
($1,013), or under 25 ($939) sworn personnel.  Offices with
250 to 999 ($439) or 50 to 99 ($466) sworn personnel had the
lowest receipts per officer.   

Court-related functions

Almost all sheriffs' offices in 2000 executed arrest
warrants (99.7%), served civil process (99%), and provided
court security (97%).  

Detention-related functions

Eighty-one percent of sheriffs' offices operated at least
one jail during 2000.  Nearly 9 in 10 offices serving
jurisdictions with 25,000 to 99,999 residents operated a
jail.  Ninety percent of all sheriffs' officers worked for
an agency that operated a jail.

Twenty percent of sheriffs' offices operated at least one
temporary holding (lockup) facility for adults that was
separate from a jail. The median maximum holding time for
these facilities was 24 hours.  

The median total capacity of adult lockups ranged from 110
in jurisdictions with 500,000 to 999,999 residents to 4 in
those with 10,000 to 24,999 residents.  The total adult
capacity of sheriffs' office lockups nationwide was about
17,400.

Seven percent of sheriffs' offices had  a lockup facility
for juveniles.  The median capacity of juvenile lockups
ranged from 15 in jurisdictions with 500,000 to 999,999
residents to 2 in those with fewer than 50,000 residents
Nationwide juvenile lockups in sheriffs' offices had a total
capacity of about 4,600 with a median maximum holding time
of 6 hours.  

Special operations functions

An estimated 73% of sheriffs' offices, employing 82% of all
sworn personnel, performed search and rescue operations on a
regular basis during 2000.  Agencies serving 1 million or
more residents (56%) were the least likely to perform this
function.

Forty percent of sheriffs' offices performed tactical
operations, utilizing what are commonly known as SWAT
(Special Weapons and Tactics) teams.  These offices employed
72% of all sworn personnel.  A majority of offices serving a
population of 25,000 or more performed tactical operations
on a regular basis.

Community policing

Community policing promotes organizational strategies to
address the causes and reduce the fear of crime and social
disorder through problem-solving tactics and community
partnerships.  A fundamental shift from traditional reactive
policing, community policing stresses the prevention of
crime before it occurs.  The implementation of a community
policing plan supports and empowers front-line officers,
decentralizes command, and encourages innovative problem
solving.

In 2000, 13% of sheriffs' offices, employing 36% of all
sworn personnel, had a formally written community policing
plan.  About a third of offices serving a population of
100,000 or more had such a plan.  

In all population categories of 25,000 or more, a majority
of sheriffs' offices had either a formal, written community
policing plan or an informal, unwritten plan.  Offices were
more likely to have a formal, written community policing
plan than an informal plan in jurisdictions with 500,000 or
more residents.  Overall, 74% of sworn personnel worked for
an agency with some type of community policing plan.

Community policing training

During the year ending June 30, 2000, 47% of sheriffs'
offices, employing 67% of all sworn personnel, trained at
least some new deputy recruits in community policing skills
such as problem-solving; Scanning, Analysis, Response,
Assessment (SARA); and developing community partnerships.  

Thirty-one percent of sheriffs' offices, employing 51% of
all sworn personnel, trained all new deputy recruits in
community policing.  The proportion of offices that trained
all recruits ranged from about half among those serving
100,000 or more residents to about a sixth of those serving
fewer than 10,000 residents.

Fifty-two percent of sheriffs' offices, employing 69% of
sworn personnel, trained at least some in-service officers
in community policing during the 1-year period.  Thirteen
percent, employing 15% of all sworn personnel, trained all
in-service officers.  

Fifteen percent of sheriffs' offices, employing 34% of all
nonsworn employees, trained at least some of these employees
in community policing during the 1-year period.  This
included about 1 in 4 offices serving a population of
250,000 or more.  

Community policing personnel

Overall, 62% of sheriffs' offices, employing 76% of all
sworn personnel, had full-time community policing officers. 
In some jurisdictions, these officers may be known as
community relations officers, community resource officers,
or some other name indicative of the community policing
approach they employed.  Nationwide, sheriffs' offices
employed about 16,500 community policing officers or their
equivalent. 

A majority of sheriffs' offices in all population categories
had full-time community policing officers.  Those serving a
population of 1 million or more employed 161 such officers
on average.  Offices serving fewer than 10,000 residents had
4 on average.

In all population categories the percentage of sheriffs'
offices using community policing officers was greater in
2000 than in 1997.  In jurisdictions with fewer than 25,000
residents, the percentage rose from 15% to 63%; in those
with 25,000 to 99,999 residents, from 34% to 56%; in those
with 100,000 to 499,999 residents, from 44% to 70%; and in
those with 500,000 or more residents, from 56% to 72%.

An estimated 48% of sheriffs' offices, employing 71% of all
sworn personnel, had full-time school resource officers
during 2000.  A majority of offices serving a population of
25,000 or more used school resource officers, including
about two-thirds of those in jurisdictions with 250,000 to
999,999 residents. 

School resource officers use a community policing approach
to provide a safe environment for students and staff.  In
addition to handling calls for service within the school,
they work closely with school administrators and staff to 
prevent crime and disorder by monitoring crime trends,
problem areas, cultural conflicts, and other areas of
concern.  

Overall, sheriffs' offices had about 5,300 full-time sworn
personnel assigned as school resource officers as of June
2000.  The average number of school resource officers ranged
from 44 in jurisdictions with 1 million or more residents,
to 2 in those with fewer than 50,000 residents.

Community-oriented policies and programs

Forty-nine percent of sheriffs' offices, employing 71% of
all sworn personnel, gave patrol officers responsibility for
specific geographic areas or beats during 2000.  This
included a majority of those serving a population of 25,000
or more.

Seventeen percent of sheriffs' offices, employing 45% of all
sworn personnel, assigned cases to investigators by
geographic area.  This included half of the offices serving
1 million or more residents, and about two-fifths of those
serving 100,000 to 999,999 residents.

Twenty-three percent of sheriffs' offices, employing 39% of
all sworn personnel, actively encouraged patrol officers to
become involved in problem-solving projects.  About a third
of those serving 100,000 or more residents had such a
policy.
 
Nine percent of sheriffs' offices included problem-solving
projects in the performance evaluation criteria for patrol
officers.  This included 25% of those serving 1 million or
more residents.  Offices including problem-solving projects
in performance evaluation criteria employed 20% of all sworn
personnel.

Twenty-two percent of sheriffs' offices, employing 44% of
all sworn personnel, upgraded technology to support their 
community policing efforts.  This included more than a third
of the offices serving 100,000 or more residents.  

An estimated 22% of sheriffs' offices  enhanced their
proactive role in solving community problems by forming
problem-solving partnerships with community groups, local
agencies, or others through written agreements.

Sheriffs' offices forming partnerships through written
agreements employed 41% of all sworn personnel.

Sixteen percent of sheriffs' offices, employing 36% of all
sworn personnel, offered training to citizens on community
policing topics such as community mobilization and
problem-solving during the 12-month period ending June 30,
2000.  About a third of those serving 250,000 or more
residents more offered such training.  

Ten percent of sheriffs' offices, employing 35% of all sworn
personnel, conducted a citizen police academy during the
year ending June 30, 2000.  About a third of those serving a
population of 100,000 or more conducted citizen academies
during this period, compared to fewer than 1 in 10 offices
serving a population of under 50,000. 

Eighty-one percent of sheriffs' offices met regularly with
community groups during the year ending June 30, 2000.  This
included about 90% of those serving a population of 25,000
to 999,999.  Sheriffs' offices regularly holding community
group meetings employed 92% of all sworn personnel. 

Most sheriffs' offices met with a wide variety of community
groups during 2000.  Those that regularly met with school
groups employed 75% of all sworn personnel.  The
corresponding percentages for other types of groups were as
follows:  neighborhood associations (69%), domestic violence
groups (58%), local public agencies (57%), senior citizen
groups (55%), business groups (54%), advocacy groups (45%),
youth service organizations (42%), religious groups (37%),
and tenants' associations (27%).

Nineteen percent of sheriffs' offices, employing 38% of all
sworn personnel, surveyed citizens in their jurisdiction
during the year ending June 30, 2000.  Twelve percent of
offices, employing 32% of all sworn personnel, surveyed
citizens' regarding their satisfaction with agency services.
Nearly 3 in 10 offices serving 100,000 or more residents
conducted this type of survey.

Eight percent of sheriffs' offices, employing 27% of all
sworn personnel, surveyed citizens regarding their
perception of crime problems; 8%, employing 21% of all sworn
personnel, surveyed citizens regarding crime reporting; and
5%, employing 19% of all sworn personnel, surveyed citizens
regarding their personal crime experiences.

A majority of the sheriffs' offices conducting surveys used
the data to provide information to officers (70%), or to
evaluate program effectiveness (58%).  Other common uses
included formulation of agency policy and procedures (44%),
training development (44%), prioritizing crime and disorder
problems (42%), and allocation of resources to neighborhoods
(35%). 

Equipment

Sidearms

In 2000, 97% of sheriffs' offices authorized the use of some
type of semi- automatic sidearm.  This represents a
significant increase from 1990 when 74% authorized them.     

In 2000, 73% of sheriffs' offices authorized the .40-caliber
semiautomatic.  This represents an increase from 59% in
1997, the first year for which comparable data are
available. Offices authorizing the .40-caliber in 2000
employed 69% of all sworn personnel.  

Sixty-five percent of offices, employing 74% of all sworn
personnel, authorized the 9mm.  Other semiautomatic sidearms
authorized included the .45-caliber (59%), the .380-caliber
(38%), and the 10mm (32%).  Forty-seven percent of sheriffs'
offices authorized the use of revolvers by sworn personnel.

Sixty-four percent of sheriffs' offices, employing 73% of
all sworn personnel, supplied regular field officers with
their primary sidearm.  Three percent of offices, employing
3% of all sworn personnel, provided a cash allowance.  

Body armor

In 2000, 65% of sheriffs' offices, employing 73% of all
sworn personnel, required at least some field officers to
wear protective body armor while on duty.  Eighty-two
percent of offices, employing 89% of all sworn personnel,
supplied armor to officers and 4% provided a cash allowance.

The percentage of sheriffs' offices requiring all field
officers to wear body armor increased from 21% in 1990 to
52% in 2000.  Such an increase was seen in all population
categories:  Under 25,000 residents, 21% to 46%; 25,000 to
99,999, 25% to 58%; 100,000 to 499,999, 23% to 60%; 500,000
or more, 17% to 53%. 

Nonlethal weapons 

In 2000 nearly all sheriffs' offices authorized sworn
personnel to use one or more types of nonlethal weapons. 
Chemical agents, such as pepper spray, were the most
commonly authorized.  Eighty-eight percent of sheriffs'
offices, employing 88% of sworn personnel, authorized the
use of pepper spray.  

Batons were also commonly authorized, with 84% of all
sheriffs' offices allowing their use.  Those authorizing one
or more types of batons employed 90% of all sworn personnel. 
Collapsible batons (73%) were authorized by more than twice
as many offices as PR-24 (34%) or traditional (32%) batons.

Four-fifths of sworn personnel in sheriffs' offices
nationwide worked for an agency authorizing collapsible
batons and two-fifths for one authorizing traditional (44%)
or PR-24 (41%) batons.  

Twenty-three percent of sheriffs' offices, employing 48% of
all sworn personnel, authorized flash/bang grenades.  Ten
percent of offices, employing 22% of all sworn personnel,
authorized electrical devices such as stun guns and tasers.  

Eight percent of sheriffs' offices, employing 17% of all
sworn personnel, authorized the use of carotid holds, choke
holds, or neck restraints.   Offices serving a population of
1 million or more (25%) were the most likely to authorize
these types of actions.

From 1990 to 2000, in all population categories, there were
large increases in the percentage of sheriffs' offices
authorizing chemical agents.  These increases were as
follows:  500,000 or more residents, 65% to 90%; 100,000 to
499,999 residents, 59% to 90%; 25,000 to 99,999 residents,
52% to 93%; and under 25,000 residents, 49% to 85%.  In
2000, 89% of sworn personnel were employed by a sheriffs'
office that authorized chemical agents.

Use of force policies

Ninety-two percent of sheriffs' offices, employing 98% of
all sworn personnel, had a written policy pertaining to the
use of deadly force.  Nearly all offices serving 25,000 or
more residents had such a policy.  

Eighty-five percent of sheriffs' offices, employing 94% of
all sworn personnel, had a written policy pertaining to the
use of nonlethal force.  At least 92% of the agencies in
each population category of 25,000 or more had this type of
policy.

Vehicles

Nationwide, sheriffs' offices operated an estimated 105,758
cars, or about 64 cars per 100 sworn personnel.  By
population category, the ratio of cars to sworn personnel
was lowest in jurisdictions with 1 million or more residents
-- 42 cars per 100 officers. This was about half the ratio
in jurisdictions with fewer than 25,000 residents.

About a third of the cars operated by sheriffs' offices were
unmarked (35%).  The proportion of cars that were unmarked
ranged from about two-fifths in jurisdictions with a
population of 250,000 or more to one-sixth in jurisdictions
with fewer than 10,000 residents.

In addition to cars, 74% of sheriffs' offices used other
4-wheel motorized vehicles such as sport utility vehicles,
trucks or vans.  Overall, there were about 15,800 such
vehicles operated, or about 10 per 100 sworn personnel.

Nine percent of sheriffs' offices used motorcycles during
2000, including about half of those serving a population of
500,000 or more.  Nationwide, sheriffs' offices operated
about 1,500 motorcycles, or about 1 for every 100 sworn
personnel. 

Fourteen percent of sheriffs' offices were using bicycles as
of June 2000, with a total of about 2,900 nationwide.  The
overall ratio of bicycles to sworn personnel was 2 per 100.

Vehicle-related policies 

Ninety percent of sheriffs' offices, employing 75% of sworn
personnel, allowed officers to take marked vehicles home. 
The percentage with such a policy was highest in
jurisdictions with fewer than 25,000 residents (96%).  In
contrast, 31% of agencies serving a population of 1 million
or more had such a policy.

In a large majority of the jurisdictions that allowed marked
vehicles to be taken home, officers were allowed only to
drive the vehicle to and from work.  Just 21% of sheriffs'
offices allowed officers to operate a marked vehicle for
personal errands, with those serving 100,000 to 249,999
residents (29%) the most likely to have such a policy.

Forty-seven percent of sheriffs' offices, employing 56% of
all sworn personnel, had a restrictive pursuit driving
policy.  This type of policy restricts  pursuits according
to criteria such as offense type or maximum speed.  

Thirty-six percent of sheriffs' offices, employing 27% of
all sworn personnel, had a judgmental pursuit policy, one
that leaves pursuit decisions to the officer's discretion. 
Five percent of offices, employing 5% of all sworn
personnel, discouraged all vehicle pursuits.  

Off-land vehicles

Thirty percent of sheriffs' offices, employing 59% of sworn
personnel, operated at least one boat during 2000.  This
included about half of those serving 50,000 to 499,999
residents, or 1 million or more residents.  Nationwide,
sheriffs' offices operated about 2,300 boats during 2000.  

Four percent of sheriffs' offices, employing 28% of sworn
personnel, used helicopters in 2000.  This included about a
fourth of those serving 250,000 or more residents.  There
were an estimated 310 sheriffs' helicopters in use during
2000.

Three percent of sheriffs' offices operated at least 1
airplane, with a total about 110 in use nationwide.   
Roughly 1 in 5 offices serving 50,000 or more residents
operated at least 1 airplane.  Sheriffs' offices using
airplanes employed 20% of all sworn personnel.

Animals

Fifty-one percent of sheriffs' offices, employing 78% of all
sworn personnel, used dogs for law enforcement activities. 
This included more than two-thirds of those serving 50,000
or more residents.  Overall, about 3,700 dogs were
maintained by sheriffs' offices in 2000.

About 4% of sheriffs' offices, employing 14% of all sworn
personnel, used horses for law enforcement purposes.  This
included a quarter of those serving 1 million or more
residents.  Sheriffs' offices collectively maintained
approximately 1,100 horses.

Video cameras

Fifty-three percent of all sheriffs' offices used video
cameras on a regular basis during the year ending June 30,
2000.  Agencies regularly using video cameras employed 68%
of all sworn personnel.  The most common use of video
cameras was in patrol cars (40%).  Sheriffs' offices using
video cameras in cars employed 50% of all sworn personnel.  

Twenty percent of sheriffs' offices, employing 24% of all
sworn personnel, used video cameras for fixed-site
surveillance. Thirteen percent of offices, employing 26% of
all sworn personnel, used video cameras for mobile
surveillance.  Seven percent of offices, employing 14% of
all sworn personnel, used video cameras for traffic
enforcement.

Special technologies

Twenty-one percent of sheriffs' offices, employing 43% of
all sworn personnel, use infrared (thermal) imagers on a
regular basis.  Eight percent of offices, employing 15% of
all sworn personnel, used image intensifiers.  Laser range
finders were used regularly by 8% of all sheriffs' offices,
employing 15% of all sworn personnel.  

Electrical/engine disruption technology was used regularly
by less than 0.5% of all sheriffs' offices.  These agencies
employed 6% of all sworn personnel. Two percent of sheriffs'
offices, employing 20% of all sworn personnel, used stolen
vehicle tracking technology on a regular basis.  Tire
deflation spikes were used regularly by 41% of all sheriffs'
offices, employing 56% of all sworn personnel.  

Forty-seven percent of sheriffs' offices, employing 72% of
all sworn personnel, regularly used digital imaging
technology for mugshots.  Twenty-one percent of offices,
employing 41% of all sworn personnel, used digital imaging
technology for suspect composites.  Twenty-seven percent of
offices, employing 62% of all sworn personnel, regularly
used digital imaging technology for fingerprints.  

Computers and information systems 

Computer functions

Sheriffs' offices utilized computers for a wide variety of 
functions in 2000.  For example, 63% of offices, employing
78% of all sworn personnel, used computers for records
management.  

Two-thirds of sheriffs' offices used computers for Internet
access, including about four-fifths of those serving a
population of 50,000 or more. Those using computers for
Internet access employed 84% of all sworn personnel in 2000. 

More than twice as many sheriffs' offices used computers for
Internet access in 2000 (67%) as in 1997 (31%).  Among those
serving fewer than 25,000 residents, nearly 4 times as many
were using computers for this purpose in 2000 (57%) as in
1997 (15%).  The increases in other population categories
were as follows:  25,000 to 99,999 residents, from 26% to
64%; 100,000 to 499,999 residents, from 47% to 79%; 500,000
or more residents, from 62% to 82%.

Sixty percent of sheriffs' offices, employing 77%% of sworn
personnel, used computers for automated booking.  A majority
of the offices in jurisdictions with 10,000 or more
residents had this capability. 

In 2000, 48% of sheriffs' offices used computers for crime
investigations, including a majority of those serving 25,000
or more residents.  Those using computers for crime
investigations employed 62% of all sworn personnel.  

Forty-seven percent of sheriffs' offices used computers for
dispatching calls for service.  A majority of those serving
a population of 25,000 or more had computer-aided dispatch,
and 68% of all sworn personnel worked for an office with
this capability.

Forty-six percent of offices, employing 69% of all sworn
personnel, used computers to maintain personnel records.  

Twenty-seven percent of offices, employing 51% of all sworn
personnel, used computers for crime analysis. 
  
Related to crime analysis efforts in sheriffs' offices is
the use of crime mapping.  In 2000, 13% of offices,
including 44% of those serving 1 million or more residents
used computers in conjunction with crime mapping.  Offices
using computers for crime mapping employed 37% of all sworn
personnel in 2000.

Thirty-three percent of sheriffs' offices, employing 55% of
all sworn personnel, used computers for interagency
information sharing. 

Computerized files

In 2000 a majority of sheriffs' offices were maintaining
computerized files on incident reports (74%), warrants
(73%), arrests (72%), stolen property (61%), and calls for
service (59%).  All of these types of information were
maintained in a computerized format by a majority of the
agencies in each population category of 10,000 or more.

Less than half of all sheriffs' offices maintained
computerized files on traffic citations (44%), criminal
histories (43%), traffic accidents (41%), summonses (41%),
alarms (27%), traffic stops (25%), use of force incidents
(20%), fingerprints (19%), and linked files for crime
analysis (13%).  

Except for alarms (47%), fingerprints (46%), traffic stops
(41%), use of force incidents (40%), and linked files for
crime analysis (31%), a majority of sworn personnel worked
for a sheriffs' office that had computer files on each type
of information included in the 2000 LEMAS survey. 

Fourteen percent of all sheriffs' offices had exclusive or
shared ownership of an Automatic Fingerprint Identification
System (AFIS) that included a file of digitized prints. 
These agencies employed 41% of all sworn personnel.  About
two-fifths of the offices serving a population of 250,000 or
more owned an AFIS system.

Seventeen percent of sheriffs' offices used an AFIS terminal
with access to a remote system.  These agencies employed 27%
of all sworn personnel.

Overall, 31% of sheriffs' offices, employing 68% of all
sworn personnel, had some type of AFIS capability.  This
included a majority of those serving a population of 100,000
or more.

Use of computers in the field

A majority of sheriffs' offices serving 100,000 or more
residents used mobile computers or terminals in the field
during 2000, including about three-quarters of those serving
250,000 to 499,999 residents.  Overall 32% of sheriffs'
offices, employing 61% of all sworn personnel, were using
in-field computers or terminals.  

Fifteen percent of all sheriffs' offices, employing 46% of
all sworn personnel, used vehicle-mounted computers in 2000. 
This included about 3 in 5 offices serving 250,000 to
999,999 residents.  

About 3 in 10 offices serving a population of 250,000 or
more were using vehicle-mounted digital/data terminals. 
Overall, 6% of offices, employing 26% of all sworn
personnel, used them.

Eight percent of sheriffs' offices, employing 16% of all
sworn personnel, used vehicle-mounted laptops during 2000. 
Four percent used vehicle-mounted digital/data computers.

Twenty-five percent of all sheriffs' offices, employing 38%
of all sworn personnel, used portable (not vehicle-mounted)
computers in 2000.  This included half of those serving
250,000 to 499,999 residents. 

Portable laptops, the most common type of in-field computer,
were used by 24% of sheriffs' offices.  These agencies
employed about a third of all sworn personnel.  Less common
were portable digital/data terminals (1%) and portable
digital/data computers (1%).

The 32% of sheriffs' offices using in-field computers or
terminals in 2000 was more than 5 times the percentage using
them in 1990 (6%).  

From 1990 to 2000, increases in the use of in-field
computers and terminals occurred in jurisdictions of all
sizes.  During this period, in-field computer use among
offices serving 500,000 or more residents increased from 45%
to 63%; among those serving 100,000 to 499,999 residents,
from 14% to 61%; among those serving 25,000 to 99,999
residents, from 6% to 37%; and among those serving fewer
than 25,000 residents, from 2% to 20%.
 
Twenty percent of sheriffs' offices used in-field computers
or terminals for writing field reports.  These agencies
employed 33% of all sworn personnel.  Thirteen percent of
sheriffs' offices, employing 34% of all sworn personnel,
used in-field computers for at least some in-field
communications. 

In approximately 1 in 7 sheriffs' offices, at least some
officers in the field could use computers to access vehicle
or driving records.  This included about half of those
serving a population of 250,000 or more.  Agencies using
in-field computers for these purposes employed about
two-fifths of all sworn personnel. 

In 11% of sheriffs' offices, employing 24% of all sworn
personnel, in-field computers or terminals could be used to
access calls for service information.  This included
two-fifths of those serving 250,000 to 499,999 residents,
about a third of those serving 1 million or more, and about
a fourth of those serving 100,000 to 249,999 and 500,000 to
999,999 residents.  

In 9% of sheriffs' offices, employing 29% of all sworn
personnel, in-field computers or terminals could be used to
access criminal history information.  This included about a
third of offices serving a population of 250,000 or more.

In 4% of sheriffs' offices, employing 6% of all sworn
personnel, in-field officers had access to linked files for
crime analysis.  This included 17% of agencies serving
250,000 to 499,999 residents.

From 1997 to 2000, the percentage of sworn personnel
employed by a sheriffs' office providing at least some
officers with access to information via in-field computers
increased for each type of information included in the LEMAS
survey.  For motor vehicle records, the increase was from
40% to 45%; driving records, 38% to 42%; criminal history
records, 29% to 33%; calls for service, 24% to 33%; linked
files for crime analysis, 6% to 8%.

In 2000, 80% of sheriffs' offices used paper reports as the
primary method to transmit criminal incident reports from
the field to the agency's central information system.  Other
methods included computers and data devices (14%), as well
as telephones and wireless systems (6%).

From 1997 to 2000, use of paper reports to transmit criminal
incident reports declined from 87% to 80%.  During the same
period, use of computer and data devices increased from 7%
to 14%, and use of telephone and wireless methods remained
at 6%.  

By jurisdiction size, the use of paper reports declined in
all population categories:  500,000 or more residents, 89%
to 79%; 100,000 to 499,999, 85% to 73%; 25,000 to 99,999,
88% to 83%; under 25,000, 86% to 82%.

Special  arrest policies 

Sheriffs' offices often have special policies to guide
officers' decision-making in specific situations, such as 
the handling of domestic assaults and the enforcement of
protection orders.

Eighty-nine percent of sheriffs' offices, employing 91% of
all sworn personnel, had a special policy regarding arrest
for domestic assault.  Sixty-eight percent of offices,
employing 71% of sworn personnel, had a mandatory arrest
policy for domestic assault.  Seventeen percent of offices,
employing 17% of sworn personnel, had a pro-arrest policy
for domestic assault.

Eighty-four percent of sheriffs' offices had a special
policy regarding arrest for violations of protective orders. 
These agencies employed 85% of all sworn personnel. 
Sixty-two percent of offices, employing 59% of all sworn
personnel, had a mandatory arrest policy and 18%, employing
22% of sworn personnel, had a pro-arrest policy.

Methodology

The Law Enforcement Management and Administrative Statistics
(LEMAS) survey collects data from a nationally
representative sample of publicly funded State and local law
enforcement agencies in the United States.  

This report presents data from the 2000 survey describing
local police departments in terms of their personnel,
expenditures and pay, operations, community policing
initiatives, equipment, computers and information systems,
and written policies.  

The 2000 LEMAS survey questionnaire was mailed to 3,132
State and local law enforcement agencies.  Sixty-seven
agencies were determined to be out-of-scope for the survey
because they had  closed, outsourced their operations, or
were operating on a part-time basis.  The initial mailing of
the questionnaire was conducted in July 2000.  The pay
period containing June 30, 2000, was used as the reference
date for all questions, unless otherwise noted.  

Allowing for the exclusion of special jurisdiction agencies
and Texas constables, 881 law enforcement agencies in the
U.S. with 100 or more sworn personnel as of June 30, 1996
were included in the sample as self-representing (SR)
agencies.  This included 528 local police departments, 304
sheriffs' offices, and the 49 primary State law enforcement
agencies.  

The self-representing (SR) agencies were supplemented by a
nationally representative sample of agencies with fewer than
100 sworn personnel.  These nonself-representing (NSR)
agencies were chosen using a stratified random sample with
cells based on the type of agency (local police or sheriff),
size of population served, and number of sworn personnel. 
The 2,184 NSR agencies selected included 1,491 local police
departments and 693 sheriffs' offices.

A total of 2,985 agencies responded to the LEMAS
questionnaire for a response rate of 97.4%.  This included
866 SR agencies and 2,119 NSR agencies.  The final database
includes responses from 1,975 local police departments, 961
sheriffs' offices, and the 49 primary State law enforcement
agencies.  Among sheriffs' offices, 961 of 997 surveys were
returned for a 96.4% response rate.

The base weight for all SR agencies is 1.  For NSR sheriffs'
offices, it is 4.  For NSR local police departments, the
base weights are determined by number of sworn officers
employed as reported in the 1996 BJS Census of State and
Local Law Enforcement Agencies.  For agencies with 0 to 6
sworn officers, the base weight is 15.55; for 7 to 13
officers, it is 9.65; for 14 to 23 officers, it is 7.09; for
24 to 39 officers, it is 4.95; for 40 to 62 officers, it is
3.38; and for 63 to 99 officers, the base weight is 2.14.

The final weight associated with every agency, both SR and
NSR, is the product of the base weight, a factor that
adjusted for changes in the universe since 1996, and a
factor that adjusted for any nonresponding agencies in each
cell.  

Some responding agencies did not fully complete the LEMAS
questionnaire.  When an agency did not supply a response to
an item, hot deck imputation, median value imputation, or
ratio imputation was used.  Hot deck imputation uses the
value reported by a randomly selected agency from the same
sample cell.  Median value imputation uses the median value
of an item reported by agencies in the same sample cell. 
Ratio imputation uses the median value of a ratio reported
by agencies in the same sample cell.

Because the data from agencies with fewer than 100 sworn
personnel were collected from a sample, the results are
subject to sampling error.  Statements of comparison in this
report reflect observed differences between values that are
significant at 2 standard errors (the 95-percent confidence
level) or higher.  The survey data are also subject to
response and processing errors.


th 1/14/03
