U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Programs
Bureau of Justice Statistics

-----------------------------------------------------
This report is one in series. More recent 
editions may be available. To view a list 
of all reports in the series go to 
http://www.bjs.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbse&sid=45

This file is text only without graphics and many of the
tables. A Zip archive of the tables in this report in
spreadsheet format (.csv) and the full report including
tables and graphics in .pdf format are available on BJS
website at:http://bjs.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbdetail&iid=4555
--------------------------------------------------------

Sheriffs’ Offices, 2007 - Statistical Tables

Andrea M. Burch, BJS Statistician

December 2012, NCJ 238558

As of September 2007, an estimated 3,000 sheriffs’ offices 
performed law enforcement functions in the United States. 
Nationally, sheriffs’ offices employed about 369,000 sworn 
and civilian personnel and operated at a cost of roughly 
$30 billion.

Sheriffs’ offices represented approximately a fifth of the 
estimated 15,600 general purpose law enforcement agencies 
operating in the United States during 2007 and employed 
about a third of all sworn and civilian personnel. Law 
enforcement agencies are publically funded government 
entities responsible for enforcing laws and maintaining 
public order and public safety. Sheriffs’ offices are 
generally empowered by the state to serve counties and 
independent cities.

Sheriffs’ offices performed a wide range of law 
enforcement functions, such as response to criminal 
incidents, response to calls for service, patrol, crime 
investigation, arrest of criminal suspects, execution of 
warrants, traffic enforcement, traffic direction and 
control, accident investigation, drug enforcement, parking 
enforcement, and crime prevention education. Although 
sheriffs’ offices may have countywide responsibilities 
related to jail operation, process serving, and court 
security, their law enforcement jurisdictions typically 
exclude county areas served by a local police department. 
In certain counties, municipalities contract with the 
sheriffs’ office for law enforcement services.

These statistical tables present data from the Bureau of 
Justice Statistics’ (BJS) 2007 Law Enforcement Management 
and Administrative Statistics (LEMAS) survey. The LEMAS 
survey is a nationally representative sample of state and 
local law enforcement agencies. It describes sheriffs’ 
offices with law enforcement duties, including their 
personnel, budgets, operations, policies and procedures, 
computers and information systems, and equipment. 
Approximately 50 sheriffs’ offices identified as 
performing jail functions or court-related functions or 
both did not have an area of primary law enforcement 
jurisdiction. The LEMAS survey has been conducted every 3 
to 4 years since 1987. Comparisons are made with prior 
years where appropriate and as data were available.

***************
Highlights
***************

**********************************
Sheriffs’ office characteristics
**********************************

* As of September 2007, an estimated 3,012 sheriffs’ 
offices performing law enforcement functions in the United 
States employed 369,084 sworn and civilian personnel 
(table 1).

* Sworn personnel represented about half (49%) of all 
those employed by sheriffs’ offices during 2007, including 
172,241 full-time and 8,831 part-time personnel.

* From 1987 to 2007, the number of full-time employees in 
sheriffs’ offices increased from about 189,000 to more 
than 346,000 (figure 1). 

* Full-time sworn personnel increased by about 43,500 
(34%) from 1987 to 2007, and full-time civilian employees 
nearly tripled—from 60,500 to 174,100.

*************************************************
Size of sheriffs’ offices and population served
*************************************************

* Nationwide, 57% (1,708) of sheriffs’ offices employed 
less than 25 sworn personnel (table 2).  

* While about 1 in 4 sheriffs’ offices employed fewer than 
10 deputies, these small agencies accounted for 2.4% of 
all full-time sworn personnel.

* Large agencies (employing 100 or more sworn personnel) 
represented about 12% of all sheriffs’ offices but 
employed nearly two-thirds (65%) of all full-time sworn 
personnel.

* About a fifth (35,501) of all full-time sworn personnel 
were employed by less than 1% of sheriffs’ offices with 
1,000 or more sworn personnel.

* Although two-thirds of sheriffs’ offices (2,029) served 
fewer than 50,000 residents, these agencies employed 18% 
(31,507) of all full-time sworn personnel (table 3).  

* About half of full-time sworn personnel (84,923) were 
employed by the 7% of sheriffs’ offices serving 
jurisdictions with 250,000 or more residents.

*********************
Operating budgets 
*********************

Operating budgets of sheriffs’ offices totaled about 
$30 billion for fiscal year 2007, which was 20% more than 
in 2003, after adjusting for inflation (table 4).  

* Overall, operating budgets averaged about $10 million 
per sheriffs’ office in 2007, ranging from about $337 
million for agencies serving populations of 1 million or 
more residents to $657,000 for those serving fewer than 
10,000 residents.

* On average, the operating cost of sheriffs’ offices 
during fiscal year 2007 was about $170,000 per sworn 
deputy and $112 per U.S. resident. 

* During 2006, nearly half (46%) of sheriffs’ offices 
received money, goods, or property from drug asset 
forfeiture programs, with more than $230 million in 
receipts overall (table 5).

***************************
Sheriffs’ office salaries
*************************** 

* In 2007, the average starting salary for entry-level 
sheriffs’ deputies was about $31,000, ranging from $27,800 
in the smallest jurisdictions to $45,600 in the largest 
(table 6).  

* Minimum salaries for sheriffs averaged $142,700 in 
jurisdictions with 1 million or more residents, compared 
to less than $55,000 in jurisdictions with a population of 
less than 25,000 residents.

* Average starting salaries for entry-level deputies were 
$7,300 (25%) higher in sheriffs’ offices with collective 
bargaining than in those without it (not shown in table).

* Among sheriffs’ offices serving 250,000 or more 
residents, a majority offered tuition reimbursement and 
about half offered education incentive pay to their sworn 
personnel (table 7).

*********************************
Personnel selection and hiring
*********************************

* Nearly all (99%) sheriffs’ offices had a minimum 
education requirement for new deputies hired in 2007 
(table 8). The most common requirement for new hires was a 
high school diploma (89%).

* In 2007, personal interviews were used almost 
universally (99%) in the hiring process and were 
supplemented by psychological evaluations in 62% of 
agencies, including more than 90% of deputies serving 
500,000 or more residents (table 10).

* New deputy recruits completed an average requirement of 
1,476 hours of classroom and field training in 
jurisdictions with 1 million or more residents, compared 
to the 754 hours required in the smallest jurisdictions 
(table 14).

* The vast majority (94%) of sheriffs’ offices had an 
annual in-service training requirement for nonprobationary 
deputies. Overall, the average annual in-service 
requirement was 45 hours (table 15).

***************************
Personnel characteristics
***************************

* Members of a racial or ethnic minority represented about 
1 in 5 sworn personnel employed by sheriffs’ offices 
during 2007 (table 16). 

* In 2007, about 9% (15,500) of sworn personnel employed 
at sheriffs’ offices were black or African American, 
slightly less than in 2003 (10%), but equal to the 
proportion employed in 1987.

* From 2003 to 2007, the number of Hispanic or Latino 
deputies increased by 16% to comprise 8% (13,900) of all 
sworn deputies in 2007.

* In 2007, an estimated 12% (20,800) of full-time sworn 
personnel in sheriffs’ offices were women, a percentage 
similar to that observed in previous LEMAS surveys (table 
17).

*********************
Patrol and response
*********************

* In 2007, an estimated 57% of full-time sheriffs’ 
deputies had regularly assigned duties that included 
responding to calls for service (table 18). 

* The proportion of deputies responding to calls ranged 
from about 5 in 10 among agencies serving 250,000 or more 
residents to about 9 in 10 among agencies serving fewer 
than 10,000 residents.

* More than 80% of sheriffs’ offices serving populations 
of 25,000 or more residents used an enhanced 9-1-1 system 
capable of displaying a caller’s name, address, and 
special needs (table 19).  

* Nearly half (44%) of sheriffs’ offices serving 500,000 
or more residents routinely used foot patrol, and about 
half (between 42% and 63%) of those serving 250,000 or 
more residents regularly patrolled by boat (table 21).

* More than half (57%) of sheriffs’ offices used dogs for 
law enforcement activities during 2007, while 5% used 
horses (table 27).

***********
Equipment 
***********

* Two-thirds of sheriffs’ offices (employing 76% of full-
time sworn personnel) authorized the use of conducted 
energy devices, such as tasers and stun guns, compared to 
30% of offices (employing 47% of full-time sworn 
personnel) in 2003 (table 30).

* About 57% of sheriffs’ offices (employing 60% of full-
time sworn personnel) required use of protective body 
armor at all times while in the field in 2007 (table 33).

* In 2007, 67% of sheriffs’ offices used video cameras in 
patrol cars, compared to 58% in 2003 (table 34). An 
estimated 28,600 in-car cameras were in use during 2007—
about 11,000 (62%) more than in 2003.

***********
Computers
***********

* About two-thirds of sheriffs’ offices used computers for 
dispatch, booking, and investigative purposes in 2007 
(table 35).

* A majority of the sheriffs’ offices in each population 
category of 50,000 or more used in-field computers or 
terminals during 2007, including over 85% of offices 
serving populations of 100,000 or more residents (table 
38).

* About 70% of sheriffs’ offices (employing 90% of 
deputies) had access to an Automated Fingerprint 
Identification System (AFIS) (table 42).

***************************
Task force participation
***************************

* A majority of sheriffs’ offices, including more than 70% 
of those serving 25,000 or more residents, had sworn 
personnel assigned to a multi-agency drug task force in 
2007 (table 49).

* Over half of sheriffs’ offices serving 500,000 or more 
residents had sworn personnel assigned to a gang task 
force (table 50).

*************************************************

***************
List of Tables 
***************

***********************************
Sheriffs’ office characteristics
***********************************

Table 1. General purpose state and local law enforcement 
agencies sworn and civilian personnel, by employment 
status and type of agency, 2007	6

***********************************************
Size of sheriffs’ offices and population served
***********************************************

Table 2. Sheriffs’ offices and full-time personnel, by 
number of sworn personnel, 2007	6

Table 3. Sheriffs’ offices and full-time personnel, by 
size of population served, 2007	6

*******************
Operating budgets 
*******************

Table 4. Annual operating budget of sheriffs’ offices, by 
size of population served, 2007	7

Table 5. Drug asset forfeiture receipts of sheriffs’ 
offices, by size of population served, 2006	7

***************************
Sheriffs’ office salaries 
***************************

Table 6. Average base annual salary for selected full-time 
positions in sheriffs’ offices, by size of population 
served, 2007	7

Table 7. Special pay and benefits for full-time sworn 
personnel in sheriffs’ offices, by size of population 
served, 2007	8

*******************************
Personnel selection and hiring
*******************************

Table 8. Education requirements for new deputies in 
sheriffs’ offices, by size of population served, 2007	8

Table 9. Background and record check methods used in 
selection of new deputy recruits in sheriffs’ offices, by 
size of population served, 2007	8

Table 10. Personal attribute screening methods used in the 
selection of new deputy recruits in sheriffs’ offices, by 
size of population served, 2007	9

Table 11. Physical attribute screening methods used in the 
selection of new deputy recruits in sheriffs’ offices, by 
size of population served, 2007	9

Table 12. Screening methods related to community policing 
used in the selection of new deputy recruits for sheriffs’ 
offices, by size of population served, 2007	9

Table 13. Workplace policies of sheriffs’ offices, by size 
of population served, 2007	10

Table 14. Training requirements for new deputy recruits in 
sheriffs’ offices, by size of population served, 2007
	10 

Table 15. In-service training requirements for sworn 
personnel in sheriffs’ offices, by size of population 
served, 2007	10

****************************
Personnel characteristics
****************************

Table 16. Race and ethnicity of full-time sworn personnel 
in sheriffs’ offices, by size of population served, 2007
	10

Table 17. Sex of full-time sworn personnel in sheriffs’ 
offices, by size of population served, 2007	11

*******************
Patrol and response
*******************

Table 18. Sheriffs’ deputies assigned to respond to calls 
for service, by size of population served, 2007	11

Table 19. Emergency 9-1-1 system participation of 
sheriffs’ offices, by size of population served, 2007 
	11

Table 20. Wireless capabilities of emergency 9-1-1 systems 
in sheriffs’ offices, by size of population served, 2007
	11

Table 21. Types of regularly scheduled patrols other than 
automobile used by sheriffs’ offices, by size of 
population served, 2007	12

Table 22. Special population and situational policies of 
sheriffs’ offices, by size of population served, 2007
	12

Table 23. Number of motorized land vehicles operated by 
sheriffs’ offices and percent unmarked, by size of 
population served, 2007 	12

Table 24. Motorized vehicles operated by sheriffs’ 
offices, by size of population served, 2007	113

Table 25. Vehicle use policies for sworn personnel in 
sheriffs’ offices, by size of population served, 2007 
	13

Table 26. Off-land vehicles operated by sheriffs’ offices, 
by size of population served, 2007	13

Table 27. Use of animals by sheriffs’ offices for law 
enforcement purposes, by size of population served, 
2007	13

***********
Equipment
***********

Table 28. Types of sidearms authorized for use by sworn 
personnel in sheriffs’ offices, by size of population 
served, 2007 	13

Table 29. Types of batons authorized for use by sworn 
personnel in sheriffs’ offices, by size of population 
served, 2007	14

Table 30. Less-than-lethal weapons authorized for use by a 
majority of sheriffs’ offices, by size of population 
served, 2007	14

Table 31. Less-than-lethal weapons or actions authorized 
for use by fewer than half of sheriffs’ offices, by size 
of population served, 2007	14

Table 32. Use-of-force policies and procedures in 
sheriffs’ offices, by size of population served, 2007
	14

Table 33. Body armor requirements for field officers in 
sheriffs’ offices, by size of population served, 2007
	15

Table 34. Use of video cameras by sheriffs’ offices, by 
size of population served, 2007	15

************
Computers
************

Table 35. General functions of computers in sheriffs’ 
offices, by size of population served, 2007	15

Table 36. Analytic functions of computers in sheriffs’ 
offices, by size of population served, 2007	 16

Table 37. Types of in-field computers or terminals used by 
sheriffs’ offices, by size of population served, 2007 
	16

Table 38. Use of in-field computers or terminals by 
sheriffs’ offices, by size of population served, 2007
	16

Table 39. Use of in-field computers for reports and 
communications by sheriffs’ offices, by size of population 
served, 2007	16 

Table 40. Types of computerized information accessible to 
in-field deputies in sheriffs’ offices, by size of 
population served, 2007	17 

Table 41. Methods used by sheriffs’ offices for 
transmitting criminal incident reports to a central 
information system, by size of population served, 200
	17

Table 42. Automated Fingerprint Identification Systems 
(AFIS) in sheriffs’ offices, by size of population served, 
2007	17

**************************
Task force participation
**************************

Table 43. Community policing policies of sheriffs’ 
offices, by size of population served, 2007 	18

Table 44. Community policing training for new deputy 
recruits in sheriffs’ offices, by size of population 
served, 2007 	18

Table 45. Community-oriented policies for patrol officers 
in sheriffs’ offices, by size of population served, 2007
	18

Table 46. Community policing activities of sheriffs’ 
offices, by size of population served, 2007 	18

Table 47. Full-time community policing officers and units 
in sheriffs’ offices, by size of population served, 2007
	19 

Table 48. Full-time school resource officers in sheriffs’ 
offices, by size of population served, 2007 	19

Table 49. Drug task force participation of sheriffs’ 
offices, by size of population served, 2007 	19

Table 50. Gang task force participation of sheriffs’ 
offices, by size of population served, 2007	19 

Table 51. Human trafficking task force participation of 
sheriffs’ offices, by size of population served, 2007
	20 

Table 52. Anti-terrorism task force participation of 
sheriffs’ offices, by size of population served, 2007
	20 

Table 53. Preparedness activities of sheriffs’ offices, by 
size of population served, 2007	20

Table 54. Full-time intelligence personnel in sheriffs’ 
offices with primary duties related to terrorist 
activities, by size of population served, 2007	20

****************
Appendix tables
****************

Appendix Table 1. Fifty largest sheriffs’ offices in the 
United States, by number of full-time sworn personnel, 
2007	23

Appendix Table 2. Standard errors of the estimated 
percentages for sheriffs’ offices, by size of population 
served, 2007	24

Appendix Table 3. Standard errors for estimated personnel 
counts in sheriffs’ offices, 2007	24 

Appendix table 4. Standard errors for estimated operating 
budgets in sheriffs’ offices, 2007	24

Appendix Table 5. Standard errors for starting salaries 
for entry-level deputies in sheriffs’ offices,
2007	24

************
Methodology
************

The Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS) conducts the Law 
Enforcement Management and Administrative Statistics 
(LEMAS) survey every 3 to 4 years. The LEMAS survey is a 
nationally representative sample of state and local law 
enforcement agencies. Each agency received either a long 
(CJ-44L) or short (CJ-44S) LEMAS questionnaire. The two 
versions of the LEMAS questionnaire differ by nine items 
that apply primarily to large agencies. The survey was 
fielded from December 2007 through December 2008.
Sample design

Based on employment data from BJS’s Census of State and 
Local Law Enforcement Agencies (CSLLEA) conducted in 2004, 
the original 2007 LEMAS survey sample included 3,224 state 
and local law enforcement agencies. (For more information, 
see Census of State and Local Law Enforcement Agencies, 
2004, BJS website, NCJ 212749, June 2007.) The sample was 
designed to be representative of all general purpose state 
and local law enforcement agencies in the United States, 
with separate samples drawn for local police departments 
and sheriffs’ offices. Agencies serving special 
jurisdictions (such as schools, airports, or parks) or 
with special enforcement responsibilities (such as hunting 
and fishing laws or alcohol laws) were considered out of 
scope for the survey.

Sheriffs’ offices without primary law enforcement 
jurisdiction were also considered out of scope for the 
survey. Approximately 50 sheriffs’ offices identified as 
performing jail functions or court-related functions or 
both did not have an area of primary law enforcement 
jurisdiction. These agencies were excluded from this 
report because this publication focuses entirely on 
factors related to law enforcement. In addition, some 
smaller sheriffs’ offices were determined to have closed 
since the 2004 CSLLEA and were removed from the sample. 
After all out-of-scope and closed agencies were removed, 
the final sample size for the survey was 3,095.

The final sample included 950 self-representing (SR) 
agencies with 100 or more sworn personnel and 
2,145 non-self-representing (NSR) agencies employing fewer 
than 100 personnel. The SR agencies included 591 local 
police departments, 310 sheriffs’ offices, and 49 state 
law enforcement agencies. All 950 SR agencies received the 
49-item CJ-44L questionnaire. The NSR agencies were 
selected using a stratified random sample with cells based 
on the number of sworn personnel. The NSR agencies were 
selected using a simple random sample. Overall, the NSR 
sample included 1,504 local police departments and 641 
sheriffs’ offices. All 2,145 NSR agencies received the 40-
item CJ-44S questionnaire.

********************
Agency response rate
*********************

A total of 2,804 agencies (91.8%) completed their LEMAS 
questionnaire. This included 879 SR agencies (92.5%) and 
1,961 NSR agencies (91.4%). The response rate for local 
police departments was 93.9%; for sheriffs’ offices, it 
was 87.0%; and for state law enforcement agencies, it was 
91.8%. The final database included full responses from 
1,968 local police departments, 827 sheriffs’ offices, and 
45 state agencies. As part of a final nonresponse follow-
up effort, an additional 21 local police departments and 
14 sheriffs’ offices completed an abbreviated 
questionnaire consisting of the first page of the original 
survey form they received.

*************
Weighting
*************

In order to compare agencies with others serving similarly 
sized jurisdictions, this report presents statistics 
mainly by categories of population served. Additional 
overall percentages weighted by the number of officers 
employed are presented in the text and selected figures.

The base weight for all SR sheriffs’ offices is 1. For NSR 
sheriffs’ offices, the base weight is 4.22. For NSR 
sheriffs’ offices, the base weight is determined by the 
number of sworn personnel employed as reported in the 2004 
CSLLEA. The final weight associated with every agency 
(both SR and NSR) is the product of the base weight—a 
factor that adjusts for changes in the universe since 
2004, and a factor that adjusts for any nonresponding 
agencies in each cell. For SR sheriffs’ offices, the final 
weight is 1.12; and for NSR sheriffs’ offices, it is 4.90.

To compute the deputy-based percentages in the report, the 
final weight for an agency is multiplied by the proportion 
of all full-time equivalent sworn officers employed by 
that agency. The number of full-time equivalent sworn 
officers is defined as the sum of the number of full-time 
sworn officers and half the number of part-time sworn 
officers.

*******************
Item nonresponse
*******************

For the 827 sheriffs’ offices completing one of the two 
versions of the LEMAS questionnaire, item nonresponse 
rates due to omission or invalid data were low. For most 
categorical items, the nonresponse rate was 0%. 
Nonresponse is noted in tables when the percent of missing 
cases is greater than 1%.

*************
Imputations
*************

When an agency did not supply a response to a numeric 
item, median value imputation or ratio imputation was 
used. The median value imputations used the median value 
of an item reported in the 2007 survey by other agencies 
in the same sample cell. The ratio imputations used the 
median value of a ratio reported in the 2007 survey by 
other agencies in the same sample cell. Imputations were 
not used for categorical items.

For race and sex data, a cold-deck imputation process was 
used. The percentages represented in an agency’s sworn 
personnel totals by each racial or ethnic or sex group in 
the 2003 LEMAS survey were applied to the 2007 sworn 
personnel totals. If 2003 data were not available, then a 
ratio imputation method was used.

**************************
Accuracy of the estimates
**************************

The accuracy of the estimates presented in this report 
depends on two types of error: sampling and nonsampling. 
Because sampling was used for smaller agencies, some of 
the statistics presented in this report are subject to 
sampling error. Sampling error is the variation that may 
occur by chance because a sample rather than a complete 
enumeration of the population was conducted. Nonsampling 
error can be attributed to many sources, such as the 
inability to obtain information about all cases in the 
sample, the inability to obtain complete and correct 
information from the administrative records, and 
processing errors. In any survey, the full extent of the 
nonsampling error is never known.

The sampling error, as measured by an estimated standard 
error, varies by the size of the estimate and the size of 
the base population. Statements of comparison have been 
tested at the 95%-confidence level. Estimates of the 
standard errors have been calculated for the 2007 survey 
(appendix table 2). These estimates may be used to 
construct confidence intervals around percentages in this 
report. For example, the 95%-confidence interval around 
the percentage of sheriffs’ offices requiring deputies to 
wear protective armor at all times is approximately 3% 
(1.96 multiplied by 1.7%).


These standard errors may also be used to test the 
significance of the difference between two sample 
statistics by pooling the standard errors of the two 
sample estimates. For example, the standard error of the 
difference between departments serving fewer than 10,000 
residents and those serving 10,000 to 24,999 residents for 
enhanced 9-1-1 would be 4.7% (or the square root of the 
sum of the squared standard errors for each group). The 
95%-confidence interval around the difference would be 
1.96 multiplied by 4.7% (or 9.3%). Since the difference of 
15% (77% minus 62%) is greater than 9.3%, the difference 
would be considered statistically significant.

Standard error estimates may also be used to construct 
confidence intervals around numeric variables, such as 
personnel counts (appendix table 3). For example, the 95%-
confidence interval around the number of full-time sworn 
personnel is approximately 172,241 plus or minus 1.96 
multiplied by 4,243 or 163,925 to 180,557.

---------------------------
Abbreviated form responses
---------------------------

In the final phase of the data collection, all remaining 
nonrespondents were given the opportunity to complete an 
abbreviated questionnaire consisting of the first page of 
the original survey form they received. A total of 21 
local police departments (5 SR and 16 NSR) and 14 
sheriffs’ offices (0 SR and 14 NSR) completed the 
abbreviated form. For analysis of the data that included 
these partial-form responses, slightly different weights 
were used. The adjusted partial-form weight for NSR 
sheriffs’ offices is 4.78.

--------------------------------------
Dollar amounts adjusted for inflation
--------------------------------------

For comparison purposes, salary and budget data for 2003 
were converted into 2007 dollars. This conversion was 
accomplished using Consumer Price Index data published by 
the Bureau of Labor Statistics.

******************************************************
The Bureau of Justice Statistics is the statistical 
agency of the U.S. Department of Justice. James P. 
Lynch is the director.

This Statistical Tables report was written by Andrea 
M. Burch. Alexia Cooper provided verification.

Morgan Young, Vanessa Curto, and Jill Thomas edited the 
report, and Tina Dorsey produced the report, under the 
supervision of Doris J. James.

December 2012, NCJ 238558

******************************************************

******************************************************
Office of Justice Programs * Innovation * Partnerships 
* Safer Neighborhoods * http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov
******************************************************
______________________
11/28/12/JER/3:35pm





