U.S. DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE
U.S. DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION


NATIONAL CENTER FOR EDUCATION STATISTICS 
BUREAU OF JUSTICE STATISTICS

March 1998

1989 and 1995 School Crime Supplement to the National Crime
Victimization Survey

Students' Reports of School Crime:  1989 and 1995

U.S. Department of Education, Office of Educational Research and
Improvement, NCES 98-241 U.S. Department of Justice, Office of
Justice Programs, NCJ-169607

Kathryn A. Chandler, National Center for Education Statistics
Christopher D. Chapman, National Center for Education Statistics
Michael R. Rand, Bureau of Justice Statistics Bruce M. Taylor,
Ph.D., Bureau of Justice Statistics

U.S. Department of Education, Office of Educational Research and
Improvement, NCES 98-241 U.S. Department of Justice, Office of
Justice Programs, NCJ-169607

U.S. Department of Education U.S. Department of Justice Richard
W. Riley, Secretary Janet Reno, Attorney General

Office of Educational Research and Improvement Office of Justice
Programs Ricky T. Takai, Acting Assistant Secretary Laurie O.
Robinson, Assistant Attorney General

National Center for Education Statistics Bureau of Justice
Statistics Pascal D. Forgione, Jr., Commissioner Jan M. Chaiken,
Director

The National Center for Education Statistics (NCES) is the 
primary federal entity for collecting, analyzing, and reporting 
data related to education in the United States and other 
nations.  It fulfills a congressional mandate to collect, 
collate, analyze, and report full and complete statistics  on
the condition of education in the United States; conduct  and
publish reports and specialized analyses of the meaning  and
significance of such statistics; assist state and local 
education agencies in improving their statistical systems;  and
report on education activities in foreign countries.

The Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS) is the primary federal 
entity for collecting, analyzing, publishing, and disseminating 
statistical information about crime, its perpetrators and 
victims, and the operation of the justice system at all  levels
of government.  These data are critical to federal,  state, and
local policymakers in combating crime and ensuring  that justice
is both efficient and evenhanded.

 March 1998

Suggested Citation

Chandler, K. A., Chapman, C. D., Rand, M. R. and Taylor, B. M.  
Students' Reports of School Crime:  1989 and 1995.  U.S. 
Departments of Education and Justice.  NCES 98-241/NCJ-169607. 
Washington, D.C.: 1998.

This publication can be downloaded from the World Wide Web at
http://nces.ed.gov or http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/.  Single
hard copies can be ordered through the National Library of
Education at 1-800-424-1616 (NCES 98-241), and the Bureau of
Justice Statistics Clearinghouse at 1-800-732-3277 (NCJ-169607). 

Contact at NCES: Kathryn Chandler (202) 219-1767 (e-mail)
kathryn_chandler@ed.gov

Contact at BJS: Michael Rand (202) 616-3494 (e-mail)
randm@ojp.usdoj.gov

NOTE:  Dr. Bruce Taylor is now with the General Accounting
Office:  (e-mail) taylorb.ggd@gao.gov

-------------------
Foreword
-------------------

All of us are concerned when children are victims of crime, 
especially violent crime, but schools bear a special responsibility 
for the safety of students when they are in the classroom, 
on school grounds, or on school-provided transportation.  
For this reason, the Bureau of Justice Statistics and the 
National Center for Education Statistics have collaborated 
on collecting information about students' experience of 
crime and crime-related conditions at school.

This is the first report that analyzes the two (1989 and 1995)
School Crime Supplements to the National Crime Victimization
Survey together.  It presents a national portrait of the extent
to which students ages 12 to 19 experience violent crime or
theft of their property at school, and their perceptions of the
presence of guns, street gangs, and illegal drugs at their
schools.  It also highlights the important changes in these
crime-related factors between 1989 and 1995.

Much more data were collected than are analyzed in this report,
so we plan future reports that provide more in-depth analyses of
the 1989 and 1995 data.  In addition, we hope to produce more
frequent updates of information from this survey of students and
to present annually a variety of statistics about the safety of
children in school.

The students in this study were interviewed in their homes or by
telephone from their homes.  These interviews were ably
conducted by the Census Bureau, which also prepared the data for
our analysis teams.  The Bureau of Labor Statistics helped in
the wording of the questionnaire items.  We also want to thank
all of the students who answered our questions and the adult
members of their households who gave permission for this
statistical data collection.

 Pascal D. Forgione, Jr., Ph.D. Jan M. Chaiken, Ph.D.
Commissioner of Education Statistics Director of the Bureau of
Justice Statistics

-------------------------
 Acknowledgments 
-------------------------

Altogether, four federal statistical agencies contributed to the
making of the 1995 School Crime Supplement (SCS) to the National
Crime Victimization Survey (NCVS).  While the authors represent
the Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS) and the National Center
for Education Statistics (NCES), persons at the Bureau of the
Census and the Bureau of Labor Statistics also contributed.  The
authors would like to thank Kathy Creighton and Marilyn Monihan
and the headquarters and field staff of the Bureau of the Census
for their hard work during the design, data collection, and data
cleaning phases of this effort.  Also contributing during the
design phase was Linda Stinson from the Office of Survey Methods
Research at the Bureau of Labor Statistics, who helped test
items for the questionnaire.  

We are grateful to Paul Planchon, Associate Commissioner of
NCES, for encouraging us to pursue this collection and report,
and to Dan Kasprzyk, Director of Education Survey Programs at
NCES for helping to find the resources necessary to complete the
report.  In addition, we would like to thank Mary Frase and John
Ralph, also from NCES, for their contributions during the design
phase.  

From BJS, we wish to thank Charles Kindermann, Chief of Crime
Measurement, Methodology, and Systems Support, and Patsy Klaus
of the Victimization Statistics Branch for their work in
planning and fielding the SCS.

Reviewers of the report included Marilyn McMillen, Dan Kasprzyk,
Michael Cohen, Mary Frase, John Ralph, and Edie McArthur at NCES
and Lawrence Greenfeld, Patsy Klaus, and Tom Hester at BJS. 
Outside of NCES and BJS, school crime experts who reviewed the
report were Paul Kingery of the Hamilton Fish National Institute
on School and Community Violence, Barbara Allen-Hagen of the
Office of Juvenile Justice and Delinquency Prevention of the
U.S. Department of Justice, and, from other parts of the
Department of Education, Ollie Moles of the Office of
Educational Research and Improvement, Bill Modzeleski and Sara
Strizzi of the Safe and Drug Free Schools Program, and Joanne
Wiggins of the Planning and Evaluation Service.  The authors
appreciate the thorough reading and thoughtful suggestions
provided by these reviewers.  Their input substantially improved
the publication.  Any remaining errors or problems are the sole
responsibility of the authors.

Finally, the authors would like to thank Amanda Miller of the
Education Statistics Services Institute and Marilyn Marbrook,
Chief of Publication and Electronic Dissemination at BJS,  for
their assistance in preparing this document for publication and
dissemination. 

----------------------------------
TABLE OF CONTENTS
----------------------------------

Section                                               

Introduction and Background                              

Student Victimization                                     

Availability of Drugs                                    

Street Gangs at School                                   

Guns at School                                           

Summary                                                  

Methodology                                             

Appendix A:  Tables of Standard Errors          
         
Appendix B:  Questionnaires                              

---------------------------------
LIST OF TABLES
---------------------------------

1.  Percent of students ages 12 through 19 reporting criminal
victimization at school, by selected characteristics and
perceptions of conditions at school:  1989 and 1995             
                            

2.  Percent of students ages 12 through 19 reporting the
availability of drugs at school, by selected characteristics and
perceptions of conditions at school: 1989 and 1995 

3.  Percent of students ages 12 through 19 reporting the
difficulty of obtaining various drugs at school:  1989 and 1995 
                                                 

4.  Percent of students ages 12 through 19 reporting the
presence of street gangs at school, by selected characteristics
and perceptions of conditions at school:  1989 and 1995         
                                

5.  Percent of students ages 12 through 19 reporting guns at
school, by selected characteristics and perceptions of
conditions at school:  1995                         


---------------------------------
LIST OF FIGURES 
---------------------------------

1.  Percent of students ages 12 through 19 who reported
experiencing various forms of victimization at school: 1989 and
1995                                                

2.  Percent of students ages 12 through 19 who reported
experiencing violent victimization at school, by gender:  1989
and 1995                                           

3.  Percent of students ages 12 through 19 who reported
experiencing violent victimization at school, by age: 1995      
                                           

4.  Percent of students ages 12 through 19 who reported
experiencing violent victimization at school, by student reports
of street gang presence at school:  1989 and  1995              
                                     

5.  Percent of students ages 12 through 19 who reported
experiencing various forms of victimization at school, by
student reports of seeing a student with a gun at school:  1989
and 1995                                           

6.  Percent of students ages 12 through 19 who reported that
drugs were available at school, by grade:  1989 and 1995        
                                           

7.  Percent of students ages 12 through 19 who reported that
drugs were available at school, by school type:  1989 and 1995  
                                            

8.  Percent of students ages 12 through 19 who reported that
drugs were available at school, by student reports of violent
victimization at school:  1989 and 1995

9.  Percent of students ages 12 through 19 who reported that
street gangs were present at school, by race/ethnicity:  1989
and 1995

10. Percent of students ages 12 through 19 who reported that
street gangs were present at school, by household income:  1989
and 1995

11. Percent of students ages 12 through 19 who reported that
street gangs were present at school, by place of residence: 
1989 and 1995

12. Percent of students ages 12 through 19 who reported that
street gangs were present at school, by school type:  1989 and
1995

13. Percent of students ages 12 through 19 who reported knowing
a student who brought a gun to school, by age:   1995           
                                       

14. Percent of students ages 12 through 19 who reported the
presence of guns at school, by student reports of street gang
presence at school:  1995                         

15. Percent of students ages 12 through 19 who reported the
presence of guns at school, by student reports of drug
availability at school:  1995  
                         
---------------------------------
Introduction and Background 
---------------------------------

This report is the first focusing on data collected in the 1995
School Crime Supplement (SCS), an enhancement to the National
Crime Victimization Survey (NCVS). The NCVS is an ongoing
household survey that gathers information on the criminal
victimization of household members age 12 and older.  While this
report does not cover all of the items in the dataset, it covers
those pertinent to school crime.  These include:  victimization
at school, drug availability at school, street gangs at school,
and guns at school.  In this report, victimization is in terms
of prevalence as opposed to counts of events.  In other words,
the report focuses on the percent of students who have been
victimized one or more times.

To put the 1995 estimates in context, data from the 1989 SCS are
also presented.  Key findings include:

*  There was little or no change in the percent of students
reporting any (violent or property) victimization at school
(14.5 percent versus 14.6 percent), or the percent of students
reporting property victimization at school (12.2 percent versus
11.6 percent) between 1989 and 1995 (table 1).  However, there
was an increase in the percent of students reporting violent
victimization at school (3.4 percent versus 4.2 percent) between
the two years.

*  In 1989, most students, 63.2 percent, reported that
marijuana, cocaine, crack, or uppers/downers were available at
school (either easy or hard to obtain; table 2).  This number
increased somewhat to 65.3 percent in 1995. 

*  The percent of students reporting street gang presence at
school nearly doubled between 1989 and 1995, increasing from
15.3 percent to 28.4 percent (table 4).

*  In 1995, a series of questions was asked about guns at
school. ***Footnote 1: A similar series of questions was not
included in 1989.***  Almost no students reported taking a gun
to school (less than one half of one percent), 5.3 percent
reported seeing another student with a gun at school, and 12.7
percent reported knowing another student who brought a gun to
school.

The supplements were fielded in January through June of their
respective years to nationally representative samples of
approximately 10,000 students.  Eligible respondents to the
supplements had to be between the ages of 12 and 19, and had to
have attended school at some point during the six months
preceding the interview.  Respondents were only asked about
crimes that had occurred at school during the six months prior
to the interview.  "At school" was defined as in the school
building, on school grounds, or on a school bus.

Readers should be aware that the 1989 SCS estimates on
victimization at school shown in this report do not match the
estimates presented in the first analysis of the 1989 SCS.
***Footnote 2:  See L. Bastian and B. Taylor.  School Crime:  A
National Crime Victimization Survey Report, NCJ-131645 (U.S.
Department of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics, Washington,
D.C.:  1991).*** In both the 1989 and 1995 SCS collections,
persons 12 to 19 years of age were asked to respond to the NCVS
and the SCS, and victimization information was captured in both
questionnaires.  The earlier authors elected to use the
victimization information reported in the NCVS, rather than the
SCS, in the development of their estimates.  Because of a
redesign of the NCVS in 1992, the 1995 victimization estimates
from the NCVS cannot readily be compared to those developed
before 1993. ***Footnote 3: C. Kindermann, J. Lynch, and D.
Cantor.   Effects of the Redesign on Victimization Estimates,
NCJ-164381 (U.S. Department of Justice, Bureau of Justice
Statistics, Washington, D.C.:  1997).*** Therefore, the authors
of this report elected to reanalyze the 1989 data to compare
estimates of victimization in 1995 to 1989 using the SCS data in
both cases.  Undoubtedly, the redesign of the NCVS also had
implications on responses to the SCS.  Unfortunately, it is not
possible to measure the extent of the impact.  (More information
about the redesign and a comparison of SCS versus NCVS estimates
of victimization can be found in the methodology section of this
report.)

This report presents estimates for two points in time, six years
apart.  Readers should not assume that the time points represent
a stable trend between 1989 and 1995.  In fact, if estimates had
been developed for the intervening years, many changes might be
seen.  

In this report, each topic is covered in a two- or three-page
presentation that consists of bullets and figures. 
Comprehensive tables on each of the topics can be found after
the body of the report.  A methodology section, which describes
the data collections and the analysis approach,  follows the
tables.  Shown in appendix A are tables containing standard
errors of the estimates, and shown in appendix B are the 1989
and 1995 School Crime Supplement questionnaires.

Again, this report does not exhaustively cover all of the data
available in the 1989 and 1995 data sets.  Readers can obtain
the 1989 SCS data through the National Archive of Criminal
Justice web site at "http://www.icpsr/umich/edu/NACJD/" (study
number 9394), and the 1995 SCS data will soon be made available
through the same source.  A SCS, jointly developed by the Bureau
of Justice Statistics (BJS) and the National Center for
Education Statistics (NCES), will continue to be fielded as a
supplement to the NCVS every few years.

------------------------------------------------------------------
Figure 1. Percent of students ages 12 through 19 who reported 
experiencing various forms of victimization at 
school:  1989 and 1995

   1989
Any /1                    14.5
Violent /2                 3.4
Property /3               12.2

   1995
Any /1                    14.6
Violent /2                 4.2
Property /3               11.6

1/ Any victimization is a combination of reported violent 
and property victimization.  If the student reported an incident of 
either, he or she is counted as having experienced any victimization.
If the respondent reported having experience both, he or she is only
counted once under  "Any victimization".

2/ Violent victimization includes physical attacks or
taking property from the student directly by force, weapons, or
threats.

3/ Property victimization includes theft of property from
a students desk, locker, or other locations.

SOURCE:  U.S. Department of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics,
School Crime Supplement to the National Crime Victimization Survey,
spring 1989 and 1995.

------------------------------------------------------------------

*  The overall level of victimization in schools in 1995, 14.6
percent, was similar to that in 1989, 14.5 percent.  There was
an increase in the percentage of students reporting violent
victimizations, however, increasing from 3.4 percent to 4.2
percent.

------------------------------------------------------------------
Figure 2. Percent of students ages 12 through 19 who reported
experiencing violent victimization at school, by gender:
1989 and 1995

   1989
Male        4.8
Female      2.0

   1995
Male        5.1
Female      3.3

NOTE:  Violent victimization includes physical attacks or taking 
property from the student directly by force, weapons, or threats.

SOURCE:  U.S. Department of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics, 
School Crime Supplement to the National Crime Victimization Survey, 
spring 1989 and 1995.

------------------------------------------------------------------

*  In 1995, male students (5.1 percent) were more likely than
female students (3.3 percent) to have experienced violent
victimization at school.  A similar relationship also existed
between violent victimization and gender in 1989.

*  While the percent of male students who reported having
experienced violent victimization at school was about the same
in 1989 as it was in 1995, there was an increase in the percent
of female students who reported such victimization

------------------------------------------------------------------
Figure 3. Percent of students ages 12 through 19 who reported
experiencing violent victimization at school, by age: 
1989 and 1995

   1989
     12     5.5
     13     4.7
     14     4.1
     15     3.3
     16     2.8
     17     1.4
     18     1.8
     19     1.0

   1995
     12     6.8
     13     5.9
     14     4.7
     15     3.9
     16     3.0
     17     1.9
     18     2.0
     19     3.3

NOTE:  Violent victimization includes physical attacks or taking
property from the student directly by force, weapons, or threats

SOURCE:  U.S. Department of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistic
School Crime Supplement to the National Crime Victimization Survey
spring 1989 and 1995.

------------------------------------------------------------------


*  Younger students were more likely to experience violent
victimization than were older students in both 1989 and 1995.

------------------------------------------------------------------
Figure 4. Percent of students ages 12 through 19 who reported 
experiencing violent victimization at school, by 
student's reports of street gang presence at school: 
1989 and 1995

   1989
Yes         6.7
No          2.9

   1995
Yes         7.5
No          2.7

NOTE:  Violent victimization includes physical attacks or taking
property from the student directly by force, weapons, or threats.

SOURCE:  U.S. Department of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistic
School Crime Supplement to the National Crime Victimization Survey
spring 1989 and 1995.
------------------------------------------------------------------

*  In 1995, only 2.7 percent of students who reported no street
gang presence at school experienced violent victimization
compared to 7.5 percent who reported street gang presence at
school.  Similar results occurred in 1989. (See figure 9 and
table 4 for reported prevalence of street gangs at school.)

*  Between 1989 and 1995, the percent of students reporting that
they were violently victimized at school did not noticeably
change among students who reported street gang presence at
school, nor did it noticeably change among students who reported
no street gang presence at school.

--------------------------------- ---------------------------------
Figure 5. Percent of students ages 12 through 19 who reported
experiencing various forms of victimization at school,
by student reports of seeing a student with a gun at 
school: 1995

Any /1
Yes        31.2
No         13.7

Violent /2
Yes        12.4
No          3.8

Property /3
Yes        24.7
No         10.9

1/ Any victimization is a combination of reported violent 
and property victimization.  If the student reported an incident of
either, he or she is counted as having experienced any victimization
If the respondent reported having experienced both, he or she is
counted once under "Any victimization".

2/ Violent victimization includes physical attacks or
taking property from the student directly by force, weapons, or
threats.

3/ Property victimization includes theft of property from 
a student's desk, locker, or other locations.

NOTE:  Students were not asked about seeing other students with 
 at school in the 1989 SCS.

SOURCE:  U.S. Department of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistic
School Crime Supplement to the National Crime Victimization Survey
spring 1995.

------------------------------------------------------------------

*  Of those students who reported seeing a student with a gun at
school, 12.4 percent reported being victims of violent crime at
school compared to 3.8 percent of those who had not. (See table
5 for student reports of seeing a student with a gun at school.)

Additional findings about student reports of victimization at
school from table 1:

*  Student reports of having experienced violent victimization
at school were relatively uniform across the different places of
residence in 1995 when 4.7 percent of students residing in
central cities, 4.4 percent of those residing in suburbs, and
3.5 percent of students residing in nonmetropolitan areas
reported such victimization.   The same was true in 1989.

*Public school students were more likely to report having
experienced violent victimization (4.4 percent) than were
private school students (2.3 percent) in 1995.  However, public
(3.5 percent) and private school students (2.9 percent) were
about as likely to report having experienced violent
victimization in 1989.

*  In 1995, students who reported that drugs were available at
school were more likely to report having been violently
victimized than students who reported that no drugs were
available (4.7 percent v. 3.0 percent).  Similar results
occurred in 1989. (See figure 6 and table 2 for student reports
of drug availability at school.)

------------------------------------------------------------------
 Figure 6. Percent of students ages 12 through 19 who reported that
drugs were available at school, by grade:  1989 and 1995

      1989
All grades    63.2
6th           42.7
7th           54.7
8th           54.0
9th           65.2
10th          69.6
11th          75.8
12th          75.6

      1995
All grades    65.3
6th           39.5
7th           50.1
8th           56.9
9th           72.2
10th          75.8
11th          79.4
12th          80.3

NOTE: In the 1989 and 1995 SCS, students were asked about the availability
of marijuana, cocaine, crack, and uppers/downers.  If the students 
reported any of these to be easy or hard to obtain at school, they are
considered having reported that drugs were available at school.

SOURCE:  U.S. Department of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics, 
School Crime Supplement to the National Crime Victimization Survey,
spring 1989 and 1995.
 
------------------------------------------------------------------

*  Though the increase was small, the percentage of students
reporting that drugs were available rose from 63.2 percent in
1989 to 65.3 percent in 1995.  

*  Students in higher grades were more likely than students in
lower grades to report that drugs were available at school in
both 1989 and 1995. 

------------------------------------------------------------------
Figure 7. Percent of students ages 12 through 19 who reported that
drugs were available at school, by school type:  1989 
and 1995

   1989
Public     64.8
Private    47.2

   1995
Public     67.2
Private    48.0

NOTE: In the 1989 and 1995 SCS, students were asked about the 
availability of marijuana, cocaine, crack, and uppers/downers.  
students reported any of these to be easy or hard to obtain at school
they are considered having reported that drugs were available at
school.

SOURCE:  U.S. Department of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistic
School Crime Supplement to the National Crime Victimization Survey
spring 1989 and 1995.

------------------------------------------------------------------

*  In 1995, students in public schools were more likely to
report that drugs were available in their schools than were
students in private schools (67.2 percent v. 48.0 percent). 
Similar results occurred in 1989.

*  A higher percent of public school students reported that
drugs were available at school in 1995 than in 1989.  However,
the percent of private school students who reported that drugs
were available at school was about the same in 1995 as it was in
1989.

------------------------------------------------------------------
Figure 8. Percent of students ages 12 through 19 who reported that 
drugs were available at school, by student's reports of   
violent victimization* at school:  1989 and 1995

   1989
Yes        74.1
No         62.9

   1995
Yes        72.9
No         65.3

* Violent victimization includes physical attacks or 
taking property from the student directly by force, weapons, or 
threats.

NOTE: In the 1989 and 1995 SCS, students were asked about the 
availability of marijuana, cocaine, crack, and uppers/downers.  If the 
students reported any of these to be easy or hard to obtain at school, 
they are considered having reported that drugs were available at school.

SOURCE:  U.S. Department of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics, 
School Crime Supplement to the National Crime Victimization Survey, 
spring 1989 and 1995.
------------------------------------------------------------------

*  In both 1995 and 1989, students who reported that they had
experienced violent victimization at school were more likely to
report that drugs were available at school than were students
who reported that they had not been violently victimized at
school.

*  Among students who reported that they had experienced violent
victimization at school, the percent of students reporting that
drugs were available in 1989 was similar to the percent of
students reporting that drugs were available in 1995.

Additional findings about student reports of drug availability
at school from tables 2 and 3:

*  Older students were more likely than younger students to
report that drugs were available at school in both 1989 and 1995.

*  In 1995, students who reported that street gangs were present
at their schools were more likely to indicate that drugs were
available (79.5 percent) than were those who did not report that
street gangs were present (61.0 percent).  The same results
occurred in 1989.

*  Among students reporting that street gangs were present at
school, reports that drugs were available increased by 6
percentage points between 1989 and 1995.  Among students
reporting that gangs were not present, reports that drugs were
available are similar between the two years.

*  The percent of students reporting that marijuana was easy to
obtain at school increased between 1989 and 1995, rising from
30.5 percent to 36.4 percent. 

*  In 1995, more students reported that marijuana was easy to
obtain than any other drug.  The same result was true in 1989.

------------------------------------------------------------------
Figure 9. Percent of students ages 12 through 19 who reported that
street gangs were present at school, by race/ethnicity:  
1989 and 1995

   1989
All Students               15.3
White, non-Hispanic        11.7
Black, non-Hispanic        19.8
Hispanic                   31.6
Other, non-Hispanic        25.4

   1995
All Students               28.4
White, non-Hispanic        23.0
Black, non-Hispanic        34.7
Hispanic                   49.5
Other, non-Hispanic        31.2

SOURCE:  U.S. Department of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics, 
School Crime Supplement to the National Crime Victimization Survey, 
spring 1989 and 1995.
------------------------------------------------------------------

* Students in 1995 were much more likely to report that street
gangs were present in their schools than were students in 1989
(28.4 percent v. 15.3 percent).

* In 1995, Hispanic students were more likely than either white
or black students to report the existence of street gangs in
their schools (49.5 percent v. 23.0 percent and 34.7 percent,
respectively).  A similar set of relationships existed in 1989. 

------------------------------------------------------------------
Figure 10.  Percent of students ages 12 through 19 who reported that
street gangs were present at school, by household income:  
1989 and 1995

   1989
LT $7,500          16.8
$7,500-$9,999      20.7
$10,000-$14,999    20.5
$15,000-24,999     17.8
$25,000-$29,999    15.7
$30,000-$49,999    12.8
$50,000+           11.2

   1995
LT $7,500          39.1
$7,500-$9,999      31.0
$10,000-$14,999    31.2
$15,000-24,999     29.8
$25,000-$29,999    30.3
$30,000-$49,999    27.4
$50,000+           24.7

SOURCE:  U.S. Department of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics, 
School Crime Supplement to the National  Crime Victimization Survey, 
spring 1989 and 1995.
------------------------------------------------------------------

* In 1989 and 1995, students living in households with higher
incomes were less likely to report that street gangs were
present at school than were students in households with lower
incomes. 

------------------------------------------------------------------
Figure 11 Percent of students ages 12 through 19 who reported that
street gangs were present at school, by place of residence:
1989 and 1995

   1989
Central city               24.8
Suburbs                    14.0
Nonmetropolitan area        7.8

   1995
Central city               40.7
Suburbs                    26.3
Nonmetropolitan area       19.9

SOURCE:  U.S. Department of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistic
School Crime Supplement to the National Crime Victimization Survey
spring 1989 and 1995.
------------------------------------------------------------------

*  Students in central cities were more likely to respond that
there were street gangs at their schools (40.7 percent) than
were suburban students (26.3 percent) or students in
nonmetropolitan areas (19.9 percent) in 1995. Similar results
occurred in 1989.

*  Between 1989 and 1995, reports of gang presence increased in
all three categories of student place of residence.

------------------------------------------------------------------
Figure 12.  Percent of students ages 12 through 19 who reported 
knowing street gangs were present at school, by school type: 
and 1995

   1989
Public     16.4
Private     4.4

   1995
Public     30.6
Private     6.8

SOURCE:  U.S. Department of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistic
School Crime Supplement to the National Crime Victimization Survey
spring 1989 and 1995.

------------------------------------------------------------------

*  Students in public schools were more likely to report that
street gangs were present at school than were students in
private schools in both years.  In 1995, 30.6 percent of
students in public schools reported that street gangs were
present compared to 6.8 percent in private schools.  The 1989
percents were 16.4 and 4.4, respectively.

*  Public school students were more likely to report that street
gangs were present at school in 1995 than in 1989, while private
school students were about as likely to report that street gangs
were present in both years. 

------------------------------------------------------------------
Figure 13. Percent of students ages 12 through 19 who reported knowing 
a student who brought a gun to school, by age:  1995

Age
     12     6.2
     13    10.0
     14    12.9
     15    15.1
     16    15.1
     17    16.4
     18    14.6
     19    16.0

SOURCE:  U.S. Department of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistic
School Crime Supplement to the National Crime Victimization Survey
spring 1995.

------------------------------------------------------------------

*  In 1995, older students were more likely than younger
students to report knowing a student who brought a gun to
school.  

------------------------------------------------------------------
 Figure 14. Percent of students ages 12 through 19 who reported the 
presence of guns at school, by student reports of street
gang presence at school:  1995

Know student who brought gun to school
Yes        24.8
No          7.7

Seen student with gun at school
Yes        11.9
No          2.8

SOURCE:  U.S. Department of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics, 
School Crime Supplement to the National Crime Victimization Survey, 
spring 1995.

------------------------------------------------------------------

*  Street gang presence at a student's school was related to
knowing another student who brought a gun to school (24.8
percent v. 7.7 percent).  In addition, street gang presence at a
student's school was related to seeing another student with a
gun at school (11.9 percent v. 2.8 percent).

------------------------------------------------------------------
Figure 15. Percent of students ages 12 through 19 who reported the 
presence of guns at school, by student's reports of drug
availability at school:  1995 

Know student who brought gun to school
Any available      16.8
None available      4.0

Seen student with gun at school
Any available       7.4
None available      1.0

NOTE:  In both the 1989 and 1995 SCS, students were asked about the 
availability of marijuana, cocaine, crack, and uppers/downers.  If 
students reported any of these to be easy or hard to obtain at school, 
they are included in the "Any available" category.  If they said each 
is impossible to obtain, they are counted in the "None available" 
category.

SOURCE:  U.S. Department of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics, 
School Crime Supplement to the National Crime Victimization Survey, 
spring 1995.
------------------------------------------------------------------

*  Students who reported that drugs were available at school
were more likely to have known another student who brought a gun
to school (16.8 percent), and to have seen another student with
a gun at school (7.4 percent) than were students who reported
that drugs were not available (4.0 percent and 1.0 percent,
respectively). 

Additional findings about student reports of guns at school from
table 5:

*  In 1995, almost no students reported taking a gun to school
(less than one half of one percent), 5.3 percent reported seeing
another student with a gun at school, and 12.7 percent reported
knowing another student who brought a gun to school.

*  Black, non-Hispanic students were more likely than white,
non-Hispanic students to report knowing another student who
brought a gun to school (15.5 percent versus 12.3 percent). 
Black, non-Hispanic students were also more likely to report
seeing another student with a gun at school than were white,
non-Hispanic students (8.7 percent v. 4.4 percent).

*  Students residing in central cities were more likely to
report knowing another student who brought a gun to school (15.0
percent) than were students from suburban areas (12.3 percent)
or students from nonmetropolitan areas (11.1 percent). 
Similarly, students from central cities were more likely to
report seeing another student with a gun at school (6.8 percent)
than were suburban or nonmetropolitan area students (each 4.8
percent).

*  Public school students were more likely to report knowing
another student who brought a gun to school than were students
attending private schools (13.6 percent v. 4.4 percent).  Public
school students were also more likely to report seeing another
student who brought a gun to school than were students attending
private schools (5.7 percent v. 2.0 percent, respectively).

---------------------------------
Summary 
---------------------------------

This report presents the first published findings from the 1995 
School Crime Supplement (SCS) to the National Crime Victimization 
Survey (NCVS) in addition to findings from a reanalysis of the 1989 
SCS.  Because of the issue's obvious importance to students, parents,
educators, and policymakers, this first report focuses on the reported
prevalence of crime in America's schools.  More specifically, it
explores student reports of victimization, drug availability,
street gang presence, and gun presence at school.

One important finding that emerged from comparing estimates from
the two time points was that more students were exposed to
certain problems at school in 1995 than in 1989.  As compared to
students in 1989, students in 1995 were more likely to report
that they had experienced violent victimization, could obtain
drugs, and were aware of street gangs at school.

A second key finding was that various types of problems tended
to co-exist.  For instance, student reports of drug
availability, street gang presence, and gun presence at school
were all related to student reports of having experienced
violent victimization at school.  Reports of having experienced
violent victimization were higher among students who reported
that drugs were available than among students who reported that
they were not.  In addition, students who reported that street
gangs were present were more likely than students who reported
that they were not present to say that they had been violently
victimized.  Finally, students who reported seeing another
student with a gun were more likely to say that they had
experienced violent victimization than students who had not seen
another student with a gun.

Because of the exploratory nature of this report, the crime
variables were studied using bivariate analyses only.  Future
research will apply multivariate approaches to the data to help
better understand possible interactions and patterns.  Also,
because the report focused on the important issues of school
crime, it did not exhaustively cover all of the topics addressed
by the data bases.  Such topics as safety measures taken by
schools to prevent crime, student avoidance of places in or near
school because of fear of attack, and student perceptions of
rule enforcement at school will form the basis of future work. 
It is the intent of both NCES and BJS to continue what has been
a successful collaborative effort to conduct some of this
research.

------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Table 1. Percent of students ages 12 through 19 reporting criminal victimization at school, 
by selected characteristics and perceptions of conditions at school:  1989 and 1995

                                                                              Year

                                                          1989                                                      1995
                                                Victimization                                             Victimization
Student               
characteristics         Number of     Any/1       Violent/2     Property/3     Number of    Any/1        Violent/2     Property/3
and perceptions of      students      Percent     Percent       Percent        students     Percent      Percent       Percent
conditions at school   (thousands)  Victimized    Victimized    Victimized     (thousands)  Victimized   Victimized    Victimized

Total                     21,554      14.5            3.4           12.2       23,933           14.6         4.2           11.6

Characteristics

Student sex
  Male                    11,166      15.2            4.8           12.1       12,331           15.8         5.1           12.0
  Female                  10,388      13.7            2.0           12.3       11,602           13.3         3.3           11.2

Student race/ethnicity
  White, non-Hispanic     15,349      14.3            3.4           12.2       16,351           14.5         4.1           11.6
  Black, non-Hispanic      3,391      14.9            3.3           12.3        3,752           16.8         5.1           13.4
  Hispanic                 2,027      14.7            4.4           11.1        2,898           12.4         3.9            9.5
  Other, non-Hispanic        787      14.7            2.2           13.3          932           13.7         3.9           11.0

Student age
  12                       3,221      17.8            5.5           14.7        3,735           19.8         6.8           15.1
  13                       3,319      18.0            4.7           14.9        3,781           17.9         5.9           13.9
  14                       3,264      16.8            4.1           14.1        3,732           17.0         4.7           13.7
  15                       3,214      15.3            3.3           12.8        3,688           14.4         3.9           12.0
  16                       3,275      12.0            2.8            9.9        3,674           11.9         3.0            9.5
  17                       3,274      10.6            1.4            9.7        3,172            9.9         1.9            8.6
  18                       1,756       8.6            1.8            7.2        1,820            6.8         2.0            5.2
  19                         231       5.3            1.0            5.3          331            8.8         3.3            6.1

Student grade
  Sixth                    1,818      17.9            5.7           14.8        2,315           18.0         6.7           13.3
  Seventh                  3,170      18.9            5.4           15.5        3,736           20.4         6.6           16.0
  Eighth                   3,258      16.1            4.0           13.1        3,795           17.1         4.7           13.9
  Ninth                    3,391      17.1            3.6           14.7        3,689           15.5         4.6           12.1
  Tenth                    3,082      13.9            2.5           11.9        3,662           12.9         3.3           10.7
  Eleventh                 3,224      10.5            2.2            8.8        3,460            9.5         2.3            7.5
  Twelfth                  3,172       8.3            1.2            7.6        2,990            8.7         1.7            7.5
  Other                      439      13.5            7.0           10.0          285           10.3         4.6            6.4

Student household income
  Less than $7,500         2,041      16.3            3.6           14.0        1,487           15.8         5.6           11.8
  $7,500-$9,999              791      14.8            5.2           10.6          783           12.8         3.6           10.1
  $10,000-$14,999          1,823      15.5            3.5           13.0        1,657           14.4         5.4           10.7
  $15,000-$24,999          3,772      14.7            3.4           12.5        3,130           14.5         4.1           11.8
  $25,000-$29,999          1,845      14.3            3.8           11.9        1,729           17.2         5.5           12.9
  $30,000-$49,999          5,798      14.4            3.5           12.2        6,295           13.9         3.9           11.1
  $50,000+                 3,498      14.2            3.4           12.0        6,562           14.2         3.7           11.8
  Not ascertained          1,983      11.7            2.3            9.9        2,289           15.5         4.4           12.5

Student place of residence
  Central city             5,816      16.1            3.9           13.4        6,309           14.7         4.7           11.3
  Suburbs                 10,089      13.8            3.5           11.3       11,341           14.6         4.4           11.5
  Nonmetropolitan area     5,648      14.0            2.9           12.3        6,283           14.3         3.5           12.0

Student school type
  Public                  19,265      14.7            3.5           12.3       21,719           14.8         4.4           11.7
  Private                  1,873      12.8            2.9           10.8        2,163           12.4         2.3           10.7
  Not ascertained            416      11.8            3.1            9.6            +              +           +              +

Perceptions of conditions at school

Student reports of street gangs at school
  Yes                      3,301      21.8            6.7           17.3        6,796           21.4         7.5           16.4
  No                      17,042      13.1            2.9           11.2       13,687           11.8         2.7            9.8
  Do not know              1,124      13.8            3.0           11.8        3,224           12.5         3.7            9.8
  Not ascertained             88       8.0            1.8            8.0          226            8.4         4.8            3.6




Student reports of knowing a student who brought a gun to school    
  Yes                         --        --             --             --        3,042           24.6         8.6           19.8
  No                          --        --             --             --       20,608           13.2         3.6           10.5
  Not ascertained             --        --             --             --          282            9.4         4.6            4.8

Student reports of seeing a student with a gun at school
  Yes                         --        --             --             --        1,270           31.2        12.4           24.7
  No                          --        --             --             --       22,359           13.7         3.8           10.9
  Do not know                 --        --             --             --            +              +           +              +
  Not ascertained             --        --             --             --          263           11.8         5.0            6.8

Student reports of drug availability: marijuana, cocaine, crack, upper/downers  /4
  Any available           13,630       16.8            4.0          14.2       15,630           16.0         4.7           12.8
  None available           2,560       10.3            2.5           8.6        3,922           12.9         3.0           10.6
  Do not know/Not   
  ascertained              5,364       10.5            2.4           8.7        4,380           10.9         3.6            8.2

-- Question is not asked in the 1989 School Crime Supplement.
+ Fewer than 30 sample cases.
 
1/ Any victimization is a combination of reported 
violent and property victimization.  If the student 
reported an incident of  either, he or she is counted 
as having experienced any victimization.  If the 
respondent reported having experienced both, he 
or she is only counted once under "Any victimization".

2/  Violent victimization includes physical attacks or 
taking property from the student directly by force,
 weapons, or threats.

3/ Property victimization includes theft of property 
from a student's desk, locker, or other locations.

4/ : In both the 1989 and 1995 SCS, students were 
asked about the availability of marijuana, cocaine, 
crack, and uppers/downers.  If students reported any of 
these to be easy or hard to obtain at school, they are 
included in the "Any available" category.  If they said each 
was impossible to obtain, they are counted in the 
"None available" category.  If students are not 
included in the first two categories, they 
are included in the "Do not know/Not ascertained" 
category.

SOURCE:  U.S. Department of Justice, Bureau of 
Justice Statistics, School Crime Supplement to 
the National Crime Victimization Survey, 
spring 1989 and spring 1995. 

---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Table 2. Percent of students ages 12 through 19 reporting the availability of drugs at school, 
by selected characteristics and perceptions of conditions at school:  1989 and 1995

                                                            Year
                               1989                        1995                        1995
                                       Any drug                       Any drug                       Any drug
Student                 Number         availability:     Number       availability:     Number       availability:
characteristics         of             1989              of           1989              of           1995
and perceptions of      students       definition/1      students     definition/1      students     definition/1
conditions at school    (thousands)    Percent           (thousands)  Percent           (thousands)  Percent

Total                     21,554           63.2            23,933           65.3       23,933           66.8

Characteristics

Student sex
  Male                    11,166           64.6            12,331           66.7       12,331           68.3
  Female                  10,388           61.7            11,602           63.8       11,602           65.2

Student race/ethnicity
  White, non-Hispanic     15,349           64.6            16,351           66.1       16,351           67.7
  Black, non-Hispanic      3,391           62.4             3,752           65.5        3,752           66.5
  Hispanic                 2,027           59.0             2,898           62.8        2,898           64.2
  Other, non-Hispanic        787           51.5               932           58.9          932           59.6

Student age
  12                       3,221           45.7             3,735           42.3        3,735           45.1
  13                       3,319           54.7             3,781           52.6        3,781           54.7
  14                       3,264           58.1             3,732           63.4        3,732           65.0
  15                       3,214           66.3             3,688           72.3        3,688           73.6
  16                       3,275           73.2             3,674           76.7        3,674           77.7
  17                       3,274           74.1             3,172           79.9        3,172           80.5
  18                       1,756           75.3             1,820           79.2        1,820           79.7
  19                         231           74.4               331           70.9          331           70.9

Student grade
  Sixth                    1,818           42.7             2,315           39.5        2,315           42.0
  Seventh                  3,170           54.7             3,736           50.1        3,736           52.6
  Eighth                   3,258           54.0             3,795           56.9        3,795           58.4
  Ninth                    3,391           65.2             3,689           72.2        3,689           73.9
  Tenth                    3,082           69.6             3,662           75.8        3,662           76.8
  Eleventh                 3,224           75.8             3,460           79.4        3,460           79.8
  Twelfth                  3,172           75.6             2,990           80.3        2,990           80.9
  Other                      439           36.6               285           34.2          285           37.4

Student household income
  Less than $7,500         2,041           63.4             1,487           58.9        1,487           60.5
  $7,500-$9,999              791           61.1               783           59.8          783           61.1
  $10,000-$14,999          1,823           58.8             1,657           62.5        1,657           63.3
  $15,000-$24,999          3,772           63.1             3,130           65.3        3,130           66.1
  $25,000-$29,999          1,845           63.9             1,729           64.6        1,729           67.3
  $30,000-$49,999          5,798           63.7             6,295           67.2        6,295           69.1
  $50,000+                 3,498           66.0             6,562           66.6        6,562           67.9
  Not ascertained          1,984           61.6             2,289           64.8        2,289           66.2

Student place of residence
  Central city             5,816           61.2             6,309           65.6        6,309           66.8
  Suburbs                 10,089           63.0            11,341           66.4       11,341           68.0
  Nonmetropolitan area     5,648           65.7             6,283           63.0        6,283           64.5

Student school type
  Public                  19,265           64.8            21,719           67.2       21,719           68.6
  Private                  1,873           47.2             2,163           48.0        2,163           49.3
  Not ascertained            416           64.1                 +              +            +              +

Perceptions of conditions at school

Student reports of street gangs at school
  Yes                      3,301           73.4             6,796           79.5        6,796           80.7
  No                      17,042           61.6            13,686           61.0       13,686           62.6
  Do not know              1,124           59.2             3,224           56.4        3,224           58.0
  Not ascertained             88           51.0               226           24.0          226           24.0

Student reports of knowing a student who brought a gun to school    
  Yes                         --             --             3,042           86.4        3,042           87.7
  No                          --             --            20,608           62.5       20,608           64.0
  Not ascertained             --             --               282           40.1          282           40.1
                                                               
Student reports of seeing a student with a gun at school
  Yes                         --             --             1,270           90.5        1,270           91.7
  No                          --             --            22,359           64.2       22,359           65.7
  Do not know                 --             --                 +              +            +              +
  Not ascertained             --             --               263           41.1          263           41.1
                       
Student reports of being the victim of any violent or property crime at school
  Yes                      3,116           73.5             3,485           71.1        3,485           74.5
  No                      18,400           61.6            20,315           64.6       20,315           65.8
  Not ascertained              +              +               133           12.3          133           12.3

Student reports of being the victim of any violent crime at school/2
  Yes                        742           74.1             1,013           72.9        1,013           75.5
  No                      20,773           62.9            22,780           65.3       22,780           66.7
  Not ascertained              +              +               140           15.2          140           15.2

Student reports of being the victim of any property crime at school/3
  Yes                      2,619           73.8             2,777           72.2        2,777           75.1
  No                      18,852           61.9            20,997           64.8       20,997           66.1
  Not ascertained             83           44.5               159           17.4          159           17.4
 
-- Question is not asked in the 1989 School Crime Supplement.
+ Fewer than 30 sample cases.
 
1/  In the 1989 School Crime Supplement, students were asked 
about the availability of marijuana, cocaine, crack, uppers 
and downers, and other illegal drugs.  In the 1995 School Crime 
Supplement, students were asked about the availability of these 
drugs and were also asked about the availability of PCP, LSD,
heroin. When comparing across the two years, only those drugs 
that are listed on both surveys are counted (i.e marijuana, 
cocaine, crack, and uppers and downers).  This list of drugs is 
referred to as "Drug availability: 1989 definition". Other illegal 
drugs are excluded from the 1989 definition used in cross-year analyses.
not making comparisons across the two surveys and focusing solely on 
the 1995 estimates, all of the 1995 response categories are counted 
(this approach is referred to as "Drug availability: 1995 definition"). 
both definitions if students reported that any of the listed drugs were 
easy or hard to obtain, they are included in the "Any available" category.

2/ Violent victimization includes physical attacks or taking 
property from the student directly by force, weapons, or threats.

3/  Property victimization includes theft of property from a 
students desk, locker, or other locations.

SOURCE:  U.S. Department of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics, 
School Crime Supplement to the National Crime Victimization Survey, 
spring 1989 and spring 1995. 

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Table 3.  Percent of students ages 12 through 19 reporting the difficulty of 
obtaining various drugs at school:  1989 and 1995

                                                                           Year
                                        1989                                                          1995
                                   Availability                                                  Availability
                                                  Don't know                                                           Don't
                  Easy to   Hard to  Impossible   know if     Don't know   Not          Easy to   Hard to  Impossible  know if     Don't know   Not
Drug              Obtain    Obtain   to Obtain    available   drug         ascert.      Obtain    Obtain   to Obtain   available   drug         ascert.
                      %         %         %           %         %            %             %         %         %         %           %            %
Marijuana           30.5      27.5      16.2        24.9       0.8          0.2          36.4      24.8      22.8      15.1         0.3          0.6
Crack                8.6      29.4      27.9        32.2       1.6          0.2           9.7      32.0      34.3      22.5         0.9          0.6
Other forms of   
   cocaine          10.7      32.6      24.8        30.7       1.0          0.2           9.9      29.7      35.2      23.6         1.0          0.6
Uppers/downers      20.4      25.8      17.3        31.1       5.2          0.2          18.3      24.9      24.4      23.4         8.3          0.7
LSD                   --        --        --          --        --           --          11.8      26.5      31.6      23.2         6.3          0.7
PCP                   --        --        --          --        --           --           5.9      25.9      33.5      24.7         9.2          0.8
Heroin                --        --        --          --        --           --           5.6      27.7      40.0      23.9         2.2          0.7
Other Drugs         13.9      27.4      18.7        36.8       2.9          0.5          12.0      29.3      30.2      26.4         1.4          0.7
 
-- Question is not asked in the 1989 School Crime Supplement.
 
SOURCE:  U.S. Department of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics, School Crime Supplement 
to the National Crime Victimization Survey, spring 1989  and spring 1995.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Table 4. Percent of students ages 12 through 19 reporting the presence of street gangs at school, by selected characteristics and perceptions of
conditions at school:  1989 and 1995

                                                                  Year

                                             1989                                          1995
Student                  Number         Street gangs at school               Number         Street gangs at school
characteristics          of                           Do not     Not         of                           Do not   Not
and perceptions of       students    Yes      No      know       ascert.     students    Yes      No      know     ascert.
conditions at school    (thousands)  Percent  Percent Percent    Percent     (thousands) Percent  Percent Percent  Percent

Total                      21,554      15.3    79.1     5.2        0.4         23,933      28.4     57.2    13.5     0.9

Characteristics

Student sex
  Male                     11,166      15.8    79.5     4.4        0.3          12,331     28.9     57.7    12.5     1.0
  Female                   10,388      14.8    78.6     6.1        0.5          11,602     27.9     56.7    14.6     0.9

Student race/ethnicity
  White, non-Hispanic      15,349      11.7    83.4     4.6        0.4          16,351     23.0     63.1    13.1     0.7
  Black, non-Hispanic       3,391      19.8    72.8     6.9        0.4           3,752     34.7     49.5    14.0     1.8
  Hispanic                  2,027      31.6    61.8     6.0        0.7           2,898     49.5     36.7    12.9     0.9
  Other, non-Hispanic         787      25.4    66.4     8.2          #             932     31.2     48.1    19.4     1.3

Student age
  12                        3,221      12.1    83.2     4.4        0.4           3,735     19.3     65.1    14.3     1.4
  13                        3,319      14.5    80.1     5.3        0.2           3,781     26.7     58.0    14.4     0.9
  14                        3,264      17.9    76.3     5.5        0.3           3,732     30.6     56.1    12.7     0.7
  15                        3,214      16.2    77.6     6.0        0.2           3,688     32.7     52.6    13.7     1.0
  16                        3,275      16.4    78.8     4.7        0.1           3,674     30.2     56.4    12.6     0.9
  17                        3,274      15.3    78.6     5.5        0.6           3,172     31.0     54.8    13.6     0.7
  18                        1,756      14.5    79.6     4.6        1.4           1,820     28.8     57.4    12.3     1.5
  19                          231      16.9    72.9     8.8        1.4             331     30.7     53.9    15.5       #

Student grade
  Sixth                     1,818      10.3    84.4     4.8        0.5           2,315     15.7     67.8    14.8     1.7
  Seventh                   3,170      16.6    79.0     4.4        0.1           3,736     26.5     57.2    15.4     0.9
  Eighth                    3,258      13.6    80.4     5.7        0.3           3,795     28.7     58.9    11.9     0.4
  Ninth                     3,391      19.6    73.9     6.2        0.3           3,689     32.4    51.5    15.0     1.1
  Tenth                     3,082      16.0    79.0     4.9        0.2           3,662     33.7    52.7    12.7     0.9
  Eleventh                  3,224      15.3    78.4     5.6        0.6           3,460     30.6    57.3    11.4     0.7
  Twelfth                   3,172      14.2    80.9     4.2        0.7           2,990     27.5    57.6    13.9     1.0
  Other                       439       9.8    79.2     8.8        2.2             285     15.5    73.9     8.2     2.5

Student household income
  Less than $7,500          2,041      16.8    76.0     6.7        0.5           1,487     39.1    44.7    15.2     1.0
  $7,500-$9,999               791      20.7    69.9     9.5        0.0             783     31.0    46.0    19.6     3.4
  $10,000-$14,999           1,823      20.5    72.7     6.4        0.4           1,657     31.2    53.3    15.2     0.3
  $15,000-$24,999           3,772      17.8    76.9     4.9        0.4           3,130     29.8    54.7    14.0     1.5
  $25,000-$29,999           1,845      15.7    78.8     4.9        0.6           1,729     30.3    58.0    10.9     0.8
  $30,000-$49,999           5,798      12.8    82.0     4.7        0.5           6,295     27.4    58.6    13.4     0.6
  $50,000+                  3,498      11.2    84.8     3.8        0.3           6,562     24.7    61.6    13.0     0.7
  Not ascertained           1,984      16.3    77.4     5.7        0.5           2,289     28.6    58.2    11.7     1.5

Student place of residence
  Central city              5,816      24.8    68.4     6.3        0.5           6,309     40.7    43.3    15.0     1.1
  Suburbs                  10,089      14.0    81.1     4.4        0.4          11,341     26.3    59.8    13.2     0.7
  Nonmetropolitan area      5,648       7.8    86.4     5.5        0.2           6,283     19.9    66.5    12.4     1.2

Student school type
  Public                   19,265      16.4    77.9     5.3        0.3          21,719     30.6    54.4    14.2     0.8
  Private                   1,873       4.4    91.9     3.4        0.3           2,163      6.8    86.5     6.3     0.3
  Not ascertained             416      12.1    75.6     8.5        3.9               +        +       +       +       +

Perceptions of conditions at school

Student reports of being the victim of any violent or property crime at school
  Yes                       3,116      23.1    71.7     5.0        0.2           3,485     41.6    46.3    11.6     0.5
  No                       18,400      14.0    80.4     5.3        0.3          20,315     26.3    59.4    13.9     0.4
  Not ascertained               +         +       +       +          +             133      2.4     4.6     3.5    89.5

Student reports of being the victim of any violent crime at school/1
  Yes                         742      29.6    65.5     4.6        0.2           1,013     50.5    36.7    11.7     1.1
  No                       20,773      14.8    79.7     5.2        0.3          22,780     27.6    58.4    13.6     0.4
  Not ascertained               +         +       +       +          +             140      2.3     7.8     5.1    84.9

Student reports of being the victim of any property crime at school/2                     
  Yes                       2,619      21.8    72.9     5.1        0.3           2,777     40.1    48.3    11.3     0.3
  No                       18,852      14.5    80.1     5.2        0.2          20,997     27.0    58.7    13.8     0.4
  Not ascertained              83       7.0    47.8     6.5       38.7             159      4.9     9.6     6.5    79.0

Student reports of knowing a student who brought a gun to school    
  Yes                          --        --      --      --         --           3,042     55.3    34.8     9.5     0.4
  No                           --        --      --      --         --          20,608     24.6    60.9    14.1     0.4
  Not ascertained              --        --      --      --         --             282     13.4    29.9    10.7    46.0

Student reports of seeing a student with a gun at school                                  
  Yes                          --        --      --      --         --           1,270     63.8    29.9     6.3     0.0
  No                           --        --      --      --         --          22,359     26.5    59.1    13.9     0.4
  Do not know                  --        --      --      --         --               +        +       +       +       +
  Not ascertained              --        --      --      --         --             263     16.2    25.5     9.7    48.6

Student reports of drug availability: marijuana, cocaine, crack, upper/downers/3
  Any available            13,630      17.8    77.0     4.9        0.3          15,630     34.6    53.5    11.6     0.3
  None available            2,560       8.3    89.7     1.8        0.2           3,922     14.0    75.1    10.4     0.5
  Do not know/Not   
  ascertained               5,364      12.4    79.2     7.7        0.2           4,380     19.3    54.4    22.8     3.5
 
-- Question is not asked in the 1989 School Crime Supplement.
+ Fewer than 30 sample cases.
# No cases are reported in this cell, although the event defined 
by this cell could have been reported by some students
with these characteristics had a different sample been drawn.

1/  Violent victimization includes physical attacks or taking 
property from the student directly by force, weapons, or threats.

2/  Property victimization includes theft of property from a 
students desk, locker, or other locations.

3/  In both the 1989 and 1995 SCS, students were asked about 
the availability of marijuana, cocaine, crack, and uppers/downers.  
If students reported any of these to be easy or hard to obtain at 
school, they are included in available" category.  If they said 
each is not available, they are counted in the "None available" 
category.  If are not included in the first two categories, they 
are included in the "Do not know/Not ascertained" category.

SOURCE:  U.S. Department of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics, 
School Crime Supplement to the National Crime
Victimization Survey, spring 1989 and spring 1995. 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Table 5.  Percent of students ages 12 through 19 reporting guns at school,
by selected characteristics and perceptions of conditions at 
school:  1995
                                                Year
                                                1995
                                                   Know
Student                                            student who   Seen student
characteristics            Number of   Took gun    brought gun   with a gun
and perceptions of         students    to school   to school     at school
conditions at school      (thousands)  Percent     Percent       Percent

Total                        23,933      0.1        12.7         5.3

Characteristics

Student sex
  Male                       12,331      0.1        12.4         6.1
  Female                     11,602      0.0        13.0         4.5

Student race/ethnicity
  White, non-Hispanic        16,351      0.1        12.3         4.4
  Black, non-Hispanic         3,752      0.1        15.5         8.7
  Hispanic                    2,898      0.1        11.8         6.2
  Other, non-Hispanic           932        #        11.1         4.8

Student age
  12                          3,735        #         6.2         2.0
  13                          3,781      0.1        10.0         4.0
  14                          3,732      0.1        12.9         4.9
  15                          3,688      0.2        15.1         6.4
  16                          3,674        #        15.1         6.2
  17                          3,172        #        16.4         8.3
  18                          1,820      0.2        14.6         6.2
  19                            331        #        16.0         7.0

Student grade
  Sixth                       2,315        #         5.7         2.0
  Seventh                     3,736        #         8.9         3.0
  Eighth                      3,795      0.1        11.9         4.8
  Ninth                       3,689      0.3        15.1         6.6
  Tenth                       3,662      0.1        14.6         5.9
  Eleventh                    3,460        #        15.4         7.3
  Twelfth                     2,990        #        16.2         6.9
  Other                         285        #         5.3         4.3

Student household income
  Less than $7,500            1,487        #        10.9         5.2
  $7,500-$9,999                 783        #        12.4         8.3
  $10,000-$14,999             1,657        #        12.1         6.2
  $15,000-$24,999             3,130      0.3        14.7         7.0
  $25,000-$29,999             1,729        #        13.7         5.7
  $30,000-$49,999             6,295      0.1        12.2         5.0
  $50,000+                    6,562      0.0        12.6         4.4
  Not ascertained             2,289        #        12.8         4.5

Student place of residence
  Central city                6,309         #        15.0         6.8
  Suburbs                    11,341       0.1        12.3         4.8
  Nonmetropolitan area        6,283       0.0        11.1         4.8

Student school type
  Public                     21,719       0.1        13.6         5.7
  Private                     2,163       0.1         4.4         2.0
  Not ascertained                 +         +           +           +

Perceptions of conditions at school

Student reports of street gangs at school
  Yes                         6,796       0.1        24.8        11.9
  No                         13,687       0.0         7.7         2.8
  Don't know if present       3,224       0.1         9.0         2.5
  Not ascertained               226         #         5.0           #

Student reports of being the victim of any violent or property crime at school
  Yes                         3,485       0.3        21.4        11.4
  No                         20,315       0.0        11.3         4.3
  Not ascertained               133         #           #           #

Student reports of being the victim of any violent crime at 
school /1
  Yes                         1,013       0.8        25.9        15.5
  No                         22,780       0.0        12.2         4.9
  Not ascertained               140         #           #           #

Student reports of being the victim of any property crime at 
school/2
  Yes                         2,777       0.2        21.6        11.3
  No                         20,997       0.1        11.6         4.6
  Not ascertained               159         #           #           #

Student reports of drug availability: marijuana, cocaine, crack, upper/
downers/3
  Any available              15,630       0.1        16.8         7.4
  None available              3,922         #         4.0         1.0
  Do not know/No
  ascertained                 4,380         #         5.9         1.9

+ Fewer than 30 sample cases.
# No cases are reported in this cell, although the event defined by this cell
could have been reported by some students with these characteristics had a
different sample been drawn.
0.0 Indicates that there are cases in the cell but that the cell total is 
less than 0.05.

1/  Violent victimization includes physical attacks or taking 
property from the student directly by force, weapons, or threats.

2/ Property victimization includes theft of property from a 
student's desk, locker, or other locations.

3/ In both the 1989 and 1995 SCS, students were asked about the 
availability of marijuana, cocaine, crack, and uppers/downers.  If student
reported any of these to be easy or hard to obtain at school, they are 
included in the "Any available" category.  If they said each was not 
available, they are counted in the "None available" category.  If students
not included in the first two categories, they are included in the "Do not
know/Not ascertained" category.

SOURCE:  U.S. Department of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics, School 
Crime Supplement to the National Crime Victimization Survey, spring 1995. 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--------------------------------- 
Methodology 
---------------------------------

---------------------------------
Background of the
School Crime Supplement
---------------------------------

---------------------------------
Purpose and Sponsorship
of the Survey
------------------------------------------------------------------

Criminal activity at school poses an obvious threat to the
safety of students and can act as a significant barrier to the
education process.  In order to study the relationship between
victimization at school and the school environment, and to
monitor changes in student experiences with victimization,
accurate information regarding its incidence must be collected. 
Jointly designed by the Department of Education's National
Center for Education Statistics and Department of Justice's
Bureau of Justice Statistics, the School Crime Supplement (SCS)
was developed to address this data need.


---------------------------------
Sample Design and Data
Collection
---------------------------------

Created as an occasional supplement to the annual National Crime
Victimization Survey (NCVS), the SCS was fielded in 1989 and
1995.  The NCVS collects data on the incidence of criminal
activity against households and household members from a
nationally representative sample of households (47,000
households in 1989 and 49,000 households in 1995).  In both 1989
and 1995, households were sampled using a stratified multistage
cluster design. ***Footnote 4: For more information regarding
the sampling approach used in the National Crime Victimization
Survey, refer to U.S. Department of Justice, Bureau of Justice
Statistics, "Criminal Victimization in the United States, 1994",
 NCJ-162126 (Washington, D.C.: 1997).*** 

NCVS interviews were conducted with each household member who
was 12 years old or older.  Once all NCVS interviews were
completed, household members between the ages of 12 and 19 were
given an SCS interview.  Only those 12 -to 19-year-olds who were
in primary or secondary education programs leading to a high
school diploma, and who had been enrolled sometime during the 6
months prior to the interview, were administered the SCS
questionnaire.  Students who were home schooled were not
included.

The SCS questionnaire was designed to record the incidence of
crime and criminal activity occurring inside a school, on school
grounds, or on a school bus during the 6 months preceding the
interview.  There were 10,449 SCS interviews completed in 1989
and 9,954 in 1995.

Data were collected by the Department of Commerce's Bureau of
the Census.  In both 1989 and 1995, SCS surveys were conducted
between January and June, with one-sixth of the sample being
covered each month.  Interviews were conducted with the subject
student over the telephone or in person.  In both years, efforts
were made to assure that interviews about student experiences at
school were conducted with the students themselves.  However,
under certain circumstances, interviews with proxy respondents
were accepted.  These circumstances included interviews
scheduled with a child between the ages of 12 and 13 where the
parents refused to allow an interview with the child, interviews
where the subject child was unavailable during the period of
data collection, and interviews where the child was physically
or emotionally unable to answer for him or herself.

Telephone interviews accounted for 7,418 of the 9,954 interviews
in 1995, and 7,407 of the 10,449 interviews in 1989. Proxy
interviews accounted for 363 of the 9,954 interviews in 1995,
and 252 of the 10,449 interviews in 1989.

Responses to both the NCVS and the SCS are confidential by law. 
Interviewers are instructed to conduct interviews in privacy
unless respondents specifically agree to permit others to be
present.  Most interviews for the NCVS and SCS are conducted by
telephone, and most questions require "yes" or "no" answers,
thereby affording respondents a further measure of privacy.  By
law, identifiable information about respondents may not be
disclosed or released to others for any purpose.

---------------------------------
 Unit and Item Response Rates
---------------------------------

Unit response rates indicate how many sampled units have
completed interviews.  Because interviews with students could
only be completed after households had responded to the NCVS,
the unit completion rate for the SCS reflects both the household
interview completion rate and the student interview completion
rate.  In the 1989 and 1995 SCS, the household completion rates
were 96.5 percent, and 95.1 percent, respectively.  The student
completion rates were 86.5 percent and 77.5 percent. ***Footnote
5. It is assumed that the response rate  for households with
students between the ages of 12 and 19 is the same as that of
all households.  The reported unit response rates are
unweighted.***  Multiplying the household completion rate times
the student completion rate produced an overall SCS response
rate of 83.5 percent in 1989 and 73.7 percent in 1995.

The rate at which respondents provide a valid response to a
given item is referred to as its item response rate.  Item
response rates for items used in this report were high.  Most
items were answered by over 95 percent of all eligible
respondents.  The only exception was the household income
question which was answered by approximately 90 percent of all
households in both years.  Income and income-related questions
typically have relatively low response rates due to their
sensitive nature.

---------------------------------
II.  Notes
Regarding Items Used in the Report
---------------------------------

------------------------------------------------------------------
Differences between the 1989 and 1995 NCVS Victimization Items
------------------------------------------------------------------

Respondents to the SCS were asked two separate sets of questions
regarding personal victimization. The first set of questions was
asked as part of the ongoing NCVS and included data on up to six
separate incidents of victimization reported by respondents to
the NCVS.  These questions covered several different dimensions
of victimization including the nature of each incident, where it
occurred, what losses resulted, etc.  Earlier research on
student victimization at school has relied on NCVS items to
develop incident rates.  ***Footnote 6.  L. Bastian and B.
Taylor,  School Crime:  A National Crime Victimization Survey
Report.***  However, changes to the basic NCVS between 1989 and
1995 make cross-year comparisons using these items difficult. 
The 1995 NCVS used a different screening procedure to uncover
victimizations than did the 1989 NCVS.  

The new screening procedure was meant to elicit a more complete
tally of victimization incidents than did the one used in the
1989 NCVS.  For instance, the 1995 screener specifically asked
whether respondents had been raped or otherwise sexually
assaulted, whereas the 1989 screener did not.  Therefore, NCVS
item based cross-year changes in reported victimization rates,
or lack thereof, may only be the result of changes in how
questions were asked and not of actual changes in the incidence
of victimization.  For more details on this issue, refer the BJS
report, "Effects of the Redesign on Victimization Estimates". 
***Footnote 7. C. Kindermann, J. Lynch, and D. Cantor.   Effects
of the Redesign on Victimization Estimates.***

Because NCVS questionnaires were completed before students were
given the SCS questionnaires, it is likely that changes to NCVS
victimization screening procedures differentially affected
responses to the 1989 and 1995 SCS victimization items.  While
the assumption is not possible to test, it is nonetheless
reasonable to expect that by providing a more detailed
victimization screening instrument in the 1995 NCVS, that 1995
SCS respondents had better victimization recall than 1989 SCS
respondents.

---------------------------------
Differences Between NCVS
and SCS Items 
---------------------------------

A less detailed set of victimization questions, which was not
modified between 1989 and 1995, was asked in the SCS.  These
items are more generally comparable across the two years and
form the basis of the victimization section of this report. 
Readers should be aware that these items indicate a higher rate
of victimization at school than do the six items included in the
NCVS.  For instance, using the NCVS items, BJS estimated that 9
percent of students experienced some form of victimization at
school during the period covered by the 1989 SCS. ***Footnote 8.
L. Bastian and B. Taylor, School Crime:  A National Crime
Victimization Survey Report.***  The 1989 SCS items, asked of
the same students, indicate that 14.5 percent of them had
experienced some sort of victimization at school.

One contributing factor to the difference may be the sequencing
of the NCVS and SCS.  Respondents were first asked the NCVS
items and then asked the SCS items.  Prompted by the NCVS to
think about incidents of victimization, respondent recall may
have improved by the time the SCS victimization questions were
asked.  A second contributing factor may be differences between
the victimization questions asked in the NCVS and the SCS. In
the NCVS, respondents were asked about an incident and where it
occurred in separate questions.  The SCS items asked respondents
about victimization and whether or not it occurred at school in
one question.  This may have prompted respondents to report
incidents that had occurred at school that may have been
forgotten during the NCVS set of questions.  Because of
differences in the way the SCS and NCVS items were asked, it is
recommended that rates developed from the SCS items not be
compared to rates developed from the NCVS items.

---------------------------------
Derived Variables 
---------------------------------

Several variables used in this report were derived by combining
information from two or more questions.  For the most part, the
derived variables and the items that went into them were the
same in both the 1989 and 1995 SCS.  The variable, violent
victimization, was derived by combining two questions dealing
with incidents at school.  The first asked whether or not the
respondent had anything taken directly by force (question
20a in the 1995 questionnaire and question 26b in the 1989
questionnaire).  Not counting incidents where the respondent had
had anything taken directly by force, the second question asked
if the respondent had been physically attacked at school
(questions 22a and 28a in 1995 and 1989, respectively).  If the
respondent said yes to either, he or she was counted as having
experienced some form of violent victimization.

Any victimization was derived from the violent victimization
item and a question asking whether or not the respondent had had
anything stolen at school (question 21a in 1995 and 27a in
1989).  The question about having something stolen excluded
incidents where something had been taken by force.  If the
respondent said something had been stolen, or had experienced
some form of violent victimization, he or she was considered a
victim in the any victimization item.  All victimization items
were dichotomous.  Either the respondent had experienced a given
form of victimization or had not.

The items drug availability: 1995 definition and drug
availability: 1989 definition were also derived.  In 1995,
respondents were asked about the difficulty of obtaining
marijuana, crack, cocaine, uppers/downers, LSD, PCP, heroin, or
other illegal drugs at school (questions 18b through 18i in the
1995 questionnaire).  If students reported any of these were
easy to obtain or were hard to obtain, they were counted as
believing drugs to be available in the drug availability: 1995
definition variable.

The same process went into constructing the drug availability: 
1989 definition item.  However, because the 1989 questionnaire
(questions 22b through 22e) did not ask about the availability
of LSD, PCP, or heroin, only the availability of marijuana,
crack, cocaine, and uppers/downers was considered.  This
variable allowed comparisons to be made about perceptions of
drug availability across the two SCS.  For both derived drug
availability variables, respondents had to say that all of the
drugs covered were impossible to obtain to be counted as
believing no drugs to be available.

A large number of respondents indicated that they were not sure
if one or more of the listed drugs were available, or were not
sure what one or more of the drugs were.  These cases make up
the difference in the tables between the number believing drugs
to be available, believing no drugs to be available, and student
population totals.  The drug variables were trichotomous in
form.  Respondents were coded as believing drugs to be
available, not available, or other.

The final derived variable, student's race/ethnicity, was a
combination of two variables (both from the NCVS but included on
the SCS files).  The first question asked the race of the
student and the second asked whether or not the student was of
Hispanic origin.  Respondents who answered yes to the second
question were counted as Hispanic.  Students who said they were
white or black, but not of Hispanic origin were counted as
white/non-Hispanic or black/non-Hispanic.  Those of other races
who were not Hispanic were counted as other/non-Hispanic.

------------------------------------------------------------------
 III. Weighting and Statistical Analysis Procedures
------------------------------------------------------------------

---------------------------------
 Weighting 
---------------------------------

The purpose of the SCS data is to make inferences about the
12-to 19-year-old student population (see above for a more
complete description of the population).  Before such inferences
can be drawn, it is important to adjust or weight the sample of
students to assure they are similar to the entire population of
such students.  The weights used in this report are a
combination of household level and person level adjustment
factors.  In the NCVS, adjustments were made to account for both
household and person non-interviews.  Additional factors were
then applied to reduce the variance of the estimate by
correcting for differences between the sample distribution of
age, race, and sex, and known population distributions of these
characteristics.  The resulting weights were assigned to all
interviewed households and persons on the file.

A special weighting adjustment was then performed for the SCS
respondents.  Non-interview adjustment factors were computed to
adjust for SCS interview non-response.  This non-interview
factor was then applied to the NCVS person level weight for each
SCS respondent.

---------------------------------
 Standard Errors
---------------------------------

The sample of students selected for each SCS is just one of many
possible samples that could have been selected.  It is possible
that estimates from a given SCS student sample may differ from
estimates that would have been produced from other student
samples.  This type of variability is called sampling error, or
the standard error, because it arises from using a sample of
students rather than all students.

The standard error is a measure of the variability of a
parameter estimate.  It indicates how much variation there is in
the population of possible estimates of a parameter for a given
sample size.  The probability that a complete census count would
differ from the sample estimate by less than 1 standard error is
about 68 percent.  The chance that the difference would be less
than 1.65 standard errors is about 90 percent, and that the
difference would be less than 1.96 standard errors, about 95
percent.  Standard errors for the percentage estimates are
presented in the appendix tables. 

Standard errors are typically developed assuming that a sample
is drawn purely at random.  The sample for the SCS was not a
simple random sample, however.  In order to help adjust the
standard errors to account for the sample design, the Census
Bureau developed three generalized variance function (gvf)
constant parameters.  The gvf represents the curve fitted to the
individual standard errors calculated using the Jackknife
Repeated Replication technique. ***Footnote 9.  A more detailed
description of the generalized variance function constant
parameters developed for the NCVS and SCS can be found in the
previously cited report "Criminal Victimization in the United
States, 1994".***  The three constant parameters (a, b, and c)
derived from the curve fitting process were:

Year          a          b        c 
1989   0.00001559      3,108    0.000 
1995   0.00006269      2,278    1.804

To adjust the standard errors associated with percentages, the
following formula is used:

standard error of p = (please see printed verison for formula)

where p is the percentage of interest expressed as a proportion
and y is the size of the population to which the percentage
applies.  Once the standard error of the proportion is
estimated, multiply it by 100 to make it applicable to the
percentage.

To calculate the adjusted standard errors associated with
population counts, the following applies:

     standard error of x = (please see printed verison for formula)

where x is the estimated number of students who experienced a
given event (e.g., violent victimization).

-----------------------------
Statistical Tests 
-----------------------------

For the most part, statistical tests done for this report rely
on Student's t tests which are designed to determine if
estimates are statistically different from one another.  The
only exception occurred when student characteristic variables
had more than two categories and all of the categories could be
rank ordered.  These variables were student's age, grade, and
household income.  When comparing these items to indicators of
crime, a different set of tests was used. Initially, to
determine if a relationship existed between these demographic
indicators and the crime indicators, adjusted chi-square tests
were employed.  If a statistically significant relationship was
found, trend tests (weighted logistic regressions) were used to
estimate its strength and direction.  

Differences discussed in this report are significant at the 95
percent confidence level or higher.  Where a lack of difference
is noted, the significance of the difference is below this
threshold.  Differences between pairs of estimated percentages
were tested using the Student's t statistic.  This t statistic
can be used to test the likelihood that the differences between
two estimates are larger than would be expected simply due to
sampling error.

To compare the difference between two independent percentage
estimates, Student's t is calculated as:    

     (please see printed verison for formula)


where p1 and p2 are the estimated percentages to be compared
and se1 and se2 are their corresponding adjusted standard errors.

As the number of comparisons on the same set of data increases,
the likelihood that the t value for one or more of the
comparisons will exceed 1.96 simply due to sampling error
increases.  For a single comparison, there is a 5 percent chance
that the t value will exceed 1.96 due to sampling error.  For
five tests, the risk of getting at least one t value over 1.96
due to sampling error increases to 23 percent.  To compensate
for the problem when making multiple comparisons on the same set
of data, Bonferroni adjustments were made.

Bonferroni adjustments essentially deflate the alpha value
needed to obtain a given confidence interval.  Bonferroni
adjustment factors are determined by establishing the number of
comparisons that could be made for a given set of data.  The
alpha value for a given level of confidence is then divided by
the number of possible comparisons.  The resulting alpha value
is then compared to the table of t statistics to find the t
value associated with that alpha value.

The effect of modifying comparison of estimates to account for
standard errors and Bonferroni adjustments is to occasionally
make apparent differences statistically not significant.  This
helps explain why differences of roughly the same magnitude are
statistically significant in some instances while not in others.

Because of the computational complexity associated with weighted
logistic regressions (used as trend tests in this report),
chi-square tests were used to determine if a relationship
existed between student's age, grade in school, or household
income and indicators of crime at school.  If a chi-square test
indicated a significant relationship, a follow-up test was
conducted using a weighted logistic regression.

Fellegi adjustments were applied to the chi-square tests to
account for effects of standard errors on the estimates.
***Footnote 10. Fellegi, I.P.  "Approximate Tests of
Independence and Goodness of Fit Based on Stratified Multistage
Samples."  Journal of the American Statistical Association,
1980, pp. 273-279.***  A Fellegi adjustment is typically
developed in two stages.  The first stage adjusts the variances
associated with an estimated cell percentage as follows:

    adjusted variance =(please see printed verison for formula)

where p1 is the estimated weighted percent of cases in a given
cell and var1 is the variance of this estimate.  N denotes the
unweighted population total.  Before Fellegi adjustments were
made, the cell variances were modified to account for the sample
design using the gvf parameters.

Once the variances are adjusted, they are summed across all
cells and the resulting sum is then divided by the number of
cells.  The chi-square estimate based on the weighted cell
percentages is then divided by this quotient before determining
if it is significant.  The equation for the adjustment is: 

(please see printed verison for formula)

where I is the number of cells in the cross tabulation and n is
the unweighted sample size.

Weighted logistic regressions used in this report were also
developed in several stages.  The crime report indicators were
dichotomized such that students who gave an affirmative response
to the indicator being tested (e.g. responding yes to knowing
another student who had brought a gun to school) were coded as
ones and all other students were coded as zeros. ***Footnote 11.
Note that the crime indicators in the chi-square tests were
dichotomized in the same manner. ***

The resulting logistic regression models took the following form:

(please see printed verison for formula)

where Y is the dependent variable and X is the independent
variable ((1 is the intercept term and ui is the residual term).
To assure that particular categories of the independent
variable were not given undue weight, the entire equation was
weighted by the inverse of the estimated variance of the
independent variable in the model as follows:

(please see printed verison for formula)

where (i2 represents the estimated
variance term.

----------------------------------------------------------------------
Appendix A:  Tables of Standard Errors
----------------------------------------------------------------------


----------------------------------------------------------------------
Table 1a.  Standard errors for the percent of students ages 12 through 19 reporting criminal victimization at school, by selected characteristics and
perceptions of conditions at school:  1989 and 1995

                                                                    Year

Student                                         1989                                          1995
characteristics                       Victimization                                        Victimization
and perceptions of              Any/1        Violent/2     Property/3           Any/1        Violent/2     Property/3
conditions at school            s.e.           s.e.           s.e.              s.e.           s.e.           s.e.


Total                             0.4            0.2            0.4             0.5            0.2            0.4

Characteristics

Student sex
  Male                            0.6            0.4            0.5             0.7            0.4            0.6
  Female                          0.6            0.2            0.6             0.6            0.3            0.6

Student race/ethnicity
  White, non-Hispanic             0.5            0.3            0.5             0.6            0.3            0.5
  Black, non-Hispanic             1.1            0.5            1.0             1.1            0.6            1.0
  Hispanic                        1.4            0.8            1.2             1.1            0.6            0.9
  Other, non-Hispanic             2.2            0.9            2.1             1.9            1.0            1.7

Student age
  12                              1.2            0.7            1.1             1.2            0.7            1.0
  13                              1.2            0.6            1.1             1.1            0.7            1.0
  14                              1.2            0.6            1.1             1.1            0.6            1.0
  15                              1.1            0.6            1.0             1.0            0.5            1.0
  16                              1.0            0.5            0.9             1.0            0.5            0.8
  17                              0.9            0.4            0.9             0.9            0.4            0.9
  18                              1.2            0.6            1.1             1.0            0.5            0.8
  19                              2.6            1.2            2.6             2.5            1.5            2.1

Student grade
  Sixth                           1.6            1.0            1.5             1.4            0.9            0.5
  Seventh                         1.2            0.7            1.1             1.2            0.7            1.1
  Eighth                          1.1            0.6            1.0             1.1            0.6            1.0
  Ninth                           1.1            0.6            1.1             1.1            0.6            1.0
  Tenth                           1.1            0.5            1.0             1.0            0.5            0.9
  Eleventh                        0.9            0.5            0.9             0.9            0.4            0.8
  Twelfth                         0.9            0.3            0.8             0.9            0.4            0.8
  Other                           2.9            2.1            2.5             2.9            1.9            2.3

Student household income
  Less than $7,500                1.4            0.7            1.3             1.6            1.0            1.4
  $7,500-$9,999                   2.2            1.4            1.9             2.0            1.1            1.8
  $10,000-$14,999                 1.5            0.8            1.4             1.5            0.9            1.3
  $15,000-$24,999                 1.0            0.5            0.9             1.1            0.6            1.0
  $25,000-$29,999                 1.4            0.8            1.3             1.6            0.9            1.4
  $30,000-$49,999                 0.8            0.4            0.8             0.8            0.4            0.7
  $50,000+                        1.0            0.5            1.0             0.8            0.4            0.7
  Not ascertained                 1.3            0.6            1.2             1.3            0.7            1.2

Student place of residence
  Central city                    0.8            0.4            0.8             0.8            0.5            0.7
  Suburbs                         0.6            0.3            0.6             0.6            0.4            0.6
  Nonmetropolitan area            0.8            0.4            0.8             0.8            0.4            0.8

Student school type
  Public                          1.4            0.7            1.3             0.5            0.3            0.5
  Private                         1.4            0.7            1.3             1.2            0.5            1.1
  Not ascertained                 2.8            1.5            2.5               +              +              +

Perceptions of conditions at school

Student reports of street gangs in school
  Yes                             1.3            0.8            1.2             1.0            0.6            0.8
  No                              0.5            0.2            0.4             0.6            0.2            0.5
  Don't know if present           1.8            0.9            1.7             1.0            0.6            0.9
  Not ascertained                 5.1            2.5            5.1             2.9            2.2            1.9

Student report of knowing a student who brought a gun to school    
  Yes                              --             --             --             1.4            0.9            1.3
  No                               --             --             --             0.5            0.2            0.4
  Not ascertained                  --             --             --             2.7            1.9            2.0

Student reports of seeing a student with a gun at school
  Yes                              --             --             --             2.2            1.5            2.1
  No                               --             --             --             0.5            0.2            0.4
  Do not know                      --             --             --               +              +              +
  Not ascertained                  --             --             --             3.2            2.1            2.4

Student reports of drug availability: marijuana, cocaine, crack, upper/downers  /4
  Any available                   0.6            0.3            0.5             0.6            0.3            0.5
  None available                  1.1            0.5            1.0             1.0            0.4            0.9
  Do not know/Not   
  ascertained                     0.7            0.4            0.7             0.8            0.5            0.7

-- Question is not asked in the 1989 School Crime Supplement.
+ Fewer than 30 sample cases.
 
1/  Any victimization is a combination of reported violent and property victimization.  
If the student reported an incident of either, he or she is counted as having experienced 
any victimization.  If the respondent reported having experienced both, he or she is 
only counted once under "Any victimization"

2/  Violent victimization includes physical attacks or taking property from the 
student directly by force, weapons, or threats.

3/  Property victimization includes theft of property from a students desk, locker, 
or other locations.

4/  In both the 1989 and 1995 SCS, students were asked about the availability of marijuana, 
cocaine, crack, and uppers/downers.  If students reported any of these to be easy or hard 
to obtain at school, they are included in the "Any available" category.  If they said each 
was impossible to obtain, they are counted in the "None available" category.  If students 
are not included in the first two categories, they are included in the "Do not know/Not 
ascertained" category.

SOURCE:  U.S. Department of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics, School Crime Supplement 
to the National Crime Victimization Survey, spring 1989 and spring 1995. 
----------------------------------------------------------------------


----------------------------------------------------------------------
Table 2a. Standard errors for the percent of students ages 12 through 19 
reporting the availability of drugs at school, by selected 
characteristics and perceptions of conditions at school:  
1989 and 1995
                                              Year
                                1989             1995             1995
                                                             Drug
Student                    Drug             Drug             availability:
characteristics            availability:    availability:    1989 and 1995
and perceptions of         1989 items/1     1989 items/1     items/1
conditions at school       s.e.             s.e.             s.e.


Total                            0.6              0.4              0.8

Characteristics

Student sex
  Male                           0.8              1.0              1.0
  Female                         0.8              1.0              1.0

Student race/ethnicity
  White, non-Hispanic            0.7              0.9              0.9
  Black, non-Hispanic            1.5              1.5              1.5
  Hispanic                       1.9              1.7              1.7
  Other, non-Hispanic            3.1              2.8              2.8

Student age
  12                             1.5              1.5              1.6
  13                             1.5              1.6              1.6
  14                             1.5              1.5              1.5
  15                             1.5              1.4              1.4
  16                             1.4              1.4              1.4
  17                             1.3              1.4              1.4
  18                             1.8              1.8              1.7
  19                             5.0              4.1              4.1

Student grade
  Sixth                          2.0              1.8              1.9
  Seventh                        1.6              1.6              1.6
  Eighth                         1.5              1.6              1.6
  Ninth                          1.4              1.4              1.4
  Tenth                          1.5              1.4              1.4
  Eleventh                       1.3              1.4              1.3
  Twelfth                        1.3              1.4              1.4
  Other                          4.0              4.6              4.7

Student household income
  Less than $7,500               1.9              2.3              2.3
  $7,500-$9,999                  3.0              3.0              3.0
  $10,000-$14,999                2.0              2.2              2.2
  $15,000-$24,999                1.4              1.6              1.6
  $25,000-$29,999                2.0              2.1              2.1
  $30,000-$49,999                1.1              1.2              1.2
  $50,000+                       1.4              1.2              1.2
  Not ascertained                1.9              1.9              1.8

Student place of residence
  Central city                   1.1              1.2              1.2
  Suburbs                        0.8              1.0              1.0
  Nonmetropolitan area           1.1              1.2              1.2

Student school type
  Public                         0.6              0.8              0.8
  Private                        2.0              2.0              2.0
  Not ascertained                4.1                +                +

Perceptions of conditions at school

Student reports of street gangs in school
  Yes                            1.4              1.0              1.0
  No                             0.6              1.0              0.9
  Do not know                    2.6              1.7              1.7
  Not ascertained                9.4              4.5              4.5

Student reports of knowing a student who brought a gun to school    
  Yes                             --              1.2              1.2
  No                              --              0.8              0.8
  Not ascertained                 --              4.7              4.7

Student reports of seeing a student with a gun at school
  Yes                             --              1.5              1.4
  No                              --              0.8              0.8
  Do not know                     --                +                +
  Not ascertained                 --              4.9              4.9

Student reports of being the victim of any violent or property crime at 
school
  Yes                            1.4              1.5              1.4
  No                             0.6              0.8              0.8
  Not ascertained                  +              4.4              4.4

Student reports of being the victim of any violent crime at school /2

  Yes                            2.8              2.5              2.4
  No                             0.6              0.8              0.8
  Not ascertained                  +              4.8              4.8

Student reports of being the victim of any property crime at school /3

  Yes                            1.5              1.6              1.6
  No                             0.6              0.8              0.8
  Not ascertained                9.6              4.7              4.7

-- Question is not asked in the 1989 School Crime Supplement.
+ Fewer than 30 sample cases.
 
1/ In the 1989 School Crime Supplement, students are asked 
about the availability of marijuana, cocaine, crack, uppers and downers, 
and other illegal drugs.  In the 1995 School Crime Supplement, students 
are asked about the availability of these drugs and were also asked about 
the availability of PCP, LSD, and heroin. When comparing across the two 
years, only those drugs that are listed on both surveys are counted (i.e. 
marijuana, cocaine, crack, and uppers and downers).  This list of drugs is 
referred to as "Drug availability: 1989 definition". Other illegal drugs 
are excluded from the 1989 definition used in cross-year analyses.  When 
not making comparisons across the two surveys and focusing solely on the 
1995 estimates, all of the 1995 response categories are counted (this 
approach is referred to as "Drug availability: 1995 definition"). 

2/  Violent victimization includes physical attacks or taking 
property from the student directly by force, weapons, or threats.

3/  Property victimization includes theft of property from a 
student's desk, locker, or other locations.

NOTE:  s.e. is standard error.

SOURCE:  U.S. Department of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics, School 
Crime Supplement to the National Crime Victimization Survey, spring 1989 
and spring 1995. 
------------------------------------------------------------------------

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Table 3a.  Standard errors for the percent of students ages 12 through 19 reporting the 
difficulty of obtaining various drugs at school: 1989 and 1995

                                                                           Year
                                        1989                                                          1995
                                   Availability                                                  Availability
                                                 Don't      Don't                                              Don't      Don't
                  Easy to   Hard to  Impossible  know if    know     Not       Easy to     Hard to  Impossible know if    know     Not
                  Obtain    Obtain   to Obtain   available  drug     ascert.   Obtain      Obtain   to Obtain  available  drug     ascert.
Drug              s.e.      s.e.      s.e.         s.e.      s.e.      s.e.     s.e.         s.e.      s.e.       s.e.     s.e.      s.e.
Marijuana            0.6       0.5       0.4       0.5       0.1       0.0         0.7       0.6       0.6       0.5       0.1       0.1
Crack                0.3       0.6       0.5       0.6       0.2       0.0         0.4       0.7       0.7       0.6       0.1       0.1
Other forms of   
   cocaine           0.4       0.6       0.5       0.6       0.1       0.0         0.4       0.7       0.7       0.6       0.1       0.1
Uppers/downers       0.5       0.5       0.4       0.6       0.3       0.0         0.6       0.6       0.6       0.6       0.4       0.1
LSD                   --        --        --        --        --        --         0.4       0.7       0.7       0.6       0.3       0.1
PCP                   --        --        --        --        --        --         0.3       0.6       0.7       0.6       0.4       0.1
Heroin                --        --        --        --        --        --         0.3       0.7       0.8       0.6       0.2       0.1
Other Drugs          0.4       0.5       0.5       0.6       0.2       0.1         0.4       0.7       0.7       0.6       0.1       0.1

-- Question is not asked in the 1989 School Crime Supplement.

NOTE:  s.e. is standard error.
 
SOURCE:  U.S. Department of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics, School Crime 
Supplement to the National Crime Victimization Survey, spring 1989 and spring 1995.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
Table 4a. Standard errors for percent of students ages 12 through 19 reporting the presence of gangs at school, by selected characteristics and
perceptions of  conditions at school:  1989 and 1995
                                                      Year

                                 1989                              1995
Student                     Street Gangs in School            Street Gangs in School
characteristics                         Do not   Not                         Do not   Not
and perceptions of      Yes      No     know     ascert.     Yes      No     know     ascert.
conditions at school    s.e.    s.e.    s.e.     s.e.        s.e.     s.e.    s.e.    s.e.

Total                     0.4     0.5     0.3     0.1         0.7     0.8     0.5     0.1

Characteristics

Student sex
  Male                    0.6     0.7     0.3     0.1         0.9     1.0     0.6     0.2
  Female                  0.6     0.7     0.4     0.1         0.9     1.0     0.6     0.1

Student race/ethnicity
  White, non-Hispanic     0.4     0.5     0.3     0.1         0.7     0.9     0.5     0.1
  Black, non-Hispanic     1.2     1.3     0.8     0.2         1.5     1.6     1.0     0.4
  Hispanic                1.8     1.9     0.9     0.3         1.7     1.7     1.1     0.3
  Other, non-Hispanic     2.7     3.0     1.7       #         2.6     2.8     2.2     0.6

Student age
  12                      1.0     1.2     0.6     0.2         1.2     1.5     1.0     0.3
  13                      1.1     1.2     0.7     0.1         1.3     1.6     1.0     0.2
  14                      1.2     1.3     0.7     0.2         1.4     1.6     1.0     0.2
  15                      1.1     1.3     0.7     0.2         1.4     1.6     1.0     0.3
  16                      1.1     1.2     0.6     0.1         1.4     1.6     1.0     0.2
  17                      1.1     1.3     0.7     0.2         1.5     1.7     1.1     0.2
  18                      1.5     1.7     0.9     0.5         1.9     2.1     1.3     0.4
  19                      4.3     5.2     3.3     1.4         4.1     4.5     3.2       #

Student grade
  Sixth                   1.2     1.5     0.9     0.3         1.3     1.8     1.3     0.4
  Seventh                 1.2     1.3     0.6     0.1         1.3     1.6     1.1     0.2
  Eighth                  1.0     1.2     0.7     0.2         1.4     1.6     0.9     0.2
  Ninth                   1.2     1.3     0.7     0.2         1.4     1.6     1.0     0.3
  Tenth                   1.2     1.3     0.7     0.1         1.5     1.6     1.0     0.2
  Eleventh                1.1     1.3     0.7     0.2         1.5     1.6     1.0     0.2
  Twelfth                 1.1     1.2     0.6     0.3         1.5     1.7     1.1     0.3
  Other                   2.5     3.4     2.4     1.2         3.4     4.3     2.6     1.4

Student household income
  Less than $7,500        1.4     1.7     1.0     0.3         2.2     2.3     1.6     0.4
  $7,500-$9,999           2.5     2.9     1.8     0.0         2.8     3.0     2.4     1.0
  $10,000-$14,999         1.7     1.8     1.0     0.3         2.0     2.2     1.5     0.2
  $15,000-$24,999         1.1     1.2     0.6     0.2         1.5     1.7     1.1     0.4
  $25,000-$29,999         1.5     1.7     0.9     0.3         2.0     2.2     1.3     0.3
  $30,000-$49,999         0.8     0.9     0.5     0.2         1.1     1.3     0.8     0.2
  $50,000+                0.9     1.1     0.6     0.1         1.0     1.2     0.8     0.2
  Not ascertained         1.5     1.7     0.9     0.9         1.7     1.9     1.2     0.4

Student place of residence
  Central city            1.0     1.1     0.6     0.2         1.2     1.2     0.8     0.2
  Suburbs                 0.6     0.7     0.4     0.1         0.9     1.0     0.6     0.1
  Nonmetropolitan area    0.6     0.8     0.5     0.1         1.0     1.2     0.8     0.2

Student school type
  Public                  0.5     0.5     0.3     0.1         0.7     0.8     0.5     0.1
  Private                 0.8     1.1     0.7     0.2         0.9     1.4     0.9     0.2
  Not ascertained         0.8     3.7     2.4     1.7           +       +       +       +

Perceptions of conditions at school

Student reports of being the victim of any violent or property crime at school
  Yes                     1.3     1.4     0.7     0.2         1.6     1.6     1.0     0.2
  No                      0.4     0.5     0.3     0.0         0.7     0.8     0.5     0.1
  Not ascertained           +       +       +       +         2.0     2.8     2.5     4.3

Student reports of being the victim of any violent crime at school/ 1
  Yes                     3.0     3.1     1.4     0.3         2.7     2.6     1.7     0.5
  No                      0.4     0.5     0.3     0.0         0.7     0.8     0.5     0.1
  Not ascertained           +       +       +       +         1.9     3.5     2.9     4.9

Student reports of being the victim of any property crime at school  / 2
  Yes                     1.4     1.5     0.8     0.2         1.7     1.8     1.0     0.2
  No                      0.4     0.5     0.3     0.0         0.7     0.8     0.5     0.1
  Not ascertained         4.9     9.7     4.8     9.4         2.6     3.6     3.0     5.2

Student reports of knowing a student who brought a gun to school    
  Yes                      --      --      --      --         1.7     1.6     0.9     0.2
  No                       --      --      --      --         0.7     0.8     0.5     0.1
  Not ascertained          --      --      --      --         3.2     4.4     2.9     4.8

Student reports of seeing a student with a gun at school
  Yes                      --      --      --      --         2.4     2.2     1.1     0.0
  No                       --      --      --      --         0.7     0.8     0.5     0.1
  Do not know              --      --      --      --        10.5    11.7    11.5     5.5
  Not ascertained          --      --      --      --           +       +       +       +

Student reports of drug availability: marijuana, cocaine, crack, upper/downers /3
  Any available           0.6     0.6     0.3     0.1         0.8     0.9     0.5     0.1
  None available          1.0     1.0     0.5     0.2         1.0     1.4     0.9     0.2
  Do not know/Not   
  ascertained             0.8     1.0     0.5     0.1         1.1     1.5     1.2     0.5

-- Question is not asked in the 1989 School Crime Supplement.
+ Fewer than 30 sample cases.
# No cases are reported in this cell, although the event defined by this cell could have
reported by some students with these characteristics had a different sample been drawn.

1/ Violent victimization includes physical attacks or taking property from the 
student directly by force, weapons, or threats.

2/ Property victimization includes theft of property from a students desk, locker, 
or other locations.

3/  In both the 1989 and 1995 SCS, students were asked about the availability of 
marijuana, cocaine, crack, and uppers/downers.  If students reported any of these to be 
easy or hard to obtain at school, they are included in the "Any available" category.  
If they said each was not available, they are counted in the "None available" category. 
If students are not included in the first two categories, they are included in the 
"Do not know/Not ascertained" category.

NOTE:  s.e. is standard error.

SOURCE:  U.S. Department of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics, School Crime Supplement
to the National Crime Victimization Survey, spring 1989 and spring 1995. 

----------------------------------------------------------------------

----------------------------------------------------------------------
Table 5a. Standard errors for the percent of students ages 12
through 19 reporting guns at school, by selected 
characteristics and perceptions of conditions at 
school:  1995
                                          Year
                                             1995
                                          Knew
Student                                   student     Saw student
characteristics             Took gun      with gun    with gun
and perceptions of         to school      at school   at school
conditions at school          s.e.        s.e.        s.e.

Total                             0.0         0.5         0.3

Characteristics

Student sex
  Male                            0.0         0.6         0.4
  Female                          0.0         0.6         0.4

Student race/ethnicity
  White, non-Hispanic             0.0         0.5         0.3
  Black, non-Hispanic             0.1         1.1         0.8
  Hispanic                        0.1         1.0         0.8
  Other, non-Hispanic               #         1.7         1.1

Student age
  12                                #         0.7         0.4
  13                              0.1         0.9         0.5
  14                              0.1         1.0         0.6
  15                              0.1         1.1         0.7
  16                                #         1.1         0.7
  17                                #         1.2         0.8
  18                              0.2         1.4         0.9
  19                                #         3.2         2.2

Student grade
  Sixth                             #         0.8         0.5
  Seventh                           #         0.8         0.5
  Eighth                          0.1         0.9         0.2
  Ninth                           0.1         1.1         0.7
  Tenth                           0.1         1.0         0.7
  Eleventh                          #         1.1         0.8
  Twelfth                           #         1.2         0.8
  Other                             #         2.1         1.9

Student household income
  Less than $7,500                  #         1.4         0.9
  $7,500-$9,999                     #         1.9         1.6
  $10,000-$14,999                   #         1.4         1.0
  $15,000-$24,999                 0.2         1.1         0.8
  $25,000-$29,999                   #         1.4         0.9
  $30,000-$49,999                 0.1         0.8         0.5
  $50,000+                          #         0.8         0.4
  Not ascertained                   #         1.2         0.7

Student place of residence
  Central city                      #         0.8         0.6
  Suburbs                         0.0         0.6         0.4
  Nonmetropolitan area            0.0         0.7         0.5

Student school type
  Public                          0.0         0.5         0.3
  Private                         0.1         0.7         0.5
  Not ascertained                   #           +           +

Perceptions of conditions at school

Student reports of street gangs at school
  Present                         0.1         1.0         0.7
  Not present                     0.0         0.4         0.2
  Do not know if present          0.1         0.9         0.4
  Not ascertained                   #         2.3           #

Student reports of being the victim of any violent or property
 crime at school
  Yes                             0.1         1.3         1.0
  No                              0.0         0.5         0.3
  Not ascertained                   #         0.0         0.0

Student reports of being the victim of any violent crime at 
school /1
  Yes                             0.4         2.3         1.9
  No                              0.0         0.5         0.3
  Not ascertained                   #         0.0         0.0

Student reports of being the victim of any property crime at 
school  /2
  Yes                             0.1         1.4         1.0
  No                              0.0         0.5         0.3
  Not ascertained                   #         0.0         0.0

Student reports of the drug availability: marijuana, cocaine, 
crack, upper/downers  /3
  Any available                   0.0         0.6         0.4
  None available                    #         0.5         0.2
  Do not know/Not   
  ascertained                       #         0.6         0.3

+ Estimate not reported because the row denominator contains less
than 30 cases.
# No cases are reported in this cell, although the event defined
by this cell could have been reported by some students with these
characteristics had a different sample been drawn.

1/ Violent victimization includes physical attacks or
taking property from the student directly by force, weapons, or
threats.

2/ Property victimization includes theft of property 
from a students desk, locker, or other locations.

3/ In both the 1989 and 1995 SCS, students were asked 
about the availability of marijuana, cocaine, crack, and upper/
downers.  If students reported any of these to be easy or hard to
obtain at school, they are included in the "Any available" 
category.  If they said each was not available, they are count
in the "None available" category.  If students are not included
in the first two categories, they are included in the "Do not 
know/Not ascertained" category.

NOTE:  s.e. is standard error.

SOURCE:  U.S. Department of Justice, Bureau of Justice 
Statistics, School Crime Supplement to the National Crime
Victimization Survey, spring 1995. 

----------------------------------------------------------------------
----------------------------------------------------------------------
Appendix
B Questionnaires for the School Crime Supplements to the
National Crime Victimization Survey:  1989 and 1995
----------------------------------------------------------------------
 
mz 
4/13/98
 