U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Programs
Bureau of Justice Statistics

-------------------------------------------------------
This file is text only without graphics and many of the
tables. A Zip archive of the tables in this report in
spreadsheet format (.csv) and the full report including
tables and graphics in .pdf format are available on BJS
website at: 
http://www.bjs.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbdetail&iid=5559

This report is one in a series. More recent editions 
may be available. To view a list of all in the series 
go to http://bjs.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbse&sid=63
-------------------------------------------------------

**************
Statistical Tables
**************

Survey of Sexual Violence in Juvenile Correctional Facilities, 
2007–12 - Statistical Tables

Ramona R. Rantala and Allen J. Beck, BJS Statisticians

************************************************************
In 2012, juvenile correctional administrators reported 865 
allegations of sexual victimization in state juvenile facilities. 
Of these, 104 were substantiated based on follow-up 
investigation. More than half (61%) of all allegations involved 
staff sexual misconduct or staff sexual harassment directed 
toward a juvenile or youthful offender. Administrators of state 
juvenile correctional facilities reported slightly more than 
4,900 allegations from 2007 to 2012, including 906 allegations of 
nonconsensual acts, 1,235 allegations of abusive sexual contact, 
2,307 allegations of staff sexual misconduct, and 474 allegations 
of staff sexual harassment.

Data are from the Bureau of Justice Statistics’ (BJS) Survey of 
Sexual Violence (SSV), which was renamed the Survey of Sexual 
Victimization in 2013. Each year, the survey includes all state 
juvenile systems and a sample of locally and privately operated 
juvenile facilities. In 2008, juvenile correctional facilities in 
Indian country were added to the survey. (See Methodology for 
more information about the systems and facilities from which data 
were collected.)

On behalf of BJS, staff of the U.S. Census Bureau mailed survey 
forms to correctional administrators in state juvenile systems, 
juvenile correctional facilities in Indian country, and a sample 
of locally and privately operated juvenile correctional 
facilities. The administrators provided summary counts of 
allegations and substantiated incidents for each survey year. 
They also completed a separate form for each substantiated 
incident, providing details about the victim, perpetrator, and 
circumstances surrounding the incident. Administrators were given 
the option of mailing back a completed form or completing it on 
the Internet. Data collection forms can be accessed on the BJS 
website.

The SSV has annually collected official records on allegations 
and substantiated incidents of youth-on-youth and staff-on-youth 
sexual victimization since 2004. Past reports of sexual 
victimization in juvenile facilities include--

* Sexual Violence Reported by Juvenile Correctional Authorities, 
2005–06 (NCJ 215337, BJS web, July 2008).

* Sexual Violence Reported by Correctional Authorities, 2004 (NCJ 
210333, BJS web, July 2005).

The SSV is one of a number of BJS data collections that are 
conducted to meet the mandates of the Prison Rape Elimination Act 
of 2003 (P.L. 108-79). BJS also collects data on the incidence 
and prevalence of sexual victimization directly from victims 
through surveys of youth held in state juvenile systems and 
locally or privately operated facilities that hold adjudicated 
youth under state contract. Past reports based on victim self-
reports include--

* Sexual Victimization in Juvenile Facilities Reported by Youth, 
2012 (NCJ 241708, BJS web, June 2013).

* Sexual Victimization in Juvenile Facilities Reported by Youth, 
2008–09 (NCJ 228416, BJS web, January 2010).

Each sexual act, as defined by BJS, is classified by the 
perpetrators who carried it out (i.e., inmate or staff) and the 
type of act. Administrators provided counts for each of the four 
types of sexual victimization that occurred during the prior 
calendar year: youth-on-youth nonconsensual sexual acts, youth-
on-youth abusive sexual contacts, staff sexual misconduct, and 
staff sexual harassment. (See text box, Defining sexual 
victimization.)

The statistical tables that follow provide counts of allegations 
and substantiated incidents by type of victimization for every 
jurisdiction and facility in the 2007–12 surveys. Each table 
includes a measure of population size (based on the number of 
youth held at yearend) as a basis of comparison; however, the 
survey results should not be used to rank systems or facilities. 
Variations in the number of allegations and substantiated 
incidents may reflect differences in definitions and reporting 
criteria as well as variations in procedures for recording 
allegations and in the thoroughness of subsequent investigations.

These tables accompany the BJS report, Sexual Victimization 
Reported by Juvenile Correctional Authorities, 2007–12 (NCJ 
249145, BJS web, January 2016), which provides national estimates 
and rates of sexual victimization and an in-depth examination of 
substantiated incidents covering the number and characteristics 
of victims and perpetrators, location, time of day, nature of the 
injuries, impact on the victims, and sanctions imposed on the 
perpetrators.

*******************************************************
******************************
Defining sexual victimization
******************************

To define sexual victimization under the Prison Rape Elimination 
Act of 2003 (P.L. 108-79), the Bureau of Justice Statistics uses 
uniform definitions that classify each sexual act by the 
perpetrator who carried out the incident (i.e., youth or staff) 
and the type of act.

Youth-on-youth sexual victimization involves sexual contact with 
a person without his or her consent or with a person who cannot 
consent or refuse. 

Nonconsensual sexual acts are the most serious victimizations, 
and include--

* contact between the penis and the vagina or the penis and the 
anus including penetration, however slight; or

* contact between the mouth and the penis, vagina, or anus; or

* penetration of the anal or genital opening of another person by 
a hand, finger, or other object.

Abusive sexual contacts are less serious victimizations, and are 
categorized by--

* intentional touching, either directly or through the clothing, 
of the genitalia, anus, groin, breast, inner thigh, or buttocks 
of any person; and

* the intent to sexually exploit (rather than to harm or 
debilitate).

Staff-on-youth sexual victimization includes both consensual and 
nonconsensual acts perpetrated on a youth by staff. Staff 
includes an employee, volunteer, contractor, official visitor, or 
other agency representative. Family, friends, and other visitors 
are excluded.

Staff sexual misconduct includes any behavior or act of a sexual 
nature directed toward a juvenile or youthful offender by staff, 
including romantic relationships. Such acts include—

* intentional touching of the genitalia, anus, groin, breast, 
inner thigh, or buttocks with the intent to abuse, arouse, or 
gratify sexual desire; or

* completed, attempted, threatened, or requested sexual acts; or
occurrences of indecent exposure, invasion of privacy, or staff 
voyeurism for sexual gratification.

Staff sexual harassment includes repeated verbal statements or 
comments of a sexual nature to a juvenile or youthful offender by 
staff. Such statements include--

* demeaning references to gender or derogatory comments about 
body or clothing; or

* repeated profane or obscene language or gestures. 
*********************************************************

****************
Methodology
****************

Sampling designs
******************

The Survey of Sexual Violence (SSV), conducted each year from 
2007 to 2012, included all state-operated juvenile residential 
placement facilities used to house juveniles and youthful 
offenders, regardless of age or reason for placement. Residential 
placement facilities include detention centers; training schools; 
long-term secure facilities; reception or diagnostic centers; 
group homes or halfway houses; boot camps; ranches; forestry 
camps, wilderness or marine programs, or farms; runaway or 
homeless shelters; and residential treatment centers for 
juveniles.

The survey relied on the Juvenile Residential Facility Census 
(JRFC) and the Census of Juveniles in Residential Placement 
(CJRP), which the Office of Juvenile Justice and Delinquency 
Prevention conducts in alternating years. The JRFC in 2006, 2008, 
and 2010 was used as a sampling frame for the SSV in 2007, 2009, 
and 2011. The CJRP in 2007, 2010, and 2011 was used for the SSV 
in 2008, 2010, and 2012.

In each year, the SSV samples included all facilities within the 
juvenile correctional systems operated by the 50 states and the 
District of Columbia. Based on the JRFC and CJRP, the SSV 
included 501 state-operated juvenile facilities in 2007, 495 in 
2008, 473 in 2009, 450 in 2010, 450 in 2011, and 422 in 2012.  

In each year beginning in 2008, the survey also included all 
juvenile correctional facilities in Indian country. Based on the 
Bureau of Justice Statistics’ (BJS) Annual Survey of Jails in 
Indian Country, facilities that held only juveniles were 
determined to be eligible. There were 20 juvenile correctional 
facilities in Indian country in the SSV in 2008, 19 in 2009, 18 
in 2010, 16 in 2011, and 20 in 2012.

Separate samples of locally and privately operated facilities 
were drawn in accordance with the requirement that BJS draw a 
random sample, or other scientifically appropriate sample, of not 
less than 10 percent of all facilities covered under the Prison 
Rape Elimination Act of 2003 (P.L. 108-79). In each year, 330 
locally or privately operated facilities were selected.
In the 2012 survey, facilities were first grouped into locally 
operated facilities (623) and privately operated facilities 
(1,003) and sampled independently. Of the 330 nonstate facilities 
in the sample, 35 locally operated facilities and 48 privately 
operated facilities were selected because they were the largest 
in their respective states. 

The remaining sample was allocated proportionally across seven 
strata that were defined by type of facility and region: (1) 
detention facilities, Midwest; (2) detention facilities, 
Northeast; (3) detention facilities, South; (4) detention 
facilities, West; (5) local noncommitment facilities; (6) local 
commitment facilities; and (7) privately operated facilities.

Based on the number of persons assigned to beds, 17 nonstate 
detention facilities, 4 locally operated facilities, and 8 
private facilities were too large compared to other facilities in 
their strata and were selected with certainty. The remaining 
facilities were selected systematically with probabilities 
proportionate to size: 

* stratum 1: 23 (of 154) facilities

* stratum 2: 7 (of 64) facilities

* stratum 3: 22 (of 149) facilities

* stratum 4: 22 (of 106) facilities

* stratum 5: 3 (of 33) facilities

* stratum 6: 30 (of 141) facilities

* stratum 7: 111 (of 867) facilities.

Similar sampling procedures were employed in all other survey 
years for locally and privately operated juvenile facilities.

Survey participation
**********************

All state systems and the District of Columbia participated in 
the survey in the 6 years of data collection. 
During the 5 years of data collection in Indian country, three 
juvenile correctional facilities closed prior to data collection: 
two in 2008 and one in 2009. One facility did not respond to the 
survey:

* Gerald Tex Fox Justice Center Juvenile Detention, New Town, ND 
(2009 and 2011). 

During the 6 years, 14 locally operated juvenile correctional 
facilities closed prior to data collection: 1 in 2007, 5 in 2009, 
2 in 2010, 5 in 2011, and 1 in 2012. Two facilities did not 
respond to the survey:

* Camp Glenn Rockey, San Dimas, CA (2012) 
* Dorothy Kirby Center, Los Angeles, CA (2009).

During the 6 years, 29 privately operated juvenile correctional 
facilities closed prior to data collection: 9 in 2007, 8 in 2008, 
3 in 2009, 2 in 2010, and 7 in 2011. Eighteen facilities did not 
respond to the survey:

* Big Brothers Home Away from Home #2, Courtland, AL (2011)

* Bonnie Brae Farms, Liberty Corner, NJ (2009)

* Carmela House Girl’s Detention, Feura Bush, NY (2010)

* Catholic Charities Services (Parmadale), Cleveland, OH (2009)

* Eckerd Youth Development Center, Clearwater, FL (2009)

* Excelsior Youth Center, Aurora, CO (2007)

* Harmony Center, Baton Rouge, LA (2009)

* Harmony Hill School, Chepachet, RI (2007)

* High Point School, Pittsfield, MA (2008)

* Hilo Emergency Shelter, Hilo, HI (2007 and 2008)

* Madison Center for Children, South Bend, IN (2009)

* Newton Campus, Wichita, KS (2009)

* Pathways, Kern County, TX (2009)

* St Gabriel’s Hall, Audubon, PA (2010)

* Three Springs, Mountain Home, ID (2009, 2010, and 2011)

* Three Springs Residential Treatment Center, Courtland, AL 
(2008)

* Youth Bridge Therapeutic Group Home and Substance Abuse 
Program, Fayetteville, AL (2011)

* Youth Farm Campus, Peoria, IL (2009).

Reports of sexual victimization 
**********************************

Since BJS first developed uniform definitions of sexual 
victimization, juvenile correctional administrators have enhanced 
their abilities to report uniform data on sexual victimization. 
In 2012, administrators in all 49 state juvenile systems and the 
District of Columbia recorded both attempted and completed 
nonconsensual sexual acts (versus completed acts only). Arkansas 
did not report any state-level data after it placed all of its 
youth in locally or privately operated juvenile facilities.

Administrators in 47 state juvenile systems and the District of 
Columbia were also able to report allegations of abusive sexual 
contact separately from nonconsensual sexual acts, an increase of 
two systems since 2007. All state juvenile systems were able to 
report data on staff sexual misconduct using survey definitions. 
Two systems were unable to separate staff sexual harassment from 
misconduct, and one did not track allegations of staff sexual 
harassment in a central database. 

Administrators of locally operated juvenile facilities were less 
likely than state juvenile administrators to report sexual 
victimization based on the definitions provided. Nearly a fifth 
(18%) of the 148 locally operated juvenile correctional 
facilities selected in 2012 did not record abusive sexual 
contacts separately from the more serious nonconsensual sexual 
acts. One local juvenile correctional facility did not record 
allegations of abusive sexual contact, and one based counts of 
nonconsensual sexual acts on completed acts only. All local 
juvenile correctional facilities kept records on allegations of 
nonconsensual sexual acts, and all facilities counted all 
allegations of nonconsensual sexual acts (rather than counting 
only those that were substantiated).

Most administrators of local juvenile facilities were able to 
report staff-on-youth sexual victimization based on the SSV 
definitions. Administrators of all local facilities except one 
recorded allegations of staff sexual misconduct, while one 
recorded substantiated incidents only. One did not record 
allegations of staff sexual harassment. Sixteen percent were 
unable to separate allegations of staff sexual harassment from 
allegations of staff sexual misconduct.

Administrators of all sampled privately operated juvenile 
facilities except one kept records on allegations of both types 
of youth-on-youth sexual victimization (i.e., nonconsensual 
sexual acts and abusive sexual contact). A quarter of these 
administrators were unable to separate abusive sexual contact 
from nonconsensual sexual acts. One privately operated facility 
recorded only substantiated incidents of nonconsensual sexual 
acts, and two recorded completed acts only. All administrators of 
privately operated facilities kept records on staff-on-youth 
sexual abuse. Four recorded only substantiated incidents of staff 
sexual misconduct, and 32 (18%) were unable to separate staff 
sexual harassment from staff sexual misconduct.

The published counts in this report include systems and 
facilities that did not meet the SSV reporting standards. Systems 
and facilities that did not meet the reporting criteria are noted 
in the tables.

Companion BJS report on sexual victimization 
**********************************************

National estimates are provided in a companion report, Sexual 
Victimization Reported by Juvenile Correctional Authorities, 
2007–12 (NCJ 249145, BJS web, January 2016). In each year, survey 
responses were weighted to produce national estimates for all 
locally and privately operated juvenile facilities.

The companion report further aggregates the weighted data for the 
6 years to provide detailed estimates of the number of 
allegations by type and facility type, and the outcome of the 
investigations by type of incident and facility type. Allegations 
that have been substantiated are then analyzed in depth by type 
of incident, victim and perpetrator characteristics, 
circumstances surrounding the incident, type of pressure or 
force, impact on victims and perpetrators, and sanctions imposed 
on perpetrators.

*****************
List of tables
*****************

Section 1. State juvenile correctional systems
**************************************************

Table 1.  Allegations of sexual victimization reported by state 
juvenile systems, by type of victimization, 2012

Table 2.  Allegations of sexual victimization reported by state 
juvenile systems, by type of victimization, 2011

Table 3.  Allegations of sexual victimization reported by state 
juvenile systems, by type of victimization, 2010

Table 4.  Allegations of sexual victimization reported by state 
juvenile systems, by type of victimization, 2009

Table 5.  Allegations of sexual victimization reported by state 
juvenile systems, by type of victimization, 2008

Table 6.  Allegations of sexual victimization reported by state 
juvenile systems, by type of victimization, 2007

Section 2. Public local juvenile correctional facilities
*********************************************************

Table 7.  Allegations of sexual victimization reported by local 
juvenile correctional authorities, by type of victimization, 2012

Table 8.  Allegations of sexual victimization reported by local 
juvenile correctional authorities, by type of victimization, 2011

Table 9.  Allegations of sexual victimization reported by local 
juvenile correctional authorities, by type of victimization, 2010

Table 10. Allegations of sexual victimization reported by local 
juvenile correctional authorities, by type of victimization, 2009

Table 11. Allegations of sexual victimization reported by local 
juvenile correctional authorities, by type of victimization, 2008

Table 12. Allegations of sexual victimization reported by local 
juvenile correctional authorities, by type of victimization, 2007

Table 13. Local juvenile correctional authorities with no 
allegations of sexual victimization, 2012

Table 14. Local juvenile correctional authorities with no 
allegations of sexual victimization, 2011

Table 15. Local juvenile correctional authorities with no 
allegations of sexual victimization, 2010

Table 16. Local juvenile correctional authorities with no 
allegations of sexual victimization, 2009

Table 17. Local juvenile correctional authorities with no 
allegations of sexual victimization, 2008

Table 18. Local juvenile correctional authorities with no 
allegations of sexual victimization, 2007

Section 3. Privately operated juvenile correctional facilities
*************************************************************** 

Table 19. Allegations of sexual victimization reported by 
privately operated juvenile correctional authorities, by type of 
victimization, 2012

Table 20. Allegations of sexual victimization reported by 
privately operated juvenile correctional authorities, by type of 
victimization, 2011

Table 21. Allegations of sexual victimization reported by 
privately operated juvenile correctional authorities, by type of 
victimization, 2010

Table 22. Allegations of sexual victimization reported by 
privately operated juvenile correctional authorities, by type of 
victimization, 2009

Table 23. Allegations of sexual victimization reported by 
privately operated juvenile correctional authorities, by type of 
victimization, 2008

Table 24. Allegations of sexual victimization reported by 
privately operated juvenile correctional authorities, by type of 
victimization, 2007

Table 25. Privately operated juvenile correctional authorities 
with no allegations of sexual victimization, 2012

Table 26. Privately operated juvenile correctional authorities 
with no allegations of sexual victimization, 2011

Table 27. Privately operated juvenile correctional authorities 
with no allegations of sexual victimization, 2010

Table 28. Privately operated juvenile correctional authorities 
with no allegations of sexual victimization, 2009

Table 29. Privately operated juvenile correctional authorities 
with no allegations of sexual victimization, 2008

Table 30. Privately operated juvenile correctional authorities 
with no allegations of sexual victimization, 2007

Section 4. Juvenile correctional facilities in Indian country
**************************************************************

Table 31. Allegations of sexual victimization reported by 
juvenile correctional authorities in Indian country, by type of 
victimization, 2012

Table 32. Allegations of sexual victimization reported by 
juvenile correctional authorities in Indian country, by type of 
victimization, 2011

Table 33. Allegations of sexual victimization reported by 
juvenile correctional authorities in Indian country, by type of 
victimization, 2010

Table 34. Allegations of sexual victimization reported by 
juvenile correctional authorities in Indian country, by type of 
victimization, 2009

Table 35. Allegations of sexual victimization reported by 
juvenile correctional authorities in Indian country, by type of 
victimization, 2008

*************************************************************
The Bureau of Justice Statistics of the U.S. Department of 
Justice is the principal federal agency responsible for measuring 
crime, criminal victimization, criminal offenders, victims of 
crime, correlates of crime, and the operation of criminal and 
civil justice systems at the federal, state, tribal, and local 
levels. BJS collects, analyzes, and disseminates reliable and 
valid statistics on crime and justice systems in the United 
States, supports improvements to state and local criminal justice 
information systems, and participates with national and 
international organizations to develop and recommend national 
standards for justice statistics. William J. Sabol is director.

This report was written by Ramona R. Rantala and Allen J. Beck. 
Anastasios “Tom” Tsoutis verified the report. Greta B. Clark 
carried out data collection and processing, under the supervision 
of Stephen G. Simoncini, Census Bureau, U.S. Department of 
Commerce. Linda Gehring and Patricia Torreyson assisted in the 
data collection. Suzanne M. Dorinski drew the facility samples 
and provided sampling weights.

Irene Cooperman and Jill Thomas edited the report. Barbara Quinn 
produced the report.

January 2016, NCJ 249143


*************************************************************

**************************************************
Office of Justice Programs
Innovation * Partnerships * Safer Neighborhoods
www.ojp.usdoj.gov
**************************************************

**********************
1/19/2016/JER/12:55pm
**********************
