U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Program

Bureau of Justice Statistics

State Use of Incident-
Based Crime Statistics

February  1999,   NCJ 173941


By  Kevin J. Strom
BJS Statistician


Background

In 1991 the Uniform Crime Reports (UCR) program of the Federal
Bureau of Investigation (FBI) began moving from summary counts
to the more detailed National Incident-Based Reporting System
(NIBRS).  NIBRS provides case-level statistics including
victim/offender relationship, incident location, weapon
involvement, time of day, and type of injury.  As of September
1998, 14 States were certified by the FBI to report NIBRS data. 
Additional States, such as Illinois, collect incident-based data
on a local or city-level, while attempting to integrate this
type of collection system State-wide. 

Based on a wide, but not comprehensive, review of available
1996-97 materials offered by State agencies, this report
describes States' publication and dissemination of
incident-based data, specifically their presentation of criminal
statistics in tabular form.  While States that have
incident-based reporting can generate statistics upon request,
emphasis is placed on the production of formal publications like
annual reports, and on special reports and Internet capabilities.

Annual reports

Index Crimes 

From among those reviewed about 14 States included basic
incident-based data in their most recently available annual
reports, commonly incident-based tables centered on index
crimes.  Index crimes include murder, forcible rape, aggravated
assault, robbery, burglary, larceny, and motor vehicle theft. 
Examples of findings from incident-based tables in State annual
reports are presented below:

Idado

In Crime in Idaho 1997, each Part I index crime is presented in 

  Idaho Department of Law Enforcement, Crime in Idaho, 1997.
a separate one-page summary of tables that includes victim/
offender relationship; victim race, sex, and age category
(juvenile or adult); and offender race, sex, and age category
(table 1).  These tables display only data pertinent to the
crime in question.  Tables on incidents by location provide
additional insight.  For example, 38% of Idaho robberies
occurred in a commercial setting, most commonly at a convenience
store (13.7%), bank (7.3%), grocery store (4.3%), specialty
store (3.0%), or restaurant (2.6%).  Idaho's annual publication
also includes incident-based data on victim outcomes, such as
victim injury and weapon use in crimes against persons and on
weapons in possession of arrestees, a valuable instrument used
for safety training among law enforcement officers.

-----------------------------------------------------------
Table 1.  Weapons used in crimes against persons in Idaho, 1997
                                 Rifle/   Knife/blunt                      Other             Other/ 
 Offense               Handgun   shotgun  object       Vehicle  Explosive  firearm  Personal unknown
Murder                      11      4        8            0        1         2          5       7
Negligent manslaughter       1      0        0            0        0         0          1       0
Forcible rape                2      0        6            0        0         2        268      18
Aggravated assault         264    129      842          155        2        79        376     237
Kidnapping/abduction        11      2        6            0        0         1         73      16
Forcible sodomy              0      0        0            0        0         0         39       2
Sexual assault with ob       0      0        5            0        0         0         21       7
Forcible fondling            0      1        4            0        0         1        610      38
Total                      289    136      871          155        3        85       1393     325

 Note:  Up to 4 weapons can be entered for each incident. 
 Source:  Uniform Crime Reporting Unit, Bureau of Criminal Identification,
-------------------------------------------------------------------

Iowa

The Iowa 1996 Uniform Crime Report 

is calculated strictly from incident-based data (Iowa is
approximately 85% IBR compliant).  Iowa presents incident-based
information on specific index crimes by time of day; month;
victim age group, sex, and race; arrestee age group, sex, and
race; victim/offender relationship; type of weapon used; and
incident location.  These data are shown in basic frequency
distributions and in colorful pie charts or bar graphs (figure
1).  

Accompanying text summarizes changes over time and highlights
pertinent information  within the tables.  For instance, in 1996
 burglaries were most commonly committed by white males 16 to 18
years old, and 58% were committed in residential properties. 
The complete annual report, with selected county-level tables,
can be downloaded from the Iowa Internet site
(www.state.ia.us/government/dps).     

South Carolina                                              

Crime in South Carolina 1997 includes basic incident-based
tables for all Part I offenses.  For forcible rape, tables
include victims by age, race, and sex; persons arrested for rape
by age, race, and sex; the victim/ offender relationship in rape
cases; rape incidents by weapon distribution; and rape incidents
by premise type.  Incident-based data, such as victim/offender
relationship, are also displayed in easy-to-read pie and bar
charts.

------------------------------------------------
Figure 1:  Robbery, 1996

Highway/parking                         51.1
Park/woods                               2.3
Residence                                 15
Other/unknown                            3.6
Grocery store                            2.9
Department store                         3.2
Other commercial                         4.4
Convenience/gas station                 13.0
Bar/restaurant                           4.5
-----------------------------------------------

Domestic violence

Several States, including Alabama, Delaware, Florida, Idaho,
Iowa, South Carolina, and Utah, presented statistics on domestic
violence separate- ly in their annual reports.  Few States
distinguished between cases of male and female victimizations,
although such information may provide additional understanding
about the nature of the incidents.          

* Crime in Alabama reports domestic violence by the type of
offense, victim characteristics, offender characteristics,
weapon use, injuries sustained, and victim/offender
relationship. 

 * Crime in Florida contains a basic table on domestic violence
by offense type and percent change between 1996 and 1997.  

* Crime in Idaho displays a table with type of offense by
relationship and change in total number of incidents from 1996
to 1997.  

* The Iowa Uniform Crime Report, which  contains the largest
breakdown of domestic abuse tables, extends information on these
incidents to include signs of domestic abuse (that is, injuries)
and referrals made by victims of domestic abuse.  In 1996, 63%
of victims of domestic abuse in Iowa suffered minor injuries,
while an additional 2% sustained serious lacerations and 1%
sustained a fracture.  

* Crime in South Carolina contains multiple tables on domestic
assaults by victim/offender relationship and on assaults
occurring between intimates.  


----------------------------------------------------

Table 2.  Motivation for hate crimes

 Nature                 Motivation          Num ber      Percent of tot

Racial                 Anti white                     14         0.318
                       Anti black                      7          15.9
                       Anti American Indian            2           4.5
                       Anti Asian                      1           2.3
                       Anti multi-racial               1           2.3

Ethnicity              Anti Hispanic                  11            25
                       Anti other ethnicity            0             0

Sexual orientation      Anti male homosexual           1           2.3
                       Anti female homosexua           2           4.5
                       Anti homosexual                 0             0
                       Anti heterosexual               0             0
                       Anti bisexual                   0             0

Religion               Anti Jewish                     0             0
                       Anti Catholic                   2           4.5
                       Anti Protestant                 0             0
                       Anti Islamic                    0             0
                       Anti other religion             3           6.8
                       Anti multi-religion             0             0
                       Anti atheist/agnostic           0             0

Disabled               Anti physically disab           0             0
                       Anti mentally disable           0             0

Total                                                 44             1

Source:  Crime in Idaho, 1997.

------------------------------------------------------

Hate crime

Among the reports analyzed, five States reported incident-based
statistics in the form of hate-bias crimes in their annual
reports.  These incidents are usually classified by motivation
for hate-bias which includes racial, ethnicity, sexual
orientation, religion, and crimes against the disabled.  Hate
crime statistics were generally reported in basic frequency
distributions.  Displaying these statistics in a cross-tabular
form, such as motivation by type of offense, could more fully
describe these events.

* Crime in Idaho contains tables on hate crime by nature and
motivation, by location, by specific agencies reporting these
incidents, by victim characteristics, and by offender race.  For
example, in offender motivation for Idaho hate crimes, 57% were
motivated by race, 25% by ethnicity, 11% by religion, and 7% by
the victim's sexual orientation (table 2).   



* In the 1996 Iowa Uniform Crime Report, hate bias crime tables
include the number of incidents by year and month, the target of
the crime, the motivation, and the actual offense.  

* Crime in Michigan displays bias crime statistics on their
Internet site and in their Annual Report.  In addition to the
categories displayed by other States, Michigan includes gender
as a possible motivating factor for hate crimes (anti-female and
anti-male).

* Crime in North Carolina reports hate crime incidents by
motivation, by offender race, and by victim characteristics.  

* Finally, Crime in Oklahoma reports frequency distributions for
types of hate-crime offenses, victim characteristics, offender
characteristics, incident location, and motivation for the
offense.    

Internet capabilities

A number of States have Internet sites that include State-level
criminal statistics.  Several provide users with the ability to
manipulate incident-based data or to download standardized
tables that contain county-level information.  Other States are
developing or enhancing their Internet sites to include these
capabilities.  (See the Internet addresses on page 9.)  Examples
follow:

Internet sites

Alabama                                                        

Crime in Alabama, available in print or via the Internet,
contains sex and race of homicide victims by type of offender,
victim/offender by race and sex of rape, relationship of rape
victims to offenders.  Special sections are also included on
domestic violence and juvenile victims of violent crime.

Iowa                                                            
   
States also provide users the ability to access and download
incident-based statistics via the Internet.  The complete 1996
Iowa Uniform Crime Report and selected incident-based tables can
be downloaded, including frequen- cy distributions for Group A
offenses.  This information is available State-wide, but also
for every law enforcement agency in Iowa, which may be useful
for agencies attempting to verify their own criminal statistics.

Michigan                   

The publication Crime in Michigan, 1997 can be viewed on the
Michigan State Police Internet site.  Incident-based data are
limited to State-wide domestic violence and bias crime
statistics.  However, interactive tables displaying arrests by
crime, age, race, and sex can be obtained, with this information
available at the county and jurisdictional-level as well (figure
above). 

South Carolina                                                 

In South Carolina a NIBRS interactive Internet site is under
development that enables users to manipulate a full-range of
incident-based statistics at the State, county, and
departmental-level.  Data can be electronically mapped down to
the county-level.  The system will also provide users with the
ability to select from a number of standardized incident-based
tables.  Included in the list of standardized incident-based
tables are robbery by premise and by time of day, arrestees with
weapons by offense, and victim/offender relationship by sex of
violent crime victims.  Establishing a core set of standardized
tables will ensure that all authorized users receive the
equivalent statistics for certain types of criminal information.
Tables can also be selected at the state, county, or
departmental-level.  

E-mail 

One technique for disseminating incident-based data is the
Vermont Crime Information Center VCIC Data Byte, a weekly e-mail
that utilizes current incident-based statistics to answer
relevant inquiries or subject areas.  For example, on the issue
of officer safety, what is the probability of encountering
firearms by type of location.  Among the 189 firearm-related
incidents, 50% occurred at residences, 17% occurred on roads or
highways, 12% in fields and woods, and 5% in parking lots and
garages.  Other examples of VCIC Data Bytes include type of
crime during the holiday season versus the summer, a rape "fact
sheet," and a profile of Vermont stalkers.  This information is
sent to a State-wide audience that includes State and local law
enforcement officials and will soon be available on the upcoming
VCIC Internet site.

Special reports utilizing IBR data

Several States produce specialized reports on topics such as
crime on college campuses, domestic violence, street gang crime,
or trends in homicide patterns.  Many of these States do not
have incident-based reporting on a State-wide level.  Listed
below are some examples of special reports that emphasis
incident-based information:

Illinois                                                        
   
Chicago is among the few jurisdictions in the State of Illinois
that collect incident-based statistics.  As a result, the
Chicago IBR data are employed to promote incident-based
reporting in other regions in the State.  The Illinois Criminal
Justice Information Authority produced several reports from the
city of Chicago that utilize incident-based information.  Street
Gang Crime in Chicago includes incident mapping by the type of
crime and type of associated gang.  Another publication focuses
on trends in homicide in Chicago since 1965.  Examples of tables
presented in this report include victimization risks by age
group and race and the types of firearms used in Chicago
homicides, 1965-95 (figure 3). 

-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Figure 3:  Number of homicides in Chicago

Year     Automatic   Nonautomatic   Nonautomatic  Nonautomatic    Unknown
    1965          55             95            16              14       18
    1966          53            161            20              22        7
    1967          77            184            13              20       20
    1968          67            200            19              19       70
    1969          66            260            33              26       56
    1970          82            312            47              26       58
    1971          81            310            36              42       61
    1972          76            316            26              25       44
    1973          92            376            24              42       86
    1974          95            368            24              36      140
    1975          76            340            12              47       81
    1976          81            324            18              29       51
    1977         102            318            15              41       50
    1978          84            339            14              26       43
    1979          98            321            15              18       87
    1980          83            314             9              30      117
    1981          96            276             7              21      146
    1982          58            198            13              23       92
    1983          69            219            13              16      111
    1984          74            217            13              25      113
    1985          60            201             7              14       98
    1986          63            221             9              23      101
    1987          76            183             8              20       85
    1988          78            224            10              11       68
    1989         117            232            10              16       63
    1990         167            338             5              18       70
    1991         263            270            11              14       78
    1992         302            234             7              20       91
    1993         332            218             9              12       65
    1994         386            207             6               6       81
    1995         350            165            16              17       53

----------------------------------------------------------------------------


Kansas                                                          

The Kansas Bureau of Investigation (KBI) has produced two
reports with incident-based statistics:  Kansas Domestic
Violence and Rape, 1995-1997, and Kansas Campus Crime,
1993-1994.  The domestic violence publication includes tables on
the character- istics of victims and offenders, the victim/
offender relationship, the location of incidents, the type of
injuries inflicted, alcohol and drug use, and the time and day
of incidents.  The KBI report also analyzes cases of forcible
rape in the State, using similar tables.  Kansas Campus Crime
contains data on criminal offenses or arrests occurring in or on
the property of an educational institution (this includes
property controlled by student organizations or property used in
direct support of educational purposes).  Tables include crime
index offenses by 2- or 4-year institutions, incidents of
domestic violence and gang violence by institution, weapon use
by institution, and time and day of specific incidents. 


North Dakota                                                   

In 1998 North Dakota's Bureau of Criminal Investigation released
Domestic Violence in North Dakota, 1996, a report detailing
statistics on violent crimes within households.  Incident-based
tables presented in the publication include the relationship of
victim to offender by offense, the location of domestic violence
offenses, and substance abuse by victims and offenders. 
Additional  figures highlight patterns of abuse against children
and elderly in family settings, including the finding that a
family or household member committed 84% of elderly
victimizations.

Tennessee                                                     

The Tennessee Bureau of Investigation (TBI) produced a report,
Crime on Campus - 1997, that covers crimes reported on campuses
of all Tennessee Institutions of higher education.  Tables cover
Group A offenses, rates per 1,000 persons, and clearances by
type of crime.  Information is also included on Group B offenses
and campus demographic statistics such as enrollment,
faculty/staff, and security personnel.  

Wisconsin                                                       

In 1998 the Wisconsin Statistical Analysis Center (SAC) released
several incident-based publications.  Sexual Assaults in
Wisconsin, 1997, analyzes the nature and prevalence of sexual
assault, both throughout the State and within specific
jurisdictions.  Incident-based tables covered in the report
include victim characteristics by offender characteristics,
relationship of assailant to victim, and location of sexual
assaults.  Sexual assault offenses are also distinguished by
severe and less serious incidents and are presented by county
and by municipality.  The SAC completed Homicide in Wisconsin
1961-1997, a report that compares national and regional homicide
trends, patterns in victim and offender characteristics, and
other circumstantial data related to homicide.  Wisconsin has
also released a report containing IBR data submitted by agencies
from 1989 to 1995;  this publication supports the usefulness of
incident-based data in the study of crime.      


IBR-related projects funded by BJS 

Alabama                         
                  
The Alabama SAC will undertake a study to analyze juvenile rape
in the State using incident-based crime reporting data, criminal
history records, and Alabama Department of Youth Services
information to assess the impact of sexual violence on both the
young victim and the processing of the youthful offender through
the state's criminal justice system.  The resulting document
will be prepared for dissemination via the Internet, and the
findings presented at appropriate research conferences.

Arkansas                                                        
                                                         
Through the use of incident-based data, the Arkansas SAC will
profile domestic and sexual violence victims in the State.  In
addition, the SAC will continue to maintain the state's uniform
crime reporting program, modifying the annual reports (Crime In
Arkansas and Rape in Arkansas) and establishing a new report,
Arkansas Crime Trends.  These reports and others will be
prepared for dissemination over the SAC's Internet home page.

Delaware                                                        
  
Delaware maintains an incident-based crime data system that is
compatible with NIBRS concepts and used extensively by the SAC
for its research.  Delaware seeks to increase their knowledge of
criminal offenders and the criminal justice system by conducting
analysis with incident-based statistics on subjects that include
the age of initial criminal arrest; recidivism patterns among
specific offenders and the effectiveness of rehabilitation
programs; and the victim/offender relationship and age, race and
gender relationships within criminal events.  

Illinois                                                        
      
The Illinois Criminal Justice Information Authority will
demonstrate the practical utility of incident-based data through
projects that include the development of crime analysis mapping
for selected local agencies and a crime analysis manual
highlighting the application of incident-based statistics. 
Through these collective efforts, the Authority seeks to
re-establish NIBRS reporting across the State. 

Massachusetts                                                

Massachusetts will conduct a study of juvenile offenders using
incident-based data.  The goal is to provide criminal and
juvenile justice practitioners, researchers, and others with a
comprehensive depiction of the nature and characteristics of
juvenile offenders and offenses. These efforts, along with the
use of incident-based statistics in collaboration with the
Center for Disease Control (CDC) for domestic and intimate
violence research, may assist in demonstrating the usefulness of
enhanced criminal data.   

Michigan                                                        
    
The Michigan SAC seeks to analyze incident-based data and
produce reports demonstrating the usefulness of these statistics
to local law enforcement agencies.  In addition, they will
assess UCR and Michigan Incident Crime Reporting (MICR) data for
determining anomalies which may effect declines in the juvenile
crime rate in 1994.

North Dakota                                                   

Through the assistance of State Justice Statistics funding, the
North Dakota SAC intends to improve SAC publications by
including IBR research and to provide IBR data analysis as a
benefit to reporting agencies.  Current publications, such as
Crime in North Dakota, will be redesigned in content and in
format, to reflect the addition of incident-based statistics.   

South Carolina                                                

The South Carolina SAC will complete NIBRS (National
Incident-Based Reporting System) tables for Internet site
display started under last year's project, will undertake
various studies using NIBRS and SCIBRS (South Carolina
Incident-Based Reporting System) data including the State's
annual crime and juvenile justice publication, domestic
violence, juvenile and youth gangs, and an assessment of law
enforcement school resource officers.  

Studies related to current issues as requested by the governor
will be conducted using NIBRS and SCIBRS data.

Utah                                                            
 
The Utah SAC plans to expand NIBRS participation State-wide to
increase the usefulness and availability of incident-based data
for local law enforcement and policy makers.  The development of
an Internet site dedicated to NIBRS data will allow users to
access detailed IBR information such as domestic violence
statistics and other relevant data.

Virginia                                                        
   
The Virginia SAC will undertake several activities related to
research using incident-based data that are compatible with the
National Incident-Based Reporting System (NIBRS).  These
activities include: acquiring equipment to process
NIBRS-compliant data tapes from the Virginia State Police;
conducting an in-depth analysis to determine how best to present
the data to meet the needs of Virginia citizens; undertaking
three site visits to see how localities are using the data, how
they might differ in its collection, to examine additional data
elements that might be collected locally, and testing the
utility of using the data with other analytical techniques --
such as graphical mapping systems; and producing a report on the
procedures and findings of the research.

Wisconsin                                                       

The Wisconsin SAC plans to develop an Internet site for
disseminating its research and reports more efficiently. 
Statistics available via the Internet will include
incident-based data and tables that can be downloaded in
aggregate and in raw form.  

West Virginia                                                    

The West Virginia SAC will profile victims and offenders of
domestic and sexual abuse within the State.  In addition, they
will maintain and enhance the Internet infrastructure currently
in place and will develop incident-based crime reporting tables
for quarterly and annual publication, including Internet
dissemination.

-------------------------------------------------------------------
Agencies wishing more information about State Justice Statistics
grants may contact Paul White, 202-307-0771, Washington, DC,
20531.

The BJS Web site also contains information:

http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs

Select "What's New at BJS." 
-------------------------------------------------------------------

Table 3.  Use and dissemination of incident-based statistics  among selected States:  July 1998  

                                   Include incident-based data in --
                       NIBRS        Annual      Special    Internet
 State                 Certified    report      reports    site       Website -- www.

Alabama                                  X                    X          agencies.state.al.us/acjis/pages/alacrime.h
Arkansas                                          X           X          acic.org/statistics.htm
Colorado                 X               X
Delaware                                 X        X
Florida                                  X                    X          fdle.state.fl.us/Crime_Statistics/
Idaho                    X               X        X           X          2.state.id.us/dle/dle.htm
Illinois                                          X           X          icjia.state.il.us 
Iowa                     X               X                    X          state.ia.us/government/dps
Kansas                                   X        X           X          kbi.state.ks.us
Louisiana
Massachusetts            X                        X           X          magnet.state.ma.us/msp/massachu.htm
Michigan                 X               X                    X          state.mi.us/msp/crd/crimstat.htm
Nebraska                 X
North Carolina                           X                    X          us.state.nc.us/Justice/
North Dakota             X               X                    X
Oklahoma                                 X
South Carolina           X               X        X           X          genesis.psc.sc.edu/`crimes/
Tennessee                X                        X           X          tbi.state.tn.us (go to statistical info.)
Texas                    X
Utah                     X               X                    X          ps.ex.state.ut.us/
Vermont                  X                        X           X          dps.state.vt.us
Virginia                 X
Wisconsin                X               X

Note:  This survey of State publications does not reflect a complete listing.
-----------------------------------------------------




References

1997 Alabama Survey of Domestic Violence Trends and Attitudes,
Alabama Criminal Justice Information Center, Statistical
Analysis Center.

Crime and Arrests in Wisconsin, 1997 Uniform Crime Reporting
Program, Statistical Analysis Center.

Crime and Delinquency in California, 1995, Division of Criminal
Justice Information Services, Bureau of Criminal Information and
Analysis, California Department of Justice.

Crime and Justice in Texas, Criminal Justice Center, Sam Houston
State University.

1997 Crime in Alabama, Alabama Criminal Justice Information
Center, Statistical Analysis Center.

Crime in Delaware 1996, Statistical Analysis Center, State of
Delaware Executive Department.

Crime in Idaho 1997, Department of Law Enforcement, Bureau of
Criminal Identification, Uniform Crime Reporting Unit.

Crime in New Jersey 1996, Uniform Crime Reporting Program, New
Jersey State Police.

Crime in North Carolina 1997, State Bureau of Investigation,
Division of Criminal Information.  

Crime in Oklahoma 1995, Oklahoma State Bureau of Investigation.

Crime in South Carolina 1997, Uniform Crime Reports Division,
State Law Enforcement Division.

Crime in Utah 1997, Bureau of Criminal Identification,
Department of Public Safety.

Crime on Campus - 1997, Crime Statistics Unit, Tennessee Bureau
of Investigation

Domestic Violence in North Dakota, Bureau of Criminal
Investigation, Office of Attorney General.

Homicide in Wisconsin 1981-1997,  Wisconsin Office of Justice
Assistance, Statistical Analysis Center.

Juveniles in Rhode Island, Statistical Analysis Center, State of
Rhode Island.

Kansas Domestic Violence and Rape 1995-1997, Kansas Bureau of
Investigation, Office of the Attorney General.

Kansas Campus Crime 1993-1994, Kansas Bureau of Investigation,
Office of the Attorney General.

"Major trends in Chicago homicide: 1965-1994," Illinois Criminal
Justice Information Authority, September 1996.

NIBRS Output Reports: The VCIC Data Byte, Vermont Crime
Information Center, Division of Criminal Justice Services,
Vermont Department of Public Safety.

Sexual Assaults in Wisconsin 1997, Wisconsin Office of Justice
Assistance, Statistical Analysis Center.

"Street Gangs and Crime: Patterns and Trends in Chicago,"
Illinois Criminal Justice Information Authority, September 1996.

Trends and Issues:  Criminal and Juvenile Justice in Illinois,
Illinois Criminal Justice Information Authority.

1996 Vermont Crime Report, Vermont Criminal Information Center,
Division of Criminal Justice Services, Vermont Department of
Public Safety. 

END OF FILE
PM 1/99