U.S. Department of Justice 
Office of Justice Programs 
Bureau of Justice Statistics 

Prison Rape Elimination Act of 2003 (PREA) 

January 2011, NCJ 231172

Sexual Victimization Reported by Adult Correctional
Authorities, 2007 2008 

Paul Guerino and Allen J. Beck, Ph.D., BJS Statisticians 

----------------------------------------------------------
This file is text only without graphics and many of the
tables. A Zip archive of the tables in this report in
spreadsheet format (.csv) and the full report including
tables and graphics in .pdf format are available from:
http://bjs.ojp.usdoj.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbdetail&iid=2204

This report is one in a series. More recent editions may be
available. To view a list of all in the series go to
http://bjs.ojp.usdoj.gov/index.cfm?ty=dcdetail&iid=406.    
-----------------------------------------------------------
     
The Survey of Sexual Violence (SSV) is an annual collection
based on official records that the Bureau of Justice
Statistics (BJS) has conducted since 2004. It is one of a
number of BJS data collections that are conducted to meet the
mandates of the Prison Rape Elimination Act of 2003 (PREA). 

On behalf of BJS, staff of the Governments Division of the
U.S. Census Bureau mailed survey forms to correctional
administrators in the Federal Bureau of Prisons, state prison
systems, public and private jails, private prisons, jails in
Indian country, and facilities operated by the U.S. military
and Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE). Administrators
were given the option to mail back a completed form or to
complete it on the web. Data collection forms can be accessed
on the BJS website at http://bjs.ojp.usdoj.gov/index.cfm?
ty=dcdetail&iid=406.     

Each sexual act, as defined by BJS, is classified by the
perpetrator who carried out the incident (i.e., inmate or
staff) and the type of act perpetrated. Administrators
provided counts of the four types of sexual victimization
that occurred during the prior calendar year:
inmate-on-inmate nonconsensual sexual acts, inmate-on-inmate
abusive sexual contacts, staff sexual misconduct, and staff
sexual harassment. (See "Defining sexual victimization," page
2.) 

For each type of victimization, correctional administrators
indicated how many of the allegations were substantiated
(determined to have occurred), unsubstantiated, unfounded
(insufficient evidence to make a final determination), and
still under investigation. 


The administrators then completed a separate form for each
substantiated allegation, providing details about the victim,
perpetrator, and circumstances surrounding the incident. 

-----------------------------------------------------
Highlights

* Correctional administrators reported 7,444 allegations of
sexual victimization in 2008 and 7,374 allegations in 2007. 

* Total allegations of sexual victimization increased
significantly between 2005 (6,241 incidents) and 2008
(7,444). 

* The increase in total allegations of sexual victimization
between 2005 and 2008 was largely due to prisons, where
allegations increased 21%, from 4,791 incidents to 5,796. 

* In  2008, 931 allegations of sexual victimization (13%)
were substantiated, i.e., determined to have occurred upon
investigation. 

* State prison administrators reported 589 substantiated
incidents of sexual violence in 2008, up 28% from 459
substantiated incidents reported in 2005. 

* About 54% of substantiated incidents of sexual
victimization involved only inmates, while 46% of
substantiated incidents involved staff with inmates. 

* Female inmates were disproportionately victimized by both
other inmates and staff in federal and state prisons, as well
as local jails.

* Approximately 12% of substantiated inmate-on-inmate sexual
victimizations were committed by two or more perpetrators. 

* Injuries were reported in about 18% of incidents of
inmate-on-inmate sexual victimizations and less than 1% of
incidents of staff-on-inmate sexual victimizations. 
--------------------------------------------------------

The 2007 and 2008 surveys included all federal and state
prisons, facilities operated by the U.S. military and ICE,
and a representative sample of jail jurisdictions and
privately operated jails and prisons. The surveys also
included jails holding adults in Indian country based on a
complete enumeration of jails in 2008 and a representative
sample of jails in 2007. In total, data were collected from
facilities containing 2.12 million inmates in 2007 and 2.17
million inmates in 2008. (See Methodology for more
information about the systems and facilities from which data
were collected.) 

Responses were weighted to provide national-level estimates
for jails and privately operated facilities.  Since the
estimates for jails and privately operated facilities are
based on a sample rather than a complete enumeration, they
are subject to sampling error. (See Methodology for
description of sampling procedures.) 

The 2007-2008 survey results should not be used to rank
systems or facilities. Given the absence of uniform
reporting, caution is necessary for accurate interpretation
of the survey results. Higher or lower counts among
facilities may reflect variations in definitions, reporting
capacities, and procedures for recording allegations, as
opposed to differences in the underlying incidence of sexual
victimization. 

Detailed tabulations of the survey results by system and
sampled facility are presented in appendix tables 19-30. 

Detail on substantiated incidents 

The 2008 SSV recorded 763 substantiated incidents of sexual
victimization, or incidents that were investigated and
determined to have occurred. Weighting this total to take
into account the sampling of local jail jurisdictions,
private prisons, and private jails, the estimated total
number of substantiated incidents in the nation in 2008 was
931. The 2007 SSV recorded 783 substantiated incidents of
sexual victimization, which when weighted represented 1,001
incidents nationwide. 

For each substantiated incident reported, correctional
administrators were asked to provide details on circumstances
surrounding each incident, characteristics of victims and
perpetrators, type of pressure or physical force, sanctions
imposed, and what type of victim assistance was provided, if
any. They provided detail on 97% of reported substantiated
incidents. These data are displayed in tables 4-7 and
appendix tables 1-18. 

-----------------------------------------------------
Defining sexual victimization

To define "sexual victimization" under the Prison Rape
Elimination Act of 2003, BJS uses uniform definitions that
classify each sexual act by the perpetrator who carried out
the incident (i.e., inmate or staff ) and the type of act
perpetrated.

Inmate-on-inmate sexual victimization involves sexual
contacts with a victim without his or her consent or with a
victim who cannot consent or refuse. The most serious
incidents, nonconsensual sexual acts, include 

* contact between the penis and the vagina or the penis and
the anus including penetration, however slight; or

* contact between the mouth and the penis, vagina, or anus;
or

* penetration of the anal or genital opening of another
person by a hand, finger, or other object.

Less serious incidents, abusive sexual contacts, include 

* intentional touching, either directly or through the
clothing, of the genitalia, anus, groin, breast, inner thigh,
or buttocks of any person; and

* incidents in which the intention is to sexually exploit
rather than to harm or debilitate.

Staff-on-inmate sexual victimization includes consensual or
nonconsensual acts perpetrated on an inmate by an employee,
volunteer, contractor, official visitor, or other agency
representative. (Family, friends, and other visitors are
excluded.)

Staff sexual misconduct includes any sexual behavior or act
directed toward an inmate by staff, including romantic
relationships. Such acts include 

* intentional touching of the genitalia, anus, groin, breast,
inner thigh, or buttocks with the intent to abuse, arouse, or
gratify sexual desire; or

* completed, attempted, threatened, or requested sexual acts;
or

* occurrences of indecent exposure, invasion of privacy, or
staff voyeurism for sexual gratification.

Staff sexual harassment includes repeated statements or
comments of a sexual nature to an inmate by staff. Such
statements include 

* demeaning references to an inmate's sex or derogatory
comments about his or her body or clothing; or

* repeated profane or obscene language or gestures 

------------------------------------------------
Summary findings

Allegations of sexual victimization

The rate of sexual victimization reported by correctional
administrators increased from 3.33 incidents per 1,000
inmates in 2005 to 3.82 in 2008.

Overall, there were 7,374 allegations of sexual victimization
in 2007 and 7,444 allegations in 2008 (table 1). Although
there was no significant difference between the overall
totals in the 2007 and 2008 collection years, total
allegations of sexual victimization increased significantly
between 2005 (6,241 allegations) and 2008. This increase was
largely the result of increased allegations of sexual
victimization in prisons, from 4,791 incidents in 2005 to
5,796 incidents in 2008. The number of allegations of sexual
victimization in local and private jails did not
increase by a statistically significant amount between 2005
and 2008.

The increase in the total number of reported allegations of
sexual victimization corresponds with an increase in the rate
of reported allegations over time, from 2.83 allegations per
1,000 inmates in 2005 to 3.18 incidents per 1,000 in 2008. As
with total allegations, this trend resulted from an increase
in the rate of reported allegations in prisons, from 3.33
incidents per 1,000 inmates in 2005 to 3.82 in 2008. The rate
of reported allegations of sexual victimization in jails did
not increase significantly between 2005 and 2008.

Allegations of inmate-on-inmate abusive sexual contacts
account for two-thirds of the total increase in reported
allegations of sexual victimization between 2005 and 2008.

The increase in the total number of reported allegations of
sexual victimization since 2005 is due to an increase in
inmate-on-inmate abusive sexual contacts. Unlike the other
three types of victimization, allegations of abusive sexual
contact increased significantly over time, from 611 incidents
in 2005 to 1,417 in 2008 (table 2). This increase accounted
for 67% of the overall increase of 1,203 allegations between
2005 and 2008.

------------------------------------------------------------

BJS Surveys of Sexual Victimization in Correctional
Facilities 

Section 4(a)(1) of the Prison Rape Elimination Act of 2003
(PREA) requires the Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS) to
"carry out, for each calendar year, a comprehensive
statistical review and analysis of the incidence and effects
of prison rape" (P.L. 108-79). 

BJS has developed a multiple-measure, multiple-mode data
collection strategy to fully implement requirements under
PREA, including three surveys relating to inmate sexual
victimization. The Survey of Sexual Violence (SSV) collects
administrative data annually on the incidence of sexual
victimization in adult and juvenile correctional facilities.
The National Inmate Survey (NIS) and the National Survey of
Youth in Custody (NYSYC) gather data on the incidence of
sexual assault as reported by inmates in prisons and jails
and by youth held in juvenile facilities. 
------------------------------------------------------------

Substantiated incidents of sexual victimization 

State prison administrators reported an increase of 130
substantiated incidents between 2005 and 2008. 

Administrators of all categories of correctional facilities
reported 1,001 substantiated incidents of sexual
victimization in 2007 and 931 substantiated incidents in 2008
(table 3). This change in all categories was not
statistically significant, nor was the increase in
substantiated incidents between 2005 (885 incidents) and
2008. State prisons experienced a 28% increase in
substantiated incidents between 2005 (459 incidents) and 2008
(589 incidents). Local and private jails saw no statistically
significant change during the same period. 

The rate of substantiated incidents of sexual violence
follows the same pattern as total substantiated incidents.
While the overall rate did not change significantly between
2005 and 2008 (for both years, it was 0.4 substantiated
incidents per 1,000 inmates), the rate of substantiated
incidents in prisons increased from 0.36 incidents per 1,000
inmates in 2005 to 0.43 incidents per 1,000 in 2008. The rate
of substantiated incidents in jails did not change
significantly between 2005 and 2008. 

Substantiated incidents of inmate-on-inmate abusive sexual
contacts and staff sexual harassment increased significantly
between 2005 and 2008. 

Substantiated incidents of inmate-on-inmate nonconsensual
sexual acts declined from 326 in 2005 to 235 in 2008, but
this decline was not statistically significant (table 4).
Substantiated incidents of abusive sexual contacts increased
significantly between 2005 and 2008, from 173 to 272.
The increase in substantiated incidents of staff sexual
misconduct from 338 in 2005 to 361 in 2008 was not
significant. Substantiated incidents of staff sexual
harassment did increase significantly, from 48 in 2005 to 
63 in 2008. 

A greater percentage of allegations of abusive sexual
contacts and incidents of staff sexual misconduct were
substantiated in local jails than in prisons. 

Administrators reported that 19% of alleged abusive sexual
contacts were substantiated, as were 12% of alleged
nonconsensual sexual acts, 19% of alleged incidents of staff
sexual misconduct, and 5% of alleged incidents of staff
sexual harassment (table 5). The percentage of substantiated
allegations varied by type of facility. Local jail
administrators reported substantiating a greater percentage
of allegations of abusive sexual  contacts (24% in jails
versus 17% in prisons). Federal and state prison
administrators reported that a greater percentage of
allegations of inmate-on-inmate sexual victimization were
found to be unsubstantiated than local jail administrators.
In prisons, 63% of alleged nonconsensual sexual acts and 61%
of abusive sexual contacts were unsubstantiated, while 41% of
nonconsensual sexual acts and 46% of abusive sexual contacts
in jails were unsubstantiated. The same was true of incidents
of staff sexual misconduct: 58% of alleged incidents were
found to be unsubstantiated in prisons, compared to 39% in
local jails.

Incident-level findings

For each substantiated incident of sexual victimization,
administrators were asked to fill out a form that collected
incident-level characteristics, such as the age and sex of
the victim, the number of perpetrators, any injuries to the
victim, the time and location of the victimization, and
sanctions imposed on the perpetrator.

Inmate-on-inmate sexual victimization 

Females were disproportionately victimized by inmates in
state and federal prisons and local jails. 

Females represent 7% of sentenced prison inmates but
accounted for 21% of all victims of inmate-on-inmate sexual
victimization in federal and state prisons***Footnote 1 See
Prison Inmates at Midyear 2008 Statistical Tables, BJS Web, 8
April 2009. ***  (table 6). Similarly, females account for
13% of inmates in local jails but 32% of all victims.
***Footnote 2 See Jail Inmates at Midyear 2008 Statistical
Tables, BJS Web, 31 March 2009.***


Victims and perpetrators of nonconsensual acts were more
likely to be younger than 25, compared to victims and
perpetrators of abusive sexual contacts. 

About 42% of victims of nonconsensual sexual acts and 31% of
perpetrators were younger than 25, compared to 33% of victims
of abusive sexual contacts and 21% of perpetrators. 

A greater percentage of perpetrators in local jails were
younger than 25 compared to perpetrators in prisons.
Perpetrators of inmate-on-inmate sexual victimization in
local jails were more likely to be under 25 (38%) than
perpetrators in prisons (17%). Perpetrators in prisons were
more likely than perpetrators in local jails to be ages 25-39
(48% in prisons compared to 39% in local jails) and 40 or
older (35% compared to 23%). 

About 1 in 9 substantiated incidents of inmate-on-inmate
sexual victimization were committed by more than one
perpetrator. 

Approximately 12% of substantiated incidents of
inmate-on-inmate sexual victimization were committed by two
or more perpetrators, but this varied by facility and
incident type. Two or more perpetrators committed a greater
percentage of substantiated incidents in local jails (14%)
than in prisons (9%). In addition, two or more perpetrators
committed a greater percentage of nonconsensual sexual acts
(16%) than abusive sexual contacts (7%). 

About 1 in 5 incidents of inmate-on-inmate sexual
victimization resulted in a victim injury. 

Under a fifth (18%) of substantiated incidents of
inmate-on-inmate sexual victimization resulted in an injury.
There was no significant difference in the percentage of
incidents resulting in an injury in prisons compared to local
jails. There was a difference by incident type: nonconsensual
sexual acts were significantly more likely to result in an
injury (28%) than abusive sexual contacts (8%). 

Nonconsensual sexual acts were more likely than abusive
sexual contacts to occur in the early morning hours (midnight
to 6 a.m.). Abusive sexual contacts occurred more often
during the day (6 a.m. to 6 p.m.) than nonconsensual sexual
acts.  

About 32% of nonconsensual sexual acts occurred between
midnight and 6 a.m., compared to 12% of abusive sexual
contacts. Roughly 22% of abusive sexual contacts occurred
between 6 a.m. and noon (compared to 17% of nonconsensual
sexual acts), and 36% occurred between noon and 6 p.m.
(compared to 24% of nonconsensual sexual acts). 

Solitary confinement was used most often as a sanction
against perpetrators of inmate-on-inmate sexual
victimization. 

Solitary confinement was the most frequent sanction imposed
on perpetrators of inmate-on-inmate sexual victimization, but
the distribution of sanctions imposed varied by facility and
incident type. Perpetrators of inmate-on-inmate sexual
victimization in local jails were more likely to receive
legal action (51%) than were perpetrators in prisons (26%).
These legal actions included arrest (22% in jail compared to
3% in prison) and referral for prosecution (34% compared to
25%). Perpetrators of inmate-on-inmate sexual victimization
were also more likely to be placed in a higher custody level
within the facility (33%) in local jails compared to prisons
(22%). 

Perpetrators of inmate-on-inmate sexual victimization in
prisons were more likely than perpetrators in local jails to
be placed in solitary confinement (77% in prisons compared to
67% in jails), transferred to another facility (23% compared
to 9%), receive a loss of good time or increase in bad time
(22% compared to 6%), and confined to their cells (14%
compared to 10%). 

Sanctions were more severe for nonconsensual sexual acts than
for abusive sexual contacts. 

Perpetrators were subject to legal action for 41% of
nonconsensual sexual acts, compared to 23% of abusive sexual
contacts. They were referred for prosecution for 36% of
nonconsensual sexual acts, compared to 17% of abusive sexual
contacts. About 32% of nonconsensual sexual acts resulted in
the perpetrator being placed in a higher custody level,
compared to 21% of abusive sexual contacts, and 27% of the
more severe acts resulted in the perpetrator being
transferred to another facility, compared to 17% of abusive
sexual contacts. 

Staff-on-inmate sexual victimization 

Females were disproportionately victimized by staff in state
and federal prisons and local jails. 

Following the same pattern as inmate-on-inmate sexual
victimization, females account for a greater proportion of
victims of staff-on-inmate victimization than they do in the
overall inmate population. As previously stated, females
account for 7% of sentenced prison inmates, but represent
about a third of all victims of staff-on-inmate sexual
victimization in federal and state prisons (32%) (table 7).
Similarly, females represent only 13% of inmates in local
jails but over half of all victims of staff-on-inmate
victimization (56%). 

Females perpetrated the majority of incidents of staff sexual
misconduct, while males perpetrated the majority of incidents
of staff sexual harassment. 

About 61% of incidents of staff sexual misconduct and 21% of
incidents of staff sexual harassment were perpetrated by
females. Males perpetrated 39% of incidents of staff sexual
misconduct and over three-quarters of incidents of staff
sexual harassment (79%). 

Over half of incidents of staff sexual harassment were
reported by the victim. 

In over half the incidents of staff sexual harassment (58%),
the victim reported the incident to administrators, compared
to 26% of the incidents of staff sexual misconduct. Incidents
of staff sexual misconduct were more likely than incidents of
staff sexual harassment to be reported by an individual other
than the victim, including another inmate (23% of staff
sexual misconduct compared to 13% of staff sexual
harassment), the family of the victim (29% compared to 21%),
or a correctional officer or frontline staff (8% compared to
2%). Incidents of staff sexual misconduct were also more
likely than incidents of staff sexual harassment to be
discovered during an unrelated investigation (4% compared to
2%) or in some other way, such as through incriminating
photos or notes (15% compared to 8%). 

About 2 in 5 incidents of staff-on-inmate sexual
victimization occurred in a program service area. 

The most common location for staff-on-inmate sexual
victimization was in a program service area*** Footnote 3
Program service areas include the commissary, kitchen,
storage area, laundry, cafeteria, workshop, and hallway.***
(38%), followed by a victim's cell or room (17%), another
area (17%), outside of the facility (12%), in a dormitory
(10%), in a common area (10%), and in a staff area (10%).
Incidents of staff sexual misconduct were more likely to
occur in a staff area (11%) or another area (18%) than
incidents of staff sexual harassment (6% and 10%,
respectively). Incidents of staff sexual harassment were more
likely to occur in a dormitory (14%) or common area (14%)
than incidents of staff sexual misconduct (9% for both).  

More incidents of staff sexual victimization occurred during
daytime hours (6 a.m. to 6 p.m.) in federal and state prisons
than in jails. 

More incidents of staff-on-inmate sexual victimization
occurred in federal and state prisons either between 6 a.m.
and noon (45%) or noon and 6 p.m. (51%) than in local jails
(21% and 36%, respectively). More incidents of staff sexual
victimization occurred between 6 p.m. and midnight in local
jails (51%) than in federal and state prisons (35%).

 --------------------------------------------------
To date, BJS has released the following reports on inmate
sexual victimization in adult correctional facilities: 

* Sexual Victimization in Prisons and Jails Reported by
Inmates, 2008-09 (NCJ 231169) 

* Sexual Victimization in Local Jails Reported by Inmates,
2007 (NCJ 221946) 

* Sexual Victimization in State and Federal Prisons Reported
by Inmates, 2007 (NCJ 219414) 

* Sexual Violence Reported by Correctional Authorities, 2006
(NCJ 218914) 

* Sexual Violence Reported by Correctional Authorities, 2005
(NCJ 214646) 

* Sexual Violence Reported by Correctional Authorities, 2004
(NCJ 210333) 
-----------------------------------------------------

Methodology 

Sampling 

The sampling designs for the 2007 and 2008 SSV surveys varied
according to the different facilities covered under PREA. The
following designs were used: 

Federal and state prisons 

In both 2007 and 2008, the survey included the Federal Bureau
of Prisons and all 50 state adult prison systems. Prison
administrators were directed to report only on incidents of
sexual victimization that occurred within publicly operated
adult prison facilities and to exclude incidents involving
inmates held in local jails, privately operated facilities,
and facilities in other jurisdictions. 

Privately operated state and federal prisons
 
In 2007, a sample of 42 privately operated state and federal
prison facilities was drawn to produce a 10% sample of the
417 private prisons identified by the 2005 Census of State
and Federal Adult Correctional Facilities. Facilities were
sorted by average daily population (ADP) in the 12-month
period ending June 30, 2005. Five facilities with ADPs
greater than 2,145 inmates were selected with certainty
because of their size.*** Footnote 4 These facilities were
given a 100% chance of selection in each sample because of
their size.***   The remaining facilities were sorted by
region (i.e., Northeast, Midwest, South, or West), state, and
ADP, and 37 facilities were sampled systematically with
probability proportional to their size.*** Footnote 5 The
chance of selection was directly related to the size of the
facility (i.e., within each stratum, facilities with larger
ADPs had a greater chance of selection than facilities with
smaller ADPs).***(See "National estimates and accuracy," page
11.) 

In 2008, BJS increased the sample from 42 to 85 privately
operated prison facilities with the intention of increasing
the precision of private prison estimates. As in 2007,
facilities were ranked by ADP in the 12-month period ending
June 30, 2005. The 33 facilities with an ADP of at least
1,000 inmates were included with certainty in the 2008 SSV.
The remaining facilities were sorted by region, state, and
ADP, and 52 facilities were sampled systematically with
probability proportional to their size. 

Three privately operated prisons selected for the 2008 survey
closed prior to data collection: 

* Pacific Furlough Facility, CA 

* Horizon Center Community Corrections Center, NY 

* Community Residential Treatment Services, OH. 

Public jails 

In 2007, a sample of 500 publicly operated jail facilities
was selected based on data reported in the 2005 Census of
Jail Inmates. First, the third-largest jail jurisdiction in
44 states and the District of Columbia was selected.***
Footnote 6 Six states have combined jail-prison systems:
Alaska, Connecticut, Delaware, Hawaii, Rhode Island, and
Vermont.***  This minimized overlap with the 2005 and 2006
studies, in which the largest and second-largest
jurisdictions in those states were chosen with certainty. An
additional 132 jail jurisdictions with ADPs greater than or
equal to 1,000 inmates were also selected with certainty. The
remaining 2,745 jail jurisdictions on the frame were then
grouped into three strata. The first stratum contained 1,527
jails with an ADP of 79 or fewer inmates, the second stratum
included 796 jails with an ADP of 80 to 253 inmates, and the
third stratum included 422 jails with an ADP of 254 to 999
inmates. Jail jurisdictions in these three strata were sorted
by region, state, and ADP and selected systematically with
probability proportional to size, resulting in 72 selections
from stratum one, 85 from stratum two, and 165 from stratum
three. 

Of the 500 selected jail jurisdictions, two did not respond
to the survey: 

* Marion-Walthall County Regional Correctional Facility, MS 

* Desoto County Jail, MS. 

Three jail jurisdictions selected for the 2007 survey closed
prior to data collection: 

* Haskell County Jail, TX 

* Galena City Jail, KS 

* Montevallo City Jail, AL. 

In 2008, a sample of 500 publicly-operated jail facilities
was selected based on data reported in the 2007 Deaths in
Custody Annual Summary on Inmates under Jail Supervision.
First, the largest jail jurisdiction in 44 states and the
District of Columbia was selected to minimize overlap with
the 2006 and 2007 studies, in which the second-and
third-largest jurisdictions were chosen with certainty,
respectively. Another 130 jail jurisdictions with ADPs
greater than or equal to 1,000 inmates were selected with
certainty. The remaining 2,707 jail jurisdictions on the
frame were then grouped into three strata. The first stratum
contained 1,483 jails with an ADP of 84 or fewer inmates, the
second stratum included 792 jails with an ADP of 85 to 263
inmates, and the third stratum included 432 jails with an ADP
of 264 to 999 inmates. As in 2007, jail jurisdictions in
these three strata were sorted by region, state, and ADP and
selected systematically with probability proportional to
their size, resulting in 63 selections from stratum one, 70
from stratum two, and 191 from stratum three. 

Of the 500 selected jail jurisdictions, 6 did not respond to
the survey: 

* St. Clair County Jail, AL 

* Welsh City Jail, LA 

* Anson County Jail, NC 

* Northumberland County Department of Corrections, PA 

* Hudspeth County Jail, TX 

* Marathon County Adult Detention, WI. Two selected jail
jurisdictions closed in 2008: 

* Tyrrell County Jail, NC 

* Trenton City Jail, MO. 

Private jails 

In 2007, a sample of 5 privately operated jails was selected
based on data reported in the 2005 Census of Jail Inmates.
The 42 private facilities on the sampling frame were sorted
by region, state, and ADP, and 5 jails were systematically
sampled with probability proportional to size. 

In 2008, a sample of 5 privately operated jails was selected
based on data reported in the 2007 Deaths in Custody Annual
Summary on Inmates under Jail Supervision. Like 2007, the 41
private facilities on the sampling frame were sorted by
region, state, and ADP, and 5 jails were systematically
sampled with probability proportional to size. 

Other correctional facilities 

Three additional censuses of other correctional facilities
were drawn to represent  

* all adult jails in Indian country in 2007 *** Footnote 7 A
sample of 15 of the 63 adult jails in Indian country was
taken in 2008 rather than a census.***   

* all facilities operated by the U.S. Air Force, 
U.S. Army, U.S. Navy, and U.S. Marines in the continental
United States 

* all facilities operated by ICE. 

Of the 66 other correctional facilities surveyed in 2007,
seven did not respond to the survey: 

* Fort Peck Police Department and Adult Detention, MT 

* Standing Rock Law Enforcement and   Adult Detention, ND 

* Turtle Mountain Law Enforcement and Adult Detention, ND 

* Laguna Tribal Police and Detention Center, NM 

* Eastern Nevada Law Enforcement and Adult Detention, NV 

* Sisseton-Wahpeton Law Enforcement and Adult Detention, SD 

* ICE Port Isabel Service Processing Center, TX.

 Five of the 74 other correctional facilities surveyed in
2008 did not respond to the survey: 

* Navajo Department of Corrections, Tuba City, AZ 

* ICE Krome Service Processing Center, FL 

* ICE LaSalle Detention Facility, LA 

* Blackfeet Adult Detention Center, MT 

* ICE Aguadilla Service Processing Center, Puerto Rico. 

Two other correctional facilities sampled for the 2007 survey
closed prior to data collection: 

* ICE San Pedro Processing Center, CA 

* Pine Ridge Police Department and Adult Detention, SD. 

One other correctional facility sampled for the 2008 survey
closed prior to data collection: 

* ICE San Pedro Processing Center, CA. Data for each
correctional system and sampled facility are displayed in
appendix tables 19-30. In each table, a measure of population
size has been included to provide a basis for comparing
victimization counts. 

Reports of sexual victimization 

Since BJS first developed uniform definitions of sexual
victimization, correctional administrators have significantly
enhanced their abilities to report uniform data on sexual
victimization. In 2008, administrators in 46 state prison
systems were able to report incidents of abusive sexual
contacts separately from nonconsensual sexual acts. This was
an increase of 4 systems since 2006. One state limited counts
of nonconsensual sexual acts to substantiated incidents, and
one state limited counts of nonconsensual sexual acts to
completed (versus attempted and completed) acts. The majority
of state prison systems were able to report data on staff
sexual misconduct using survey definitions. Three systems
were unable to separate staff sexual harassment from
misconduct, and one system did not track incidents of staff
sexual harassment in a central database. 

Public jail administrators were less likely than prison
administrators to report sexual victimization based on the
definitions provided. About a quarter of public jail
jurisdictions did not record abusive sexual contacts
separately from the more serious nonconsensual sexual acts in
2008. This is an improvement over the 2006 SSV, in which a
third of public jail jurisdictions did not record this
information. Ten public jail jurisdictions did not record
allegations of abusive sexual contacts, 12 based counts of
nonconsensual sexual acts on completed acts only, and 15
based counts of nonconsensual sexual acts on substantiated
allegations only. Finally, 5 public jail jurisdictions did
not keep records on allegations of nonconsensual sexual acts. 

Published estimates are not adjusted to account for systems
and facilities that were unable to meet BJS reporting
standards. However, these systems and facilities are
footnoted in appendix tables 19-30. 

National estimates and accuracy 

Survey responses were weighted to produce national estimates
by type of correctional facility. Data from the Federal
Bureau of Prisons, all state systems, 2008 jails in Indian
country, military facilities, and ICE facilities received a
weight of 1.00, since these systems and facilities were all
selected with certainty. 

Among public jails, private jails, private prisons, and 2007
jails in Indian country, facilities were assigned a weight
equal to the inverse of their probability of selection.
Estimates for responding public jail jurisdictions were
adjusted for nonresponse by multiplying each estimate by the
ratio of the total ADP in all jurisdictions within the jail's
sampling stratum to the ADP among participating jurisdictions
within the jail's sampling stratum. 

Survey estimates for public jails, private jails, and private
prisons are subject to sampling error. The estimated sampling
error varies by the size of the estimate and the size of the
base population. 

Estimated standard errors were calculated using SUDAAN.***
Footnote 8. See Research Triangle Institute (2008). SUDAAN
Language Manual Release 10.0. Research Triangle Park, NC.*** 
For summary statistics, the 2007 and 2008 data files were
treated separately. For each file, the sampling information
was retained by treating each facility-level sample as its
own stratum (or multiple strata in the case of the public
jail sample), for a total of 10 strata in 2007 and 10 strata
in 2008. 

The 2007 and 2008 incident report data files were combined
and treated as one data file. The sampling information for
each year was retained by treating each facility-level sample
as its own stratum (or multiple strata in the case of the
public jail samples), for a total of 19 strata across both
years. A finite population correction was utilized for both
summary- and incident-level estimation. 

Estimates of the standard errors are included in appendix
tables 2, 4, 6, 8, 10, 12, 14, 16, and 18. These standard
errors may be used to construct confidence intervals around
survey estimates (e.g., numbers, rates, and percentages), as
well as differences between these estimates. For example, the
95% confidence interval around the percentage of male victims
of inmate-on-inmate sexual victimization is approximately 77%
plus or minus 1.96 times 1.2% resulting in a 95% confidence
interval of 74.6% to 79.4%. 

Tests of statistical significance 

To facilitate the analysis, rather than provide the detailed
estimates for every standard error, differences in the
estimates of sexual victimization for subgroups in these
tables have been tested for significance at the 95% level of
confidence. For example, the difference in the total number
of incidents of sexual victimization in 2005 (6,241
incidents) compared to 2008 (7,444), is statistically
significant at the 95% level of confidence (table 1). In all
tables providing detailed comparisons, statistical
differences at the 95% level of confidence have been
designated with two asterisks (**). The comparison group has
been designated with one asterisk (*). 

Appendix tables 

Appendix tables 1-6 have more detailed information on
characteristics of inmate-on-inmate incidents.
Characteristics of staff-on-inmate sexual victimization are
described in table 5 and appendix tables 7-18. Detailed
tabulations of the survey results by system and sampled
facility are presented in appendix tables 19 30. All appendix
tables are available on the BJS website at
http://bjs.ojp.usdoj.gov/content/pub/pdf/svraca0708.pdf. 

Office of Justice Programs * Innovation * Partnerships * Safer
Neighborhoods * http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov

The Bureau of Justice Statistics is the statistical agency of
the U.S. Department of Justice. James P. Lynch is Director.

This Special Report was written by Paul Guerino under the
supervision of Allen J. Beck. Ebony Nicholson, Kyle Harbacek,
and Allina Boutilier verified this report.

Brian R. Higgins (Lockheed Martin) and Jill Duncan edited the
report, Barbara Quinn produced the report, and Jayne Robinson
prepared the report for final printing under the supervision
of Doris J. James.

January 2011, NCJ 231172

This report in portable document format and in ASCII and its
related statistical data and tables are available at the BJS
website: http://bjs.ojp.usdoj.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbdetail&iid=2204.

1/19/2011/ JER/ 4:30




