U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Programs
Bureau of Justice Statistics

-------------------------------------------------------
This file is text only without graphics and many of the
tables. A Zip archive of the tables in this report in
spreadsheet format (.csv) and the full report including
tables and graphics in .pdf format are available on BJS
website at: 
http://www.bjs.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbdetail&iid=4882

This report is one in a series. More recent editions 
may be available. To view a list of all in the series 
go to http://www.bjs.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbse&sid=63
-------------------------------------------------------

*******************
Special Report
*******************

Sexual Victimization Reported by Adult Correctional 
Authorities, 2009–11

Allen J. Beck, Ph.D., and Ramona R. Rantala, BJS 
Statisticians, and Jessica Rexroat, BJS Intern

In 2011, correctional administrators reported 8,763 
allegations of sexual victimization in prisons, jails, and 
other adult correctional facilities (figure 1). About half 
(51%) involved allegations of nonconsensual sexual acts or 
abusive sexual contacts of inmates with other inmates, and 
half (49%) involved staff sexual misconduct or sexual 
harassment directed toward inmates. About 10% of the 
allegations (902) were substantiated based on follow-up 
investigation. While the number of allegations has risen 
since 2005 (6,241), the number substantiated has remained 
nearly unchanged (885 in 2005).

The Survey of Sexual Violence (SSV) is an annual 
collection based on official records that the Bureau of 
Justice Statistics (BJS) has conducted since 2004. It is 
one of a number of BJS data collections that are conducted 
to meet the mandates of the Prison Rape Elimination Act of 
2003 (PREA).

******************************************************

*************
Highlights
*************

* Correctional administrators reported 8,763 allegations 
of sexual victimization in 2011, a statistically 
significant increase over the 8,404 allegations reported 
in 2010 and 7,855 in 2009.

* Total allegations of sexual victimization rose 
significantly between 2005 (6,241) and 2011 (8,763).

* The increase in allegations of sexual victimization 
between 2005 and 2011 was largely due to prisons, where 
allegations increased from 4,791 allegations to 6,660 (up 
39%). 

* In 2011, 902 allegations of sexual victimization (10%) 
were substantiated (i.e., determined to have occurred upon 
investigation).

* State prison administrators reported 537 substantiated 
incidents of sexual victimization in 2011, up 17% from 459 
substantiated incidents reported in 2005.

* About 52% of substantiated incidents of sexual 
victimization in 2011 involved only inmates, while 48% of 
substantiated incidents involved staff with inmates.

* About 44% of victims of inmate-on-inmate sexual 
victimization experienced physical force or threat of 
force; 12% had been talked into it; and 5% had been 
bribed, blackmailed, or given drugs or alcohol to engage 
in the sexual activity. 

* Approximately 18% of substantiated incidents of inmate-
on-inmate sexual victimization involved physical injury; 
7% resulted in a major injury.

* About two-thirds of victims of nonconsensual sexual acts 
by other inmates were given a medical examination; a third 
were administered a rape kit.

* Between 2009 and 2011, females represented about 7% of 
all state and federal prison inmates, but accounted for 
22% of inmate-on-inmate victims and 33% of staff-on-inmate 
victims.

* More than half of all substantiated incidents of staff 
sexual misconduct and a quarter of all incidents of staff 
sexual harassment were committed by females.

* Among all substantiated incidents between 2009 and 2011, 
84% of those perpetrated by female staff, compared to 37% 
of those perpetrated by male staff, involved a sexual 
relationship that “appeared to be willing.”

* Physical force and pressure or abuse of power were 
identified in 20% of incidents involving male staff, 
compared to 1% of incidents involving female staff.

* The most commonly imposed sanctions for staff sexual 
misconduct were loss of job (in 85% of incidents) and 
arrest or prosecution (56%).

* More than half of the staff (52%) involved in sexual 
harassment of inmates lost their jobs, while 43% were 
reprimanded, disciplined, demoted or transferred, and 6% 
were arrested or prosecuted.
******************************************************

******************************************************
******************************
Defining sexual victimization
******************************

To define sexual victimization under the Prison Rape 
Elimination Act of 2003, BJS uses uniform definitions that 
classify each sexual act by the perpetrator who carried it 
out (i.e., inmate or staff) and the type of act.

Inmate-on-inmate sexual victimization involves sexual 
contact with a victim without his or her consent or with a 
victim who cannot consent or refuse. 

Nonconsensual sexual acts are the most serious 
victimizations, and include--

* contact between the penis and the vagina or the penis 
and the anus, including penetration, however slight

* contact between the mouth and the penis, vagina, or anus

* penetration of the anal or genital opening of another 
person by a hand, finger, or other object.

Abusive sexual contacts are less serious victimizations, 
and include--

* intentional touching, either directly or through 
clothing, of the genitalia, anus, groin, breast, inner 
thigh, or buttocks of any person

* incidents in which the intent was to sexually exploit 
(rather than to harm or debilitate).

* Staff-on-inmate sexual victimization includes both 
consensual and nonconsensual acts perpetrated on an inmate 
by staff. Staff includes an employee, volunteer, 
contractor, official visitor, or other agency 
representative. Family, friends, and other visitors are 
excluded.

Staff sexual misconduct includes any act or behavior of a 
sexual nature directed toward an inmate by staff, 
including romantic relationships. Such acts include--

* intentional touching of the genitalia, anus, groin, 
breast, inner thigh, or buttocks with the intent to abuse, 
arouse, or gratify sexual desire

* completed, attempted, threatened, or requested sexual 
acts

* occurrences of indecent exposure, invasion of privacy, 
or staff voyeurism for sexual gratification.

Staff sexual harassment includes repeated verbal 
statements or comments of a sexual nature to an inmate by 
staff. Such statements include--

* demeaning references to an inmate’s sex or derogatory 
comments about his or her body or clothing

* repeated profane or obscene language or gestures.

******************************************************

For each type of victimization, correctional 
administrators indicated how many of the allegations were 
substantiated (determined to have occurred), 
unsubstantiated (insufficient evidence to make a final 
determination), unfounded (determined to have not 
occurred), and still under investigation.

The administrators then completed a separate form for each 
substantiated incident, providing details about the 
victim, perpetrator, and circumstances surrounding the 
incident.

The 2009, 2010, and 2011 surveys included all federal and 
state prisons, facilities operated by the U.S. military 
and ICE, and a representative sample of jail 
jurisdictions, privately operated jails and prisons, and 
jails holding adults in Indian country. In total, data 
were collected from facilities containing 1.99 million 
inmates in 2009, 1.98 million inmates in 2010, and 1.97 
million inmates in 2011. (See Methodology for more 
information about the systems and facilities from which 
data were collected.)

Responses were weighted to provide national-level 
estimates for jails and privately operated facilities. 
Because the estimates for jails and privately operated 
facilities are based on a sample rather than a complete 
enumeration, they are subject to sampling error. (See 
Methodology for description of sampling procedures.)

Detailed tabulations of the survey results, grouped by 
system and sampled facility, are presented in Survey of 
Sexual Violence in Adult Correctional Facilities, 2009–11 
- Statistical Tables (NCJ 244227).

The 2011 SSV recorded 773 substantiated incidents of 
sexual victimization—incidents that were investigated and 
determined to have occurred. Weighting this total to 
account for the sampling of local jail jurisdictions, 
private prisons, and private jails, the estimated total 
number of substantiated incidents in the nation in 2011 
was 902. The 2010 SSV recorded 743 substantiated incidents 
of sexual victimization, which when weighted represented 
856 incidents nationwide. The 2009 SSV recorded 711 
substantiated incidents, representing 851 incidents 
nationwide.

For each substantiated incident of sexual victimization, 
correctional administrators were asked to provide details 
on the circumstances surrounding each incident, 
characteristics of victims and perpetrators, type of 
pressure or physical force used, sanctions imposed, and 
what type of victim assistance was administered, if any. 
They provided detail on 94% of reported substantiated 
incidents. These data are displayed in tables 8–13 and 
appendix tables 8–19.

***********************
Summary-level findings
***********************

Allegations of sexual victimization
************************************

Allegations of sexual victimization 
increased every year between 2005 
and 2011
*************************************

Correctional administrators reported 8,763 allegations of 
sexual victimization in 2011, a significant increase over 
the 8,404 allegations reported in 2010 and 7,855 in 2009 
(table 1). Total allegations of sexual victimization also 
increased significantly between 2005 (6,241 allegations) 
and 2011. This increase was largely the result of a 39% 
increase in allegations of sexual victimization in 
prisons, from 4,791 allegations in 2005 to 6,660 
allegations in 2011, although the number of allegations in 
prisons in 2011 was slightly less than in 2010 (6,648). 
The number of allegations of sexual victimization in local 
and private jails also increased between 2005 (1,406) and 
2011 (2,042). During 2011, the number of allegations rose 
sharply, up 20% from 2010. The number of allegations 
reported by authorities responsible for ICE facilities 
increased from 4 in 2005 to 17 in 2009 and to 50 in 2011. 

The increase in the total number of reported allegations 
of sexual victimization corresponds with an increase in 
the rate of reported allegations over time, from 2.83 
allegations per 1,000 inmates in 2005 to 3.90 per 1,000 in 
2011 (table 2). As with total allegations, this trend 
resulted from an increase in the rate of reported 
allegations in prisons, from 3.33 allegations per 1,000 
inmates in 2005 to 4.49 in 2011. The rate of reported 
allegations of sexual victimization in jails also 
increased significantly between 2005 and 2011, from 1.86 
per 1,000 to 2.73 per 1,000.

In each year between 2009 and 2011, the rates of alleged 
sexual victimization were consistently higher in prisons 
than in jails. In 2011, facilities operated by the U.S. 
military had a victimization rate of 2.63 per 1,000, 
similar to the rates in jails (2.73 per 1,000) and federal 
prisons (2.77), but lower than the rate in state prisons 
(4.81). The rate of reported allegations of sexual 
victimization in ICE-operated facilities (3.41 per 1,000 
detainees) was higher than the rate in jails, federal 
prisons, and military facilities, but lower than the rate 
in state prisons.

Inmate-on-inmate victimizations 
accounted for two-thirds of the 
total increase in allegations of 
sexual victimization between 2005 
and 2011
************************************

The number of allegations of sexual victimization rose by 
2,520 allegations between 2005 and 2011 (table 3). This 
increase was due primarily to a rise in reported inmate-
on-inmate sexual victimizations, which accounted for 67% 
of the overall increase. Inmate-on-inmate abusive sexual 
contacts more than doubled from 611 allegations in 2005 to 
1,479 in 2011, while inmate-on-inmate nonconsensual sexual 
acts increased from 2,160 to 2,984.

In 2011, about 32% of reported allegations of sexual 
victimization involved staff sexual misconduct and 17% 
involved staff sexual harassment. These percentages 
remained nearly unchanged from those reported in 2009 (not 
shown). Correctional authorities reported 4,298 
allegations of staff sexual misconduct and harassment 
during 2011, compared to 4,167 in 2009 and 3,470 in 2005.

*************************************
Upon investigation, most allegations 
were unsubstantiated 
*************************************

The most common outcome of investigations was a 
determination that the evidence was insufficient to show 
whether the alleged incident occurred, i.e., the 
allegation was unsubstantiated. Based on completed 
investigations between 2009 and 2011, allegations of staff 
sexual harassment and inmate-on-inmate nonconsensual acts 
were less likely to have been substantiated than other 
types of allegations (table 4). During the 3-year period, 
6% of allegations of staff sexual harassment and 9% of 
inmate-on-inmate nonconsensual acts were substantiated, 
compared to 15% of the allegations of staff sexual 
misconduct and 16% of the allegations of inmate-on-inmate 
abusive sexual contacts.

The outcomes of investigations differed significantly 
between prisons and jails. For every type of allegation, 
the percentage substantiated was higher in local jails 
than in prisons, with the largest differences reported for 
allegations involving staff. An estimated 21% of 
allegations of staff sexual misconduct and 15% of 
allegations of staff sexual harassment in jail were 
substantiated, compared to 12% of allegations of staff 
sexual misconduct and 4% of allegations of staff sexual 
harassment in prison.

Federal and state prison administrators reported that a 
significantly greater percentage of allegations of all 
types of sexual victimization were found to be 
unsubstantiated than did local jail administrators. In 
prisons, 66% of alleged nonconsensual sexual acts and 55% 
of staff sexual misconduct were unsubstantiated, while 48% 
of nonconsensual sexual acts and 33% of staff sexual 
misconduct were unsubstantiated in jails.
 
******************************
Substantianted incidents of 
sexual victimization
******************************

The total number of substantiated 
incidents did not change significantly 
between 2005 and 2011
****************************************

Administrators of all categories of correctional 
facilities reported 902 substantiated incidents of sexual 
victimization in 2011 (table 5). They reported 856 
incidents in 2010 and 851 substantiated incidents in 2009. 
These changes in substantiated incidents for all 
categories of facilities were not statistically 
significant, nor was the increase in substantiated 
incidents between 2005 (885 incidents) and 2011. 

State prisons experienced a significant increase (17%) in 
substantiated incidents between 2005 (459 incidents) and 
2011 (537). Public and private jails saw no statistically 
significant change during the same period. 

The overall rate of substantiated incidents of sexual 
victimization per 1,000 inmates follows the same pattern 
as the total number of substantiated incidents. While the 
rate for all categories of facilities did not change 
significantly between 2005 and 2011 (0.40 substantiated 
incidents per 1,000 inmates for both years), the rate of 
substantiated incidents in prisons increased from 0.36 
incidents per 1,000 inmates in 2005 to 0.41 incidents per 
1,000 in 2011 (table 6). The rate of substantiated 
incidents in jails in 2005 (0.46) was not statistically 
different from the rate in 2011 (0.38). (See Methodology 
for discussion of significance tests and appendix table 6 
for standard errors for each rate.)

Substantiated incidents of 
inmate-on-inmate abusive 
sexual contact and staff sexual 
harassment increased between 
2005 and 2011
************************************

Between 2005 and 2011, the number of substantiated 
incidents of inmate-on-inmate abusive sexual contact rose 
from 173 to 250, and the number of incidents of staff 
sexual harassment rose from 48 to 102 (table 7). 
Substantiated incidents of inmate-on-inmate nonconsensual 
sexual acts dropped from 326 in 2005 to 224 in 2011; 
however, this drop was not statistically significant. At 
the same time, the number of substantiated incidents of 
staff sexual misconduct was statistically unchanged (338 
in 2005 and 327 in 2011). 

Among all substantiated incidents in 2011, nearly half 
(48%) involved staff sexual misconduct or harassment. The 
percentage of incidents involving staff has fluctuated, 
with the lowest in 2005 (44%) and the highest in 2006 
(56%) and 2009 (53%) (not shown). 

*************************
Incident-level findings
*************************

Administrators were asked to provide detailed information 
on a separate form for each substantiated incident of 
sexual victimization. Authorities reported on the 
circumstances of each incident, characteristics of victims 
and perpetrators, type of pressure or physical force used, 
impact on victims, and sanctions imposed on the 
perpetrators. These reports provide a profile of victims 
and perpetrators and show consistent patterns of 
victimization by type of incident across types of 
correctional facilities.

*************************
Inmate-on-inmate sexual 
victimization
*************************

Correctional authorities reported detailed data on 
substantiated incidents of inmate-on-inmate sexual 
victimizations, including nonconsensual sexual acts and 
abusive contacts. Taking into account weights for sampled 
facilities, detailed data were provided on 1,124 incidents 
that occurred between 2009 and 2011. These incidents 
involved an estimated 1,194 inmate victims and 1,285 
inmate perpetrators.

Force was used in about two-thirds 
of substantiated incidents of 
nonconsensual sexual acts 
************************************

Force or threat of force was more common among incidents 
of nonconsensual sexual acts (66%) than among incidents of 
abusive sexual contact (27%) (table 8). An estimated 15% 
of victims of nonconsensual acts with other inmates said 
they were persuaded or talked into it; 7% said they were 
bribed, blackmailed, or given drugs or alcohol. More than 
half (52%) of victims of abusive sexual contacts reported 
an absence of any force or threat, persuasion, bribery, or 
other types of pressure. About 1 in 8 of the victims of 
abusive sexual contacts said they had been grabbed, 
groped, or attacked while asleep, or had been masturbated 
on or in front of against their will (not shown).

Prison and jail inmates reported similar levels of force 
and coercion in substantiated incidents of inmate-on-
inmate sexual victimization. Overall, 44% of the victims 
reported experiencing physical force or threat of force. 
About 12% of the victims had been talked into it, while 5% 
had been bribed, blackmailed or given drugs or alcohol to 
engage in the sexual activity. In more than a third (37%) 
of the incidents, there was no indication of any force or 
pressure.

Female inmates were disproportionately 
victimized by other inmates
***************************************

Between 2009 and 2011, females represented about 7% of 
sentenced prison inmates, but accounted for 22% of all 
victims of substantiated incidents of inmate-on-inmate 
sexual victimization in federal and state prisons.
***Footnote 1 See Prisoners in 2011, NCJ 239808, BJS web, 
December 2012.*** Similarly, during these 3 years, females 
represented about 13% of inmates in local jails but 27% 
of all victims.***Footnote 2 See Jail Inmates at Midyear 
2011 - Statistical Tables, NCJ 237961, BJS web, 
April 2012.***

Nearly 1 in 3 victims (31%) of abusive sexual contacts and 
1 in 8 victims (12%) of nonconsensual acts were females. 
The proportion of male victims was significantly higher 
for nonconsensual sexual acts (88%) than for abusive 
sexual contacts (69%).

****************************************************

************************************
BJS Surveys of Sexual Victimization 
in Correctional Facilities
***********************************

Section 4(a)(1) of the Prison Rape Elimination Act of 2003 
(PREA) requires the Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS) to 
“carry out, for each calendar year, a comprehensive 
statistical review and analysis of the incidence and 
effects of prison rape” (P.L. 108–79).

BJS has developed a multiple-measure, multiple-mode data 
collection strategy to fully implement requirements under 
PREA, including three surveys relating to inmate sexual 
victimization. The Survey of Sexual Violence (SSV) 
collects administrative data annually on the incidence of 
sexual victimization in adult and juvenile correctional 
facilities. The National Inmate Survey (NIS) and the 
National Survey of Youth in Custody (NSYC) gather data on 
the incidence of sexual assault as reported by inmates in 
prisons and jails and by youth held in juvenile 
facilities.
*******************************************************

Victims and perpetrators of 
inmate-on-inmate sexual victimization 
in jails were younger than those 
in prisons
************************************

About 3.5% of jail inmate victims were age 17 or younger, 
compared to 0.4% of prison inmate victims. In addition, 
42% of jail inmate victims were age 18 to 24, compared to 
35% of prison inmate victims. Likewise, 9% of victims in 
local jails were age 40 or older, compared to 20% of 
victims in prisons. 

On average, perpetrators of inmate-on-inmate sexual 
victimizations were older than their victims. About 45% of 
inmate perpetrators were age 35 or older, compared to 28% 
of their victims. A greater percentage of perpetrators in 
local jails were age 24 or younger, compared to 
perpetrators in prisons. Perpetrators of inmate-on-inmate 
sexual victimization in local jails were more likely to be 
age 24 or younger (28%) than perpetrators in prisons 
(18%). Perpetrators in jails (14%) were less likely than 
perpetrators in prisons (26%) to be 45 or older.

Females represented about a quarter (26%) of perpetrators 
of abusive sexual contacts, compared to about an eighth 
(12%) of perpetrators of nonconsensual sexual acts. The 
percentage of male perpetrators was significantly higher 
for nonconsensual sexual acts (88%) than for abusive 
sexual contacts (74%). 

Fewer than 1 in 5 substantiated 
incidents of inmate-on-inmate sexual 
victimization resulted in an injury
************************************

About 18% of substantiated incidents of inmate-on-inmate 
sexual victimization resulted in a physical injury (table 
9). More than a third (6.6%) of these incidents involved a 
major injury, typically involving anal or vaginal tearing.

The percentage of inmate-on-inmate incidents resulting in 
an injury was nearly identical in prisons (18%) and local 
jails (17%). More than a quarter (28%) of the 
substantiated incidents of nonconsensual sexual acts 
resulted in injury, compared to a tenth (11%) of incidents 
of abusive sexual contacts. About 14% of the nonconsensual 
sexual acts involved a major injury.

About two-thirds of victims of 
nonconsensual sexual acts were given 
a medical examination; a third were 
administered a rape kit
************************************

Medical treatment and services available to inmates after 
a sexual victimization include medical exams, rape kits, 
testing for HIV/AIDS or other sexually transmitted 
diseases, and counseling or mental health treatment. In 
73% of the incidents of nonconsensual sexual acts, victims 
received one or more of these services (not shown). 
Victims in 62% of these incidents received a medical exam. 
Counseling (48% of incidents) and administering a rape kit 
(32%) were also common. 

For victims of abusive sexual contacts, medical 
examinations (43%) and counseling services (40%) were the 
most common responses to victimization. However, in 43% of 
the incidents of abusive sexual contacts, no medical 
follow-up was provided.

Although victims were equally likely to have been injured 
in incidents in prisons and jails, victims were less 
likely to be given a medical examination in jails (41%) 
than in prisons (54%). In addition, while the percentage 
of incidents involving no force or threat of force in jail 
(42%) was nearly equal to that in prisons (45%), the 
percentage of incidents in which no medical follow-up was 
provided was substantially higher in jails (47%) than in 
prisons (33%).

Most victims experienced a change 
in their housing
************************************

The most common response in substantiated incidents of 
sexual victimization among inmates was to place the victim 
in administrative segregation or protective custody. Among 
incidents of nonconsensual sexual acts, 47% of the victims 
were placed in administrative segregation or protective 
custody, 17% were placed in a medical unit, and 12% were 
transferred to another facility. Among incidents of 
abusive sexual contacts, 25% were placed in administrative 
segregation or protective custody, 6% were placed in a 
medical unit, and 6% were transferred to another facility. 
Nearly a quarter (23%) of the victims of nonconsensual 
acts and about half (52%) of the victims of abusive sexual 
contacts experienced no change in housing or custody 
level. 

Most inmate perpetrators were placed 
in solitary confinement 
************************************

Solitary confinement was the most frequent sanction 
imposed on perpetrators of inmate-on-inmate sexual 
victimization, but the type of sanctions imposed varied by 
facility and incident type. Perpetrators in prisons (76%) 
were more likely than perpetrators in local jails (63%) to 
be placed in solitary confinement, transferred to another 
facility (22% compared to 5%), and receive a loss of good 
time or increase in bad time (22% compared to 5%).

Perpetrators of inmate-on-inmate sexual victimization in 
local jails were more likely to be sanctioned with legal 
action (43%) than were perpetrators in prisons (27%). 
These legal actions included arrest (19% in jails compared 
to 3% in prisons) and referral for prosecution (38% 
compared to 22%).

Sanctions were more severe for 
nonconsensual sexual acts than for 
abusive sexual contacts
************************************

Perpetrators were subjected to legal action for 48% of 
substantiated incidents of nonconsensual sexual acts, 
compared to 19% of abusive sexual contacts. Perpetrators 
were referred for prosecution in 44% of the substantiated 
nonconsensual sexual acts, compared to 14% of abusive 
sexual contacts.
 
Almost all perpetrators, regardless of type of 
victimization, received a sanction (98%). Other sanctions 
included loss of privileges (22%), placement in a higher 
custody level (18%), loss of good time or increase in bad 
time (17%), and transfer to another facility (16%).

************************************
Staff-on-inmate sexual victimization
************************************

Correctional authorities also reported detailed data on 
substantiated incidents of staff sexual misconduct and 
harassment. Taking into account weights for sampled 
facilities, detailed data were provided on 1,257 incidents 
that occurred between 2009 and 2011. These incidents 
involved an estimated 1,393 inmate victims and 1,286 staff 
perpetrators.

Females were disproportionately 
victimized by staff in state and 
federal prisons and local jails
************************************

Following the same pattern as inmate-on-inmate sexual 
victimization, females account for a greater proportion of 
victims of staff-on-inmate victimization than they do in 
the overall inmate population. Females account for 7% of 
sentenced prison inmates, but represent 33% of all victims 
of staff-on-inmate sexual victimization in federal and 
state prisons (table 10). Similarly, females represent 
only 13% of inmates in local jails, but 67% of all victims 
of staff-on-inmate victimization.

Female staff were more frequently 
implicated in sexual misconduct in 
prisons; male staff in local jails
************************************

About 54% of incidents of staff sexual misconduct and 26% 
of incidents of staff sexual harassment were perpetrated 
by females. Males perpetrated 46% of incidents of staff 
sexual misconduct and 74% of incidents of staff sexual 
harassment. In state and federal prisons, 67% of inmate 
victims of staff sexual misconduct or harassment were 
male, while 58% of staff perpetrators were female. In 
local jails, 67% of victims were female, while 80% of 
perpetrators were male.

Staff members involved in sexual 
misconduct were younger than those 
involved in sexual harassment
************************************

Nearly 30% of staff members in substantiated incidents of 
sexual misconduct were age 29 or younger, compared to 15% 
of those in incidents of sexual harassment. Conversely, 
staff members were age 45 or older in 37% of sexual 
harassment incidents and 25% of sexual misconduct 
incidents.

Correctional officers were implicated 
in two-thirds of substantiated incidents 
************************************

A correctional officer was identified as the perpetrator 
in 62% of the incidents in prisons and in 88% of incidents 
in jails. A correctional officer was the perpetrator in 
76% of the incidents of staff sexual harassment and 67% of 
the incidents of staff sexual harassment. Overall, 69% of 
the incidents involved a correctional officer.

Among all substantiated incidents in prisons, 13% involved 
medical or other health care staff and 12% involved 
maintenance or other facility support staff. Among 
substantiated incidents in jails, 6% involved staff in 
medical or health care and 4% involved maintenance or 
other facility support.

******************************************************

************************************
BJS reports on sexual victimization 
in correctional facilities
************************************

Sexual Victimization in Juvenile Facilities Reported by 
Youth, 2012 (NCJ 241708)

Sexual Victimization in Prisons and Jails Reported by 
Inmates, 2011–12 (NCJ 241399)

Sexual Victimization Reported by Former State Prisoners, 
2008 (NCJ 237363)

Sexual Victimization in Juvenile Facilities Reported by 
Youth, 2008–09 (NCJ 228416)

Sexual Victimization Reported by Adult Correctional 
Authorities, 2007–2008 (NCJ 231172)

Sexual Victimization in Prisons and Jails Reported by 
Inmates, 2008–09 (NCJ 231169)

Sexual Victimization in Local Jails Reported by Inmates, 
2007 (NCJ 221946)

Sexual Victimization in State and Federal Prisons Reported 
by Inmates, 2007 (NCJ 219414)

Sexual Violence Reported by Correctional Authorities, 2006 
(NCJ 218914)

Sexual Violence Reported by Juvenile Correctional 
Authorities, 2005–06 (NCJ 215337)

Sexual Violence Reported by Correctional Authorities, 2005 
(NCJ 214646)

Sexual Violence Reported by Correctional Authorities, 2004 
(NCJ 210333)

******************************************************

The sexual relationship “appeared 
to be willing” in nearly three-
quarters of incidents of staff 
sexual misconduct
************************************

Correctional authorities reported that the sexual contact 
between the inmate and staff “appeared to be willing” in 
59% of substantiated incidents (table 11). However, few 
incidents of staff sexual harassment were determined to be 
willing (2%). When limited to incidents of staff sexual 
misconduct only, nearly three-quarters (74%) were 
classified as “appeared to be willing.” 

Physical force, abuse of power, or pressure was involved 
in 13% of incidents of staff sexual misconduct. An 
estimated 10% of the incidents of staff sexual misconduct 
involved unwanted touching for sexual gratification, and 
9% involved indecent exposure, invasion of privacy, or 
voyeurism.
 
The nature of staff-on-inmate sexual victimizations also 
differed by type of facility. Pressure or abuse of power 
was more common among substantiated incidents in jails 
(23%) than in prisons (4%), as was indecent exposure or 
voyeurism (18% of incidents in jails, compared to 4% in 
prisons). Relationships that appeared to be willing were 
reported in 66% of substantiated incidents in prisons and 
in 44% of incidents in jails.

More than a third of incidents of 
staff-on-inmate victimization occurred 
in a program service area
***************************************

The most common location for staff-on-inmate sexual 
victimization (48%) was in a program service area, such as 
the commissary, kitchen, storage area, laundry, cafeteria, 
workshop, and hallway. Other locations included outside or 
in the yard (16%) and the victim’s cell or room (16%), 
followed by common areas within the cell block (14%), such 
as a bathroom or a shower. 

In prisons, staff-on-inmate victimizations were more 
likely to occur in a program service area (52%). In jails, 
program service areas (36%) and the victim’s cell (23%) 
were the most common locations.

Incidents of staff sexual misconduct (48%) were as likely 
as incidents of sexual harrassment (47%) to occur in a 
program service area. However, incidents of staff sexual 
harassment were more likely to occur in common areas 
within the cell block (18%) or a dormitory (18%) than 
incidents of staff sexual misconduct (13% and 10%).

More incidents of staff sexual 
misconduct occurred during the 
daytime hours (6 a.m. to 6 p.m.) 
in prisons than in jails 
************************************

Staff sexual victimization occurred at all times of the 
day, and in many incidents, multiple times. Noon to 6 p.m. 
was the peak time for both incidents of staff sexual 
misconduct (47%) and staff sexual harassment (51%).

A higher percentage of all incidents of staff sexual 
victimization occurred in prisons from 6 a.m. to noon 
(43%) than in jails (30%), and from noon to 6 p.m. (55%) 
than in local jails (33%). In jails, incidents were more 
common from 6 p.m. to midnight (45%) and from midnight to 
6 a.m. (36%).

When reported, staff sexual 
victimization was typically reported 
by the victim or another inmate, not 
by a correctional officer or other staff
******************************************

In more than half of the incidents of staff sexual 
victimization, either the victim (40%) or another inmate 
(18%) reported the incident to correctional authorities. 
In 25% of the incidents, a correctional officer or other 
frontline staff reported the incident.

The person reporting the incident to authorities differed 
depending on the type of incident. Significantly fewer 
incidents of staff sexual misconduct were reported by 
victims (33%), compared to staff sexual harassment (68%). 
A higher percentage of incidents of staff sexual 
misconduct (28%) than incidents of sexual harassment (12%) 
were reported by correctional officers or frontline staff. 
Incidents of staff sexual misconduct (5%) were also more 
likely than incidents of sexual harassment (1%) to have 
been discovered during an unrelated investigation or 
through routine monitoring.

Nearly a quarter of victims of staff 
sexual misconduct were given counseling 
or mental health treatment
*****************************************

The most frequent type of medical follow-up after an 
incident of staff-on-inmate sexual victimization was 
counseling or mental health treatment (22% overall), 
followed by medical examinations (16%) (table 12). Victims 
of more severe incidents received more follow-up (32% of 
staff sexual misconduct victims received at least one type 
of treatment, compared to 21% of staff sexual harassment 
victims). An estimated 23% of victims of staff sexual 
misconduct received counseling, 19% were given a medical 
examination, and 5% had a rape kit administered.

Overall, victims in prison and jail received the same 
types of medical follow-up. The percentage receiving a 
medical exam, a rape kit, a test for HIV/AIDS or other 
STDs, or counseling or mental health treatment also did 
not differ whether the incident occurred in a prison or a 
jail.

About 46% of inmates involved in staff 
sexual misconduct were transferred or 
placed in segregation 
***************************************

Correctional authorities indicated that the victims of 
staff sexual misconduct were often placed in 
administrative segregation or protective custody (26%) or 
transferred to another facility (20%). However, 
authorities reported that most victims of staff sexual 
harassment (82%) experienced no change in their housing or 
custody level. Placement of victims in a medical unit, 
ward, or hospital was uncommon, with 1.6% of victims in 
incidents of staff sexual misconduct receiving such 
placement.

Overall, 78% of staff perpetrators 
lost their jobs; 45% were arrested 
or referred for prosecution
************************************

Correctional authorities indicated that staff had been 
discharged or resigned in 78% of substantiated incidents 
of sexual misconduct or harassment. Staff had been 
arrested or referred to prosecution in 45% of incidents. 
Approximately 17% of the staff perpetrators had been 
reprimanded, disciplined, demoted, or transferred.

Significantly more staff in prisons (34%) resigned prior 
to investigation than in jails (17%). Incidents in jails 
were more likely to result in an arrest (40%) than those 
in prisons (14%). 

Sanctions differed significantly depending on the type of 
incident. The most commonly imposed sanctions for staff 
sexual misconduct were loss of job (85% of incidents) and 
legal action (56%). Staff sexual harassment resulted in 
loss of job (52%) and other sanctions, such as a 
reprimand, discipline, demotion, or transfer (43%). Few 
perpetrators of sexual harassment experienced any legal 
action (6%).

Incidents of sexual victimization 
differed by the sex of staff involved
************************************

The nature of staff-on-inmate sexual victimizations was 
significantly different for male and female perpetrators. 
Among all substantiated incidents, 84% of those 
perpetrated by female staff “appeared to be willing”, 
compared to 37% of those perpetrated by male staff (table 
13). Physical force and pressure or abuse of power were 
identified in 20% of incidents involving male staff, 
compared to 1% of incidents involving female staff. Among 
incidents of male staff victimization, 35% involved sexual 
harassment or repeated verbal statements of a sexual 
nature, 14% involved unwanted touching for sexual 
gratification, and 13% involved indecent exposure, 
invasion of privacy, or voyeurism. Among incidents of 
female staff sexual victimization, 8% involved sexual 
harassment or repeated verbal statements of a sexual 
nature, 3% involved unwanted touching for sexual 
gratification, and 2% involved indecent exposure, invasion 
of privacy, or voyeurism.

Most staff sexual misconduct was cross-gender. An 
estimated 93% of the inmates victimized by female staff 
were males, while 69% of inmates victimized by male staff 
were females.

Most incidents perpetrated by a female staff member 
occurred in a program service area (57%), outside or in 
the yard (16%) or in a staff area (13%). Most incidents 
perpetrated by a male occurred in a program service area 
(39%), in the victim’s cell (21%), or in a common area 
(18%). Correctional officers comprised 83% of the male 
perpetrators, compared to 55% of the female perpetrators 
of staff-on-inmate incidents. 

Substantiated incidents of male staff victimization (61%) 
were more likely than incidents of female staff 
victimization (16%) to have been reported by the victim. 
Incidents involving female staff (40%) were more likely 
than incidents involving male staff (12%) to have been 
reported by correctional officers and frontline staff. In 
addition, a higher percentage of incidents perpetrated by 
female staff (19%) than by male staff (8%) had been 
reported by other facility staff.

Female perpetrators (90%) were more likely than male 
perpetrators (67%) to lose their job as a result of the 
staff-on-inmate sexual victimization.

Female staff members (36%) were also significantly more 
likely than male staff members (20%) to resign prior to an 
investigation. A higher percentage of male perpetrators 
(27%) than female perpetrators (15%) had been arrested or 
received some other sanction, such as a reprimand, 
discipline, demotion, or transfer (26% of males compared 
to 7% of females).

**************
Methodology
**************

Sampling
***********

The sampling designs for the Bureau of Justice Statistics’ 
(BJS) 2009, 2010, and 2011 Survey of Sexual Violence (SSV) 
varied according to the different facilities covered under 
PREA.

Federal and state prisons
*****************************

In each year, the survey included the Federal Bureau of 
Prisons and all 50 state adult prison systems. Prison 
administrators were directed to report only on allegations 
of sexual victimization that occurred within publicly 
operated adult prison facilities and to exclude 
allegations involving inmates held in local jails, 
privately operated facilities, and facilities in other 
jurisdictions.

Privately operated state 
and federal prisons
****************************

In each year, a sample of 125 privately operated state and 
federal prison facilities was drawn to produce a sample of 
the private prisons identified by the 2005 Census of State 
and Federal Adult Correctional Facilities. The sampling 
frame of privately operated prison facilities contained 
417 facilities in 2009 and 2010 and 393 in 2011 (after 
removing prisons that had closed). Facilities were sorted 
by average daily population (ADP) in the 12-month period 
ending June 30, 2005. In 2009 and 2010, 71 facilities with 
ADPs of 488 or more were selected with certainty because 
of their size. In 2011, 69 facilities with ADPs of 445 or 
more were selected with certainty (i.e., given a 100% 
chance of selection in each sample because of their size).

The remaining facilities were sorted by region (i.e., the 
Northeast, Midwest, South, or West), state, and ADP, and 
sampled systematically with probabilities proportional to 
their size. Fifty-four facilities were selected in 2009 
and 2010, and 56 in 2011.*** Footnote 3The chance that a 
facility would be selected was directly related to the 
size of the facility (i.e., within each stratum, 
facilities with larger ADPs had a greater chance of being 
selected than facilities with smaller ADPs).***

Among the privately operated prisons selected for the 
survey, 3 had closed prior to data collection in 2009, 14 
in 2010, and 10 in 2011. Three facilities selected in 2009 
were out-of-scope. Six privately operated prisons did not 
respond to the survey in 2009:

* Carver Correctional Center, Oklahoma City, OK

* Crossroads Adult Transitional Center, Chicago, IL

* Dismas Charities, El Paso, TX

* Dismas House, St. Louis, MO

* Joseph Coleman Center, Philadelphia, PA

* Stepping Stones (Community Alcohol Drug Center), 
Mitchell, SD.

All selected and active privately operated prisons in 2010 
and 2011 participated in the survey.

Public jails
**************

In each year, 700 publicly operated jail facilities were 
selected based on data reported in BJS’s Deaths in Custody 
Reporting Program (DCRP). Based on the DCRP data in each 
year prior to the survey, the largest jail jurisdiction 
was selected in 45 states and the District of Columbia.*** 
Footnote 4 Five states with combined jail-prison systems 
had no public jails: Connecticut, Delaware, Hawaii, Rhode 
Island, and Vermont.***

Jail jurisdictions with ADPs greater than or equal to 
1,000 inmates were also selected with certainty (128 in 
2009, 131 in 2010, and 117 in 2011). The remaining jail 
jurisdictions on the frame were then grouped into three 
strata. 

* In the 2009 sample, 99 jails (out of 1,489) with an ADP of 
85 or fewer inmates were selected in the first stratum, 
317 jails (out of 770) with an ADP of 86 to 268 inmates 
were selected from the second stratum, and 110 jails (out 
of 434) with an ADP of 269 to 999 inmates were selected 
from the third stratum.

* In the 2010 sample, 117 jails (out of 1,476) with an ADP 
of 85 or fewer inmates were selected in the first stratum, 
247 jails (out of 762) with an ADP of 86 to 267 inmates 
were selected from the second stratum, and 159 jails (out 
of 436) with an ADP of 268 to 999 inmates were selected 
from the third stratum.

* In the 2011 sample, 197 jails (out of 1,489) with an ADP 
of 87 or fewer inmates were selected in the first stratum, 
120 jails (out of 773) with an ADP of 88 to 273 inmates 
were selected from the second stratum, and 220 jails (out 
of 427) with an ADP of 274 to 999 inmates were selected 
from the third stratum.

During the three years, one publicly operated jail closed 
prior to data collection (in 2009). Among the remaining 
selected jail jurisdictions in 2009, six did not respond 
to the survey:

* Bessemer City Jail, Bessemer, AL

* Cooke County Justice Center, Gainesville, TX

* Marshall County Jail, Marshalltown, IA

* Oklahoma County Jail, Oklahoma City, OK

* Osage County Jail, Linn, MO

* Roberts County Jail, Sisseton, SD.

Among the 700 jail jurisdictions selected in 2010, 8 did 
not respond to the survey:

* Cumberland County Sheriff’s Office, Portland, ME

* Erie County Holding Center, Buffalo, NY

* Houston County Sheriff’s Office, Dotham, AL

* Morgan County Sheriff’s Office, Decatur, AL

* Pottawatomie County Sheriff’s Office, Shawnee, OK

* Ray County Sheriff’s Office, Henrietta, MO

* St. Louis Department of Public Safety, St. Louis, MO

* Wichita Falls County Sheriff’s Office, Wichita Falls, 
TX.

Among the 700 selected in 2011, 5 did not respond to the 
survey:

* Cumberland County Sheriff’s Office, Portland, ME

* East Carroll Parish Sheriff’s Office, Lake Providence, 
LA

* Ostego County Jail, Gaylord, MI

* Tazewell County Jail, Pekin, IL

* Victoria County Jail, Victoria, TX.

Private jails
**************

In each year, a sample of 15 privately operated jails was 
selected based on data reported in the DCRP files. The 
DCRP file listed 41 privately operated jails in 2008, 38 
in 2009, and 34 in 2010. The facilities on the sampling 
frame were sorted by region, state, and ADP. Based on 
their large ADP, two facilities were selected with 
certainty in 2009, three in 2010, and four in 2011. The 
remaining private jails in each year were systematically 
sampled with probabilities proportional to size.

Among the sampled facilities, one had closed prior to data 
collection in 2009 and one had closed in 2010. All 
selected and active, privately operated jails in 2009, 
2010, and 2011 participated in the survey.

Other correctional facilities
*******************************

A sample of 15 adult jails in Indian country was selected 
each year. Based on BJS’s Jails in Indian Country 
collection program, jails that held adults only or adults 
and juveniles were eligible for the sampling frame. Jails 
that held only juveniles were included in the juvenile SSV 
data collection. 

Each year the sample was selected through probabilities 
proportionate to size, with ADP as the measure of size. 
For sampling purposes, jails with an ADP of less than one 
inmate were assigned 1 as their measure of size. Due to 
their relatively large size, two jails were selected with 
certainty in 2009, three in 2010, and three in 2011. There 
were 63 adult jails in Indian country in 2009, 61 in 2010, 
and 59 in 2011. The remaining jails were sorted by state 
and ADP and then selected with probability proportionate 
to size.

Of the adult jails selected in Indian country from 2009 
through 2011, one closed prior to data collection:

* Truxton Canyon Adult Detention Center, AZ (closed in 
2010). 

Five Indian country jails did not respond to the survey:

* Choctaw Justice Complex Adult Division, MS (2011)

* Fort Peck Police Department and Adult Detention, MT 
(2010)

* Oglala Sioux Tribal Offenders Facility, SD (2010 and 
2011)

* Rosebud Sioux Tribal Police Department and Adult 
Detention, SD (2010)

* Standing Rock Law Enforcement and Adult Detention 
Center, ND (2011).

Two additional censuses of other correctional facilities 
were conducted to represent--

* all facilities operated by the U.S. Air Force, U.S. 
Army, U.S. Navy, and the U.S. Marine Corps in the 
continental United States

* all facilities operated by or exclusively for 
Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE).*** Footnote 5 
Based on information from the ICE integrated decision 
support system, 19 facilities were operating in 2009 and 
2010, and 18 facilities in 2011. In 2011, Willacy 
Detention Center, TX, no longer operated as an ICE 
facility.***


All of the facilities under active operation by the U.S. 
military and ICE participated in the 2009, 2010, and 2011 
surveys.

Nonresponse adjustments
************************

Survey responses were weighted to produce national 
estimates by type of correctional facility. Data from the 
Federal Bureau of Prisons, all state systems, and military 
and ICE facilities received a weight of 1.00 because they 
were all selected with certainty and had 100% survey 
participation.

Among public jails, private jails, Indian country jails, 
and private prisons, facilities were assigned an initial 
weight equal to the inverse of the probability that they 
would be selected. In each year, weights for responding 
public jail jurisdictions were adjusted for nonresponse by 
multiplying initial weights by the ratio of the sum of 
initial weights in each stratum to the sum of weights for 
participating jurisdictions. As a result, the sum of the 
final weights in each stratum equaled the sum of weights 
for active jails in each stratum.

Nonresponse adjustments for samples of private jails, 
private prisons, and Indian country jails were based on 
ratios of the sum of weights times the measure of size for 
each affected stratum. Within each stratum, the number of 
jails or prisons in operation was multiplied by the 
measure of size (ADP) for each facility and then summed. 
Within the same stratum, the number of jails or prisons 
responding to the survey was multiplied by the measure of 
size for each facility and then summed. The ratio of the 
first sum to the later sum equaled the nonresponse 
adjustment factor for the affected stratum. Overall, after 
adjusting for nonresponse, and summing across all strata, 
the sum of the measure of size times the adjusted weight 
equaled the total number of inmates held in private jails, 
private prisons, and Indian country jails.

********************************
Reports of sexual victimization
********************************
 
Since BJS first developed uniform definitions of sexual 
victimization, correctional administrators have 
significantly enhanced their abilities to report uniform 
data on sexual victimization. In 2011, administrators in 
47 state prison systems reported allegations of abusive 
sexual contacts separately from nonconsensual sexual acts, 
an increase of 5 systems since 2006. One state limited 
counts of nonconsensual sexual acts to completed (versus 
attempted and completed) acts. The majority of state 
prison systems reported data on staff sexual misconduct 
using survey definitions. Four systems were unable to 
separate staff sexual harassment from misconduct, and one 
system did not track allegations of staff sexual 
harassment in a central database. 

Public jail administrators were less likely than prison 
administrators to report sexual victimization based on the 
definitions provided. More than a quarter (27%) of the 695 
public jail jurisdictions selected in 2011 did not record 
abusive sexual contacts separately from the more serious 
nonconsensual sexual acts. This is an improvement over the 
2006 SSV, in which a third (36%) of public jail 
jurisdictions did not record this information. Ten public 
jail jurisdictions did not record allegations of abusive 
sexual contacts, 10 based counts of nonconsensual sexual 
acts on completed acts only, and 22 based counts of 
nonconsensual sexual acts on substantiated incidents only. 
Finally, four public jail jurisdictions did not keep 
records on allegations of nonconsensual sexual acts. 

Most public jail administrators reported staff sexual 
victimization based on the SSV definitions. However, 19% 
could not separate allegations of staff sexual harassment 
from allegations of staff sexual misconduct. Three did not 
record allegations of staff sexual misconduct, while 19 
recorded substantiated incidents only. Seven did not 
record allegations of staff sexual harassment.

The published estimates are not adjusted to account for 
systems and facilities that did not meet the SSV reporting 
standards. However, these systems and facilities are noted 
in Survey of Sexual Violence in Adult Correctional 
Facilities, 2009–11 - Statistical Tables (NCJ 244227).

National estimates and accuracy
*********************************
Estimated standard errors were calculated using 
SUDAAN.***Footnote 6 See Research Triangle Institute 
(2013). SUDAAN Release 11.0.1. Research Triangle Park, 
NC.*** For summary statistics, the 2009, 2010, and 2011 
data files were treated separately. For each file, the 
sampling information was retained by treating each 
facility-level sample as its own stratum (or multiple 
strata in the public jail sample). Each file contained 11 
strata.

The 2009, 2010, and 2011 substantiated incident data files 
were combined and treated as one file. The sampling 
information for each year was retained by treating each 
facility-level sample as its own stratum (or multiple 
strata in the public jail samples), for a total of 33 
strata across all three years. A finite population 
correction was used for both summary- and incident-level 
estimation.

Estimates of the standard errors are included in appendix 
tables 1–9, 11, 13–14, and 16–19. These standard errors 
may be used to construct confidence intervals around 
survey estimates (e.g., numbers, rates, and percentages), 
as well as differences between these estimates. For 
example, based on estimates in table 1 and standard errors 
in appendix table 1, the 95% confidence interval around 
the total number of allegations in 2011 is approximately 
8,763 plus or minus 1.96 times 93, resulting in a 
confidence interval of 8,581 to 8,945. 

***********************************
Tests of statistical significance
***********************************

To facilitate the analysis, differences in the estimates 
of sexual victimization for subgroups in these tables have 
been tested for significance at the 95% level of 
confidence. For example, the difference in the total 
number of allegations of sexual victimization in 2011 
(8,763 allegations) compared to 2010 (8,404), is 
statistically significant at the 95% level of confidence 
(table 1). In all tables providing detailed comparisons, 
statistical differences at the 95% level of confidence 
have been designated with two asterisks (**). The 
comparison group has been designated with one asterisk 
(*).

******************
Appendix tables
******************

Appendix tables 10, 12, and 15 have more detailed 
information on the characteristics of substantiated 
inmate-on-inmate and staff-on-inmate sexual victimization. 
All appendix tables are available on the BJS website.

**************************************************
The Bureau of Justice Statistics, located in the Office of 
Justice Programs, U.S. Department of Justice, collects, 
analyzes, and disseminates statistical information on 
crime, criminal offenders, victims of crime, and the 
operation of justice systems at all levels of government. 
William J. Sabol is acting director.

This report was written by Allen J. Beck and Ramona R. 
Rantala. Jessica Rexroat (former BJS intern) assisted with 
the jurisdiction-level tables and summary-level national 
estimates. Alexia Cooper and Ramona R. Rantala verified 
the report.

Paul Guerino (former BJS statistician) was the project 
manager for the Survey of Sexual Victimization, 2009–11. 
Greta B. Clark carried out data collection and processing, 
under the supervision of Stephen G. Simoncini, Census 
Bureau, U.S. Department of Commerce. Linda Gehring and 
Patricia Torreyson assisted in the data collection. 
Suzanne M. Dorinski drew the facility samples and provided 
sampling weights.

Lynne McConnell (Lockheed Martin), Morgan Young, and Jill 
Thomas edited the report, and Barbara Quinn and Morgan 
Young produced the report.

January 2014, NCJ 243904

**************************************************

**************************************************
Office of Justice Programs
Innovation * Partnerships * Safer Neighborhoods
www.ojp.usdoj.gov
**************************************************

***********************
1/16/2014/JER/12:30 pm
***********************

