U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Programs
Bureau of Justice Statistics

-------------------------------------------------------
This file is text only without graphics and many of the
tables. A Zip archive of the tables in this report in
spreadsheet format (.csv) and the full report including
tables and graphics in .pdf format are available on BJS
website at: 
http://www.bjs.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbdetail&iid=5560

This report is one in a series. More recent editions 
may be available. To view a list of all in the series 
go to http://bjs.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbse&sid=63
-------------------------------------------------------

**************
Special Report
**************

Sexual Victimization Reported by Juvenile Correctional 
Authorities, 2007–12

Allen J. Beck and Ramona R. Rantala, BJS Statisticians

************************************************************
**************
Highlights
**************

* In 2012, juvenile correctional administrators reported 865 
allegations of sexual victimization in state juvenile systems and 
613 in local or private facilities and Indian country facilities.

* The number of allegations per year has fluctuated in state 
juvenile systems and the rate more than doubled, from 19 per 
1,000 youth in 2005 to 47 per 1,000 in 2012.

* In locally and privately operated facilities, the number of 
allegations dropped from 2009 to 2011 and then began to rise in 
2012. Based on 2-year rolling averages, the rate in 2012 was 13.5 
per 1,000 youth, up from 7.2 per 1,000 in 2010.

* From 2007 to 2012, nearly 9,500 allegations of sexual 
victimization of youth were reported in state or local and 
private facilities. Fifty-five percent involved youth-on-youth 
sexual victimization and 45% involved staff-on-youth sexual 
victimization.

* Upon investigation, 25% of the allegations of youth-on-youth 
sexual victimization and 10% of the allegations of staff-on-youth 
sexual victimization were substantiated during the 6-year period.

* Relative to the number of youth held, the rates of sexual 
victimization were significantly higher in state juvenile systems 
(5.9 per 1,000 youth) than in local or private facilities (2.3 
per 1,000) during the 6-year period.

* Across state systems and in locally or privately operated 
facilities, youth-on-youth sexual victimization accounted for 
more than three-quarters (76%) of substantiated incidents from 
2007 to 2012.

* Fewer than a fifth (18%) of substantiated incidents were 
reported as nonconsensual sexual acts between youth, involving 
force or threat of force and penetration, and more than a third 
(35%) were reported as abusive sexual contact, involving unwanted 
touching for sexual gratification.

* Force or threat of force was involved in nearly a quarter (22%) 
of youth-on-youth substantiated incidents.

* Victims were physically injured in 5% of substantiated 
incidents of youth-on-youth sexual victimization, and the 
majority of all victims (61%) received some form of medical 
follow-up.

* Sixty-four percent of perpetrators of staff sexual misconduct 
and 31% of perpetrators of staff sexual harassment were female.

* Among all substantiated incidents of staff sexual misconduct 
between 2007 and 2012, 64% involved a sexual relationship that 
“appeared to be willing.”  These incidents were considered an 
abuse of power, with an unknown level of coercion, and were 
illegal.

* An estimated 13% of incidents of staff sexual misconduct 
involved unwanted touching for sexual gratification, 9% involved 
pressure or abuse of power, and 6% involved indecent exposure, 
invasion of privacy, or voyeurism.

* The most commonly imposed sanctions for staff sexual misconduct 
were loss of job (in 92% of incidents) and arrest and referral 
for prosecution (51%).

* Nearly half of the staff (49%) involved in sexual harassment of 
juveniles lost their jobs, 43% were reprimanded or disciplined, 
5% were demoted, and 4% were transferred to another facility. 
About 16% of the perpetrators of staff sexual harassment were 
arrested or referred for prosecution.
************************************************************

On behalf of BJS, staff of the U.S. Census Bureau mailed survey 
forms to correctional administrators in state juvenile systems, 
juvenile correctional facilities in Indian country, and a sample 
of locally or privately operated juvenile correctional 
facilities. The administrators provided summary counts of 
allegations and substantiated incidents for each survey year. 
They also completed a separate form for each substantiated 
incident, providing details about the victim, perpetrator, and 
circumstances surrounding the incident. Administrators were given 
the option of mailing back a completed form or completing it on 
the Internet. Data collection forms can be accessed on the BJS 
website.

Each sexual act, as defined by BJS, is classified by the 
perpetrator who carried it out (i.e., inmate or staff) and the 
type of act. Administrators provided counts for each of the four 
types of sexual victimization that occurred during the prior 
calendar year: youth-on-youth nonconsensual sexual acts, youth-
on-youth abusive sexual contact, staff sexual misconduct, and 
staff sexual harassment. (See text box, Defining sexual 
victimization.)

************************************************************
******************************
Defining sexual victimization
******************************

To define sexual victimization under the Prison Rape Elimination 
Act of 2003 (P.L. 108–79), the Bureau of Justice Statistics uses 
uniform definitions that classify each sexual act by the 
perpetrator who carried out the incident (i.e., youth or staff) 
and the type of act.

Youth-on-youth sexual victimization involves sexual contact with 
a person without his or her consent or with a person who is 
unable to consent or refuse.

Nonconsensual sexual acts are the most serious victimizations, 
and include--

* contact between the penis and the vagina or the penis and the 
anus including penetration, however slight; or

* contact between the mouth and the penis, vagina, or anus; or

* penetration of the anal or genital opening of another person by 
a hand, finger, or other object.

Abusive sexual contacts are less serious victimizations, and 
include--

* intentional touching, either directly or through clothing, of 
the genitalia, anus, groin, breast, inner thigh, or buttocks of 
any person; and

* incidents in which the intent was to sexually exploit (rather 
than to harm or debilitate).

Staff-on-youth sexual victimization includes both consensual and 
nonconsensual acts perpetrated on a youth by staff. Staff 
includes an employee, volunteer, contractor, official visitor, or 
other agency representative. Family, friends, and other visitors 
are excluded.

Staff sexual misconduct includes any behavior or act of a sexual 
nature directed toward a juvenile or youthful offender by staff, 
including romantic relationships. Such acts include--

* intentional touching of the genitalia, anus, groin, breast, 
inner thigh, or buttocks with the intent to abuse, arouse, or 
gratify sexual desire; or

* completed, attempted, threatened, or requested sexual acts; or

* occurrences of indecent exposure, invasion of privacy, or staff 
voyeurism for sexual gratification.

Staff sexual harassment includes repeated verbal statements or 
include comments of a sexual nature to a juvenile or youthful 
offender by staff. Such statements include--

* demeaning references to gender or derogatory comments about 
body or clothing; or

* repeated profane or obscene language or gestures.
************************************************************

For each type of victimization, juvenile correctional 
administrators indicated how many of the allegations were 
substantiated (determined to have occurred), unsubstantiated 
(insufficient evidence to make a final determination), unfounded 
(determined not to have occurred), and still under investigation. 
The administrators then completed a separate form for each 
substantiated incident, providing details about the victim, 
perpetrator, and circumstances surrounding the incident.

In each year, survey responses were weighted to produce national 
estimates for all state systems, locally and privately operated 
juvenile facilities, and juvenile facilities in Indian country. 
Weights for locally and privately operated facilities were 
adjusted for nonresponse by multiplying the initial sampling 
weights in each stratum by the ratio of the sum of the weights 
for active facilities in the stratum to the sum of the weights 
for participating facilities. (See Methodology for a description 
of sampling procedures and weighting.)

Detailed tabulations for state systems and sampled facilities for 
each year are presented in the companion report, Survey of Sexual 
Violence in Juvenile Correctional Facilities, 2007–12 - 
Statistical Tables (NCJ 249143, BJS web, January 2016) which 
provides unweighted counts of the number of allegations and 
substantiated incidents by type of sexual victimization. Survey 
results should not be used to rank systems or facilities. 
Variations in the number of allegations and substantiated 
incidents may reflect differences in definitions and reporting 
criteria as well as variations in procedures for recording 
allegations and in the thoroughness of subsequent investigations.

Between 2007 and 2012, BJS also conducted the National Survey of 
Youth in Custody (NSYC), which relies on reports of victimization 
directly from youth. First conducted in 2008–09 and again in 
2012, the NSYC uses methodologies that provide the data needed to 
permit reliable facility- and state-level comparisons. The NSYC 
is administered using audio computer-assisted self-interview 
procedures, which allow victims to report their experiences 
anonymously. Youth use headphones to follow audio instructions 
and a touch screen to interact with a computer-assisted 
questionnaire. For facility- and state-level rankings, see Sexual 
Victimization in Juvenile Facilities Reported by Youth, 2012 (NCJ 
241708, BJS web, June 2013).

*************************************
Allegations of sexual victimization
*************************************

From 2005 to 2012, the rate of allegations
of sexual victimization rose steadily in 
state systems but varied in local and 
private facilities
*********************************************

State juvenile correctional administrators reported 865 
allegations of sexual victimization in 2012, a significant 
increase over the 735 allegations reported in 2011 (table 1). The 
annual number of allegations has fluctuated, rising from 771 in 
2005 to 912 in 2007, then dropping to 690 in 2010. At the same 
time, the number of youth held in state juvenile systems declined 
sharply, from 38,580 at yearend 2006 to 19,095 at yearend 2012 
(not shown). As a result, the rate of allegations per 1,000 youth 
held in state juvenile systems more than doubled, from 19 per 
1,000 in 2005 to 47 per 1,000 in 2012 (figure 2).

In locally and privately operated juvenile facilities, the 
estimated number of allegations of sexual victimization dropped 
sharply after 2008 and then began to rise in 2012. National 
estimates, based on reports from administrators in sampled 
locally and privately operated juvenile facilities and in Indian 
country facilities, are subject to survey sampling error. 
However, even after smoothing year-to-year variations by relying 
on 2-year moving averages, the number of allegations dropped from 
approximately 1,247 per year between 2005 and 2008 to 382 by 
2011. (See appendix table 1 for standard errors for each 2-year 
estimate.)

The declining number of youth held partially explained the drop 
in the reported allegations of sexual victimization in local or 
private juvenile facilities. On census day in October 2006, local 
and private juvenile facilities held 57,677 youth; by 2012, they 
held 38,542 youth ***Footnote 1 Hockenberry, S., Sickmund, M., 
and Sladky, A. (2009). Juvenile Residential Facility Census, 
2006: Selected Findings (NCJ 228128). Washington, DC: U.S. 
Department of Justice, Office of Juvenile Justice and Delinquency 
Prevention. Hockenberry, S., Sickmund, M., and Sladky, A. (2015). 
Juvenile Residential Facility Census, 2012: Selected Findings 
(NCJ 247207). Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Justice, Office 
of Juvenile Justice and Delinquency Prevention.***. 
Administrators in these facilities reported about 15 to 18 
allegations of sexual victimization per 1,000 youth each year 
from 2005 to 2009. The rates declined to 7 per 1,000 in 2010 and 
8 per 1,000 in 2011, then increased to 14 per 1,000 in 2012.

The reasons for the sharp contrast between rates of allegations 
of sexual victimization in state juvenile systems (47 per 1,000 
in 2012) and those in local or private facilities (14 per 1,000) 
are not known. The rates may reflect differences in the types of 
youth held in these facilities, with state systems holding youth 
who have more serious behavioral problems and other risk factors 
associated with sexual victimization. The rates might also 
reflect differences in facility or staff characteristics--such as 
size, crowding, understaffing, or inadequate training or 
management--that are associated with sexual victimization. The 
differing rates may also be due to variations in reporting 
capabilities. Most state systems are able to report on the four 
types of allegations of sexual victimization in the SSV, while 
record systems in locally and privately operated facilities might 
be less able to report on the four types of allegations 
separately. (See Methodology for reporting capabilities.)

Nearly 9,500 allegations of sexual 
victimization were reported from 2007 to 2012
*********************************************

Correctional administrators in state juvenile systems reported 
more than 4,900 allegations of sexual victimization between 2007 
and 2012 (table 2). Taking into account weights for sampled 
facilities, administrators of locally and privately operated 
juvenile facilities and in Indian country facilities reported 
more than 4,500 allegations.

Thirty-eight percent of the reported allegations were for staff 
sexual misconduct and 7% were for staff sexual harassment. About 
29% of the allegations involved youth-on-youth nonconsensual 
sexual acts, the most serious form of sexual victimization among 
youth, and 26% involved youth-on-youth abusive sexual contact.

Staff sexual misconduct accounted for nearly half (47%) of all 
allegations in state systems, compared to less than a third (29%) 
in local or private facilities. Youth-on-youth nonconsensual 
sexual acts represented a higher percentage of allegations 
reported in local or private facilities (40%) than in state 
systems (18%). Allegations of staff sexual harassment were less 
common, accounting for 10% of all allegations in state systems 
and 4% in local or private facilities and in Indian country 
facilities.

Most allegations of sexual victimization 
were unsubstantiated or unfounded
*********************************************

Based on completed investigations between 2007 and 2012, 53% of 
youth-on-youth and 49% of staff-on-youth allegations were 
unsubstantiated (i.e., the evidence was insufficient to determine 
whether the alleged victimization occurred) (table 3). These 
investigations determined that about 1 in 5 allegations involving 
other youth and 2 in 5 allegations involving staff were unfounded 
(i.e., the investigation determined that the event did not 
occur). During the 6-year period, 10% of allegations of staff-on-
youth sexual victimization were substantiated, compared to 25% of 
allegations involving youth-on-youth victimization.

In 2012, 192 of the estimated 1,477 allegations (13%) of sexual 
victimization in juvenile facilities were substantiated based on 
follow-up investigation. A third (32%) of these incidents 
involved staff sexual misconduct or staff sexual harassment 
directed toward a juvenile or youthful offender (not shown).

During the 6-year period, the outcomes of investigations differed 
significantly between state juvenile systems and locally or 
privately operated facilities. In state systems, 32% of the 
allegations of youth-on-youth sexual victimization were 
substantiated, compared to 20% in local or private facilities. 
Approximately 48% of the allegations of staff sexual misconduct 
or harassment in local or private facilities were determined to 
be unfounded, compared to 38% in state systems.

************************************************
Substantiated incidents of sexual victimization
************************************************

On average, 281 allegations of sexual 
victimization were substantiated each year
*********************************************

Between 2007 and 2012, there were 1,686 substantiated incidents 
of youth sexual victimization in juvenile facilities, or 
approximately 281 each year (table 4). An estimated 1,282 
incidents involved youth-on-youth victimizations and 404 involved 
staff-on-youth victimizations. The number of substantiated 
incidents was slightly greater in state systems (877) than in 
local or private facilities (809) including Indian country 
facilities. Relative to the number of youth held, the rates of 
sexual victimization were significantly higher in state juvenile 
systems (5.9 per 1,000 youth) than in local or private facilities 
(2.3 per 1,000 youth).

Juvenile authorities provided details 
on 97% of substantiated incidents
*********************************************

Juvenile correctional administrators were asked to provide 
detailed information on each substantiated incident of sexual 
victimization. Using a separate incident form, the SSV obtained 
incident-based data, allowing for an in-depth analysis of sexual 
victimization. Data included details on the circumstances 
surrounding each incident, characteristics of victims and 
perpetrators, type of physical force, threat of force, pressure 
used, sanctions imposed, and victim assistance.

Incident-level data were reported on 866 of the 877 substantiated 
incidents (99%) in state systems and 190 of the 208 (unweighted) 
substantiated incidents (91%) in local or private facilities 
(including Indian country facilities). Upon investigation, 56 
incidents of youth-on-youth sexual victimization in state systems 
and 13 incidents in local or private facilities were reported by 
correctional officials as voluntary and were excluded from the 
analysis.

There was no evidence of reporting bias among the 987 
substantiated incidents with detailed data. Most state systems 
and facilities provided data on all substantiated incidents every 
year. Data from state juvenile systems were missing in Georgia (7 
in 2012), Louisiana (2 in 2009), Illinois (1 in 2010), and the 
District of Columbia (1 in 2011). Data were missing from local 
and private facilities in Colorado (4 in 2007 and 2 in 2011), 
Indiana (6 in 2008), Georgia (3 in 2009), and Wisconsin (3 in 
2008).

Across all state systems and in local or private facilities, 
incidents of youth-on-youth sexual victimization accounted for 
nearly three-quarters (73%) of substantiated incidents (table 5). 
Forty-one percent of substantiated incidents in state systems 
involved abusive sexual contact, compared to 26% in locally or 
privately operated facilities. Approximately 13% of substantiated 
incidents in state systems were nonconsensual sexual acts, 
compared to 25% of incidents in local or private facilities. 
Sexual misconduct accounted for the largest percentage of 
incidents involving staff (21%), while sexual harassment 
accounted for the smallest percentage (6%).


Approximately 20% of all substantiated incidents between youth 
were determined to be voluntary. Correctional authorities 
reported these incidents because they began as allegations of 
nonconsensual sexual acts or abusive sexual contact. Upon 
investigation, authorities determined these incidents were 
voluntary; however, the juveniles involved could not legally 
consent to these acts.

Youth-on-youth victimization
*******************************

Juvenile correctional administrators reported detailed data on 
substantiated incidents of youth-on-youth sexual victimization, 
including nonconsensual sexual acts and abusive sexual contact. 
Taking into account weights for sampled facilities, detailed data 
were provided on 1,031 incidents that occurred between 2007 and 
2012. These incidents involved an estimated 1,108 victims and 
1,247 perpetrators. The data revealed that--

* Nearly two-thirds (64%) of the victims in state systems and 
three-quarters (74%) of those in locally or privately operated 
facilities were male, while about a third (36%) in state systems 
and a quarter (26%) in locally or privately operated facilities 
were female (table 6). Females were overrepresented among victims 
because at the time of the 2011 Census of Juveniles in 
Residential Placement, they represented 10% of youth in state 
systems and 15% of youth in locally or privately operated 
facilities ***Footnote 2 Sickmund, M., Sladky, T. J., Kang, W., 
and Puzzanchera, C. (2015). Easy Access to the Census of 
Juveniles in Residential Placement, available at 
www.ojjdp.gov/ojstatbb/ezacjrp/***.

* More than half (55%) of all victims were white, compared to a 
third of all youth held in juvenile facilities (33% in state 
systems and 32% in local or private facilities).

* Among victims, 28% were black and 12% were Hispanic. In 
comparison, among all youth held in juvenile correctional 
facilities in 2011, 40% were black and 23% were Hispanic.

* Nearly half of all victims (47%) were age 15 or younger, while 
less than a third (30%) of all youth held nationwide were age 15 
or younger. About 60% of victims in local or private facilities 
were age 15 or younger, compared to 38% of victims in state 
systems.

Nearly 80% of victims and perpetrators 
of youth-on-youth nonconsensual sexual 
acts were male
*********************************************

Upon investigation, it was determined that most victims of youth-
on-youth sexual assault experienced abusive sexual contact (532) 
or engaged in voluntary sexual acts (294). About a quarter (283) 
of victims experienced more serious nonconsensual sexual acts 
involving penetration or contact with the penis, vagina, or anus. 
Victims of youth-on-youth nonconsensual sexual acts were more 
likely to be male (80%) than victims of other sexual assaults 
(64%).

Across all forms of youth-on-youth sexual victimization, most 
perpetrators were male (70% of perpetrators in state systems and 
86% in local or private facilities). As with victims, more 
perpetrators in local or private facilities were age 15 or 
younger (52%) than perpetrators in state systems (30%).

Black youth accounted for 42% of perpetrators, compared to 40% of 
black youth held nationwide. Approximately 12% of perpetrators of 
youth-on-youth sexual victimizations were Hispanic, compared to 
23% of Hispanic youth held in juvenile facilities overall.

Most incidents of sexual victimization 
occurred outside the victim’s room in a 
common area or program service area
*********************************************

More than 60% of incidents of youth-on-youth sexual victimization 
occurred in a location other than the victim’s room or dormitory 
(table 7). Thirty-seven percent of incidents took place in a 
common area (such as a shower or day room), 20% in a program 
service area (such as the commissary, kitchen, storage area, 
laundry, cafeteria, workshop, hallway, classroom, or clinic), and 
8% outside of the facility or in transit. A quarter occurred in 
the victim’s room (25%) and 15% occurred in a dormitory.

Youth-on-youth incidents in locally or privately operated 
facilities (39%) were more likely to occur in the victim’s room, 
compared to incidents in state systems (15%). More than 40% of 
incidents in state systems occurred in a common area and 25% 
occurred in a program service area.

While incidents of youth-on-youth sexual victimization occurred 
at all times of the day, the majority occurred between 6 p.m. and 
midnight (39%) or between noon and 6 p.m. (34%). Nonconsensual 
sexual acts occurred most often between 6 p.m. and midnight 
(56%), while incidents of abusive sexual contact were spread 
across a broader timeframe, with the majority occurring between 6 
a.m. and noon (34%), noon and 6 p.m. (38%), and 6 p.m. and 
midnight (29%).

In two-thirds of incidents of youth-on-youth sexual 
victimization, the victim (53%) or another youth (16%) reported 
the incident. Facility staff made the initial report in about a 
third of substantiated incidents.

About 6% of victims were physically held 
down by other youth
*********************************************

Juvenile correctional authorities reported that force or threat 
of force was involved in nearly a quarter (22%) of youth-on-youth 
incidents (table 8). About a third of the incidents (36%) were 
reported as involuntary (i.e., they involved unwanted touching 
for sexual gratification without force, threat of force, bribery, 
or other forms of coercion).

Force or threat of force was more common among male victims (27%) 
of youth-on-youth sexual victimization than among female victims 
(12%). Victims age 15 or younger (30%) were more likely to have 
experienced force or threat of force than victims age 16 or older 
(17%).

In about 22% of the incidents, the victims had been talked into 
it or otherwise persuaded to be involved in the sexual contact or 
activity. Victims age 15 or younger (29%) were more likely than 
older victims (17%) to report such forms of pressure.

Victims received some form of medical 
follow-up in more than 60% of all incidents
*********************************************

Across all substantiated incidents of youth-on-youth sexual 
victimization, 1 in 20 victims (5%) sustained an injury (table 
9). Fifteen percent of victims of nonconsensual sexual acts were 
physically injured.

The majority of victims (61%) received medical attention. 
Counseling or mental health treatment was provided in about half 
of all incidents (51%). Twenty-one percent of victims were given 
a medical examination, 4% were administered a rape kit, 5% were 
tested for HIV/AIDS, and 5% were tested for other STDs.

Nearly 90% of youth who were victims of nonconsensual sexual acts 
received medical attention or counseling—34% were given a medical 
examination, 14% were administered a rape kit, 12% were tested 
for HIV/AIDS, 12% were tested for other STDs, and 78% received 
counseling or mental health treatment.

Victims of other types of incidents received less medical follow 
up. About a third of youth involved in voluntary acts (34%) and 
half of the victims of abusive sexual contact (48%) received 
counseling or mental health treatment following the incident.

The most common responses following a substantiated incident of 
youth-on-youth sexual victimization was to move the victim within 
the facility (25%), place the victim in segregation or protective 
custody (11%), or confine the youth to his or her room (4%). In 
more than half of the incidents (58%), there was no change in the 
housing assignment or custody level of the victimized youth.

Victims of nonconsensual sexual acts (64%) were more likely to be 
moved than victims of abusive sexual contact. Eighteen percent 
were placed in segregation or protective custody, 5% were 
confined to their room, 36% were moved elsewhere within the 
facility, and 6% were transferred to another unit or facility.

Most youth-on-youth perpetrators of 
nonconsensual sexual acts received legal 
sanctions or were placed in solitary 
confinement or higher levels of custody
*********************************************

A legal sanction (including referral to law enforcement, arrest, 
referral for prosecution, or a new sentence) was imposed on 
perpetrators in 54% of all substantiated incidents involving 
youth-on-youth nonconsensual sexual acts and in 23% of the 
incidents involving abusive sexual contact. Authorities in 
locally or privately operated facilities (23%) were more likely 
to refer the incident to law enforcement than were state 
authorities (5%).

In the most serious incidents, youth perpetrators were moved to 
solitary confinement or disciplinary segregation (25%), placed in 
higher custody (28%), or transferred to another unit or facility 
(20%).

Even in the least serious incidents (i.e., those involving 
voluntary sexual activity between youth), many perpetrators 
received legal sanctions (13%), were transferred to another unit 
or facility (10%), placed in higher custody (29%), or given 
solitary or disciplinary confinement (18%).

Among the multiple types of sanctions imposed on youth 
perpetrators, the most common were loss of privileges (31%), loss 
of good time (14%), and other sanctions (17%), including extra 
work, receiving a disciplinary report, and mandatory treatment or 
counseling.

Staff-on-youth victimization
******************************

Juvenile administrators reported detailed data on substantiated 
incidents of staff-on-youth sexual victimization, including staff 
sexual misconduct and staff sexual harassment. Taking into 
account weights for sampled facilities, detailed data were 
provided on 383 incidents that occurred between 2007 and 2012. 
These incidents involved an estimated 446 victims and 467 staff 
perpetrators. The data revealed that--

* Females accounted for 10% of all youth held in state systems 
and 15% of youth held in locally or privately operated facilities 
in 2011, but represented 38% of victims of staff-on-youth sexual 
victimization in state systems and 23% of victims in locally or 
privately operated facilities (table 10). Forty percent of 
victims of staff sexual harassment were female.

* Nearly half of the victims (49%) of staff sexual abuse were 
white, compared to nearly a third of all youth in juvenile 
facilities nationwide (32%).

* Forty-two percent of victims of staff sexual misconduct and 
sexual harassment were black and 12% were Hispanic, compared to 
the proportion of black (40%) and Hispanic (23%) youth held in 
residential placement or juvenile correctional facilities in 
2011.

* More than three-quarters of the victims of staff-on-youth 
sexual abuse were age 16 or older (77%), which was higher than 
their representation among victims of youth-on-youth sexual 
victimization (52%) and their representation among youth held in 
juvenile facilities nationwide (70%).

Female staff were more frequently implicated 
in incidents of sexual misconduct, and male 
staff were more frequently implicated in 
incidents of sexual harassment
*********************************************

The majority of staff perpetrators were female (55%), and nearly 
two-thirds were age 34 or younger (61%). However, the sex and age 
of staff differed by type of incident. Females accounted for 64% 
of substantiated incidents of staff sexual misconduct and males 
accounted for 69% of incidents of staff sexual harassment.

Perpetrators of staff sexual harassment were older than those 
involved in sexual misconduct. Approximately 31% of perpetrators 
of sexual harassment were age 45 or older, compared to 13% of 
staff involved in sexual misconduct. Nearly half of staff 
involved in sexual misconduct (46%) were age 29 or younger.

For perpetrators of sexual misconduct and sexual harassment 
combined, 61% were white, 32% were black, and 6% were Hispanic. 
The involvement of staff by race or Hispanic origin did not 
differ by type of facility or type of incident.

Most perpetrators of staff sexual abuse 
were supervision staff
*********************************************

Supervision staff were responsible for approximately 80% of all 
incidents of staff sexual misconduct and harassment. These staff 
were involved in 86% of substantiated incidents in local or 
private facilities and 76% in state systems. Educational staff 
were involved in nearly 10% of substantiated staff-on-youth 
incidents and medical, health care, and counseling staff were 
involved in 4%.

Full-time or part-time employees (92%) accounted for the majority 
of perpetrators, 6% were contract employees, and 2% were other 
employees such as interns and volunteers.

The sexual relationship “appeared to be 
willing” in nearly two-thirds of the 
incidents of staff sexual misconduct
*********************************************

Juvenile correctional authorities reported that sexual contact 
between the youth and staff “appeared to be willing” in 50% of 
substantiated incidents (table 11). Few incidents of staff sexual 
harassment were determined to be willing (2%). When limited to 
incidents of staff sexual misconduct, 64% of incidents were 
classified as “appeared to be willing.” Regardless of how 
juvenile correctional authorities reported these incidents, they 
were considered an abuse of power, involved an unknown level of 
coercion, and were illegal.

Nine percent of incidents of staff sexual misconduct involved 
physical force, pressure, or abuse of power. An estimated 13% of 
incidents of staff sexual misconduct involved unwanted touching 
for sexual gratification and 6% involved indecent exposure, 
invasion of privacy, or voyeurism.

The nature of staff-on-youth sexual victimization also differed 
by type of facility. Physical force, pressure, or abuse of power 
were more common among substantiated incidents in local or 
private facilities (13%) than in state systems (8%). Sexual 
harassment or repeated verbal statements of a sexual nature were 
more common among substantiated incidents in state systems (32%) 
than in local or private facilities (18%).

Nearly a third of the incidents of staff 
sexual misconduct occurred in a program 
service area
*********************************************

The most common location for staff-on-youth sexual misconduct 
(33%) was in a program service area, such as the commissary, 
kitchen, storage area, laundry, cafeteria, workshop, classroom, 
or hallway. Other locations included a common area, such as a 
dayroom, bathroom, or shower (29%); the victim’s room (20%); or a 
dormitory (13%). Although the location of incidents varied 
somewhat among types of facilities, the differences were not 
statistically significant.

Incidents of staff sexual harassment were more likely to occur in 
a common area (43%) or a dormitory (23%) than were incidents of 
staff sexual misconduct (29% in a common area and 13% in a 
dormitory).

Incidents of staff sexual victimization 
occurred at all times of the day
*********************************************

Staff sexual victimization occurred at all times of the day. The 
peak time for staff-on-youth incidents to occur was between 6 
p.m. and midnight (46%) for staff sexual misconduct and between 
noon and 6 p.m. (48%) for staff sexual harassment.

A higher percentage of incidents of staff-on-youth sexual 
victimization occurred between noon and 6 p.m. in state systems 
(45%) than in local or private facilities (21%).

When reported, staff sexual victimization was 
reported by the victim or another youth, 
rather than by staff
*********************************************

In more than half of the incidents of staff sexual victimization, 
either the victim (46%) or another youth (17%) reported the 
incident to correctional authorities. Line staff reported 20% of 
the incidents and administrative staff reported 13% of the 
incidents.

The person reporting the incident to authorities differed 
depending on the type of incident. Significantly fewer incidents 
of staff sexual misconduct were reported by victims (39%), 
compared to incidents of staff sexual harassment (69%). Incidents 
of staff sexual misconduct (13%) were more likely than incidents 
of sexual harassment (2%) to have been discovered from an 
anonymous report, hotline report, interception of a letter, 
community member, or relative or family member.

Less than half of the victims of staff sexual 
misconduct received counseling or mental 
health treatment
*********************************************

More than half of the victims of staff sexual misconduct (52%) 
did not receive any medical follow-up (table 12). Victims of 
staff sexual misconduct in local or private facilities (60%) were 
more likely than victims in state systems (36%) to receive 
medical follow-up.

The most common type of medical follow-up after an incident of 
staff sexual misconduct was counseling or mental health treatment 
(42%). Victims of staff sexual misconduct in local or private 
facilities (54%) were more likely than victims in state systems 
(29%) to receive counseling or mental health treatment.

Among all facilities, 10% of the victims were given a medical 
examination, 6% were tested for HIV/AIDS, and 7% were tested for 
other STDs. None of the victims sustained physical injuries from 
staff-on-youth sexual misconduct (not shown).

Staff perpetrators lost their job or faced 
legal action in 82% of incidents
*********************************************

Staff were discharged in 58% of substantiated incidents of staff 
sexual misconduct or harassment, resigned in 25% of substantiated 
incidents, and were arrested or referred for prosecution in 43% 
of incidents (table 13). In approximately 21% of incidents, staff 
were reprimanded, disciplined, demoted, or transferred to another 
facility.

More staff were discharged or resigned from local or private 
facilities (90%) than from state systems (76%).

Sanctions against staff differed by type of incident. The most 
commonly imposed sanctions for staff sexual misconduct were loss 
of job (92%) and legal action (51%). Staff sexual harassment 
resulted in loss of job (49%) and sanctions other than legal 
action (52%), including reprimand or discipline (42%), demotion 
or diminished responsibilities (5%), and transfer to another 
facility (4%). About 16% of the perpetrators of sexual harassment 
received legal sanctions.

***************
Methodology
***************

Sample designs
***************

The Survey of Sexual Violence (SSV), conducted each year from 
2007 to 2012, included all state-operated juvenile residential 
placement facilities used to house juveniles and youthful 
offenders, regardless of age or reason for placement. Residential 
placement facilities include detention centers; training schools; 
long-term secure facilities; reception or diagnostic centers; 
group homes or halfway houses; boot camps; ranches; forestry 
camps, wilderness or marine programs, or farms; runaway or 
homeless shelters; and residential treatment centers for 
juveniles.

The survey relied on the Juvenile Residential Facility Census 
(JRFC) and the Census of Juveniles in Residential Placement 
(CJRP), which the Office of Juvenile Justice and Delinquency 
Prevention conducts in alternating years. The JRFC in 2006, 2008, 
and 2010 was used as a sampling frame for the SSV in 2007, 2009, 
and 2011. The CJRP in 2007, 2010, and 2011 was used for the SSV 
in 2008, 2010, and 2012.

In each year, the SSV samples included all facilities within the 
juvenile correctional systems operated by the 50 states and the 
District of Columbia. Based on the JRFC and CJRP, the SSV 
included 501 state-operated juvenile facilities in 2007, 495 in 
2008, 473 in 2009, 450 in 2010, 450 in 2011, and 422 in 2012.

In each year beginning in 2008, the survey also included all 
juvenile correctional facilities in Indian country. Based on the 
Bureau of Justice Statistics’ (BJS) Annual Survey of Jails in 
Indian Country, facilities that held only juveniles were 
determined to be eligible. There were 20 juvenile correctional 
facilities in Indian country in the SSV in 2008, 19 in 2009, 18 
in 2010, 16 in 2011, and 20 in 2012.

Separate samples of locally and privately operated facilities 
were drawn in accordance with the requirement that BJS draw a 
random sample, or other scientifically appropriate sample, of not 
less than 10 percent of all facilities covered under the Prison 
Rape Elimination Act of 2003 (P.L. 108–79). In each year, 330 
locally or privately operated facilities were selected.

In the 2012 survey, facilities were first grouped into locally 
operated facilities (623) and privately operated facilities 
(1,003) and sampled independently. Of the 330 nonstate facilities 
in the sample, 35 locally operated facilities and 48 privately 
operated facilities were selected because they were the largest 
in their respective states.

The remaining sample was allocated proportionally across seven 
strata that were defined by type of facility and region: (1) 
detention facilities, Midwest; (2) detention facilities, 
Northeast; (3) detention facilities, South; (4) detention 
facilities, West; (5) local noncommitment facilities; (6) local 
commitment facilities; and (7) privately operated facilities.

Based on the number of persons assigned to beds, 17 nonstate 
detention facilities, 4 locally operated facilities, and 8 
privately operated facilities were too large compared to other 
facilities in their strata and were selected with certainty. The 
remaining facilities were selected systematically with 
probabilities proportionate to size:

* stratum 1: 23 (of 154) facilities

* stratum 2: 7 (of 64) facilities

* stratum 3: 22 (of 149) facilities

* stratum 4: 22 (of 106) facilities

* stratum 5: 3 (of 33) facilities

* stratum 6: 30 (of 141) facilities

* stratum 7: 111 (of 867) facilities.

Similar sampling procedures were employed in all other survey 
years for locally and privately operated juvenile facilities.

Survey participation
*********************

All state systems and the District of Columbia participated in 
the survey in the 6 years of data collection.

During the 5 years of data collection in Indian country, three 
juvenile correctional facilities closed prior to data collection: 
two in 2008 and one in 2009. One facility did not respond to the 
survey:

* Gerald Tex Fox Justice Center Juvenile Detention, New Town, ND 
(2009 and 2011).

During the 6 years, 14 locally operated juvenile correctional 
facilities closed prior to data collection: 1 in 2007, 5 in 2009, 
2 in 2010, 5 in 2011, and 1 in 2012. Two facilities did not 
respond to the survey:

* Camp Glenn Rockey, San Dimas, CA (2012)

* Dorothy Kirby Center, Los Angeles, CA (2009).

During the 6 years, 29 privately operated juvenile correctional 
facilities closed prior to data collection: 9 in 2007, 8 in 2008, 
3 in 2009, 2 in 2010, and 7 in 2011. Eighteen facilities did not 
respond to the survey:

* Big Brothers Home Away from Home #2, Courtland, AL (2011)

* Bonnie Brae Farms, Liberty Corner, NJ (2009)

* Carmela House Girl’s Detention, Feura Bush, NY (2010)

* Catholic Charities Services (Parmadale), Cleveland, OH (2009)

* Eckerd Youth Development Center, Clearwater, FL (2009)

* Excelsior Youth Center, Aurora, CO (2007)

* Harmony Center, Baton Rouge, LA (2009)

* Harmony Hill School, Chepachet, RI (2007)

* High Point School, Pittsfield, MA (2008)

* Hilo Emergency Shelter, Hilo, HI (2007 and 2008)

* Madison Center for Children, South Bend, IN (2009)

* Newton Campus, Wichita, KS (2009)

* Pathways, Kern County, TX (2009)

* St. Gabriel’s Hall, Audubon, PA (2010)

* Three Springs, Mountain Home, ID (2009, 2010, and 2011)

* Three Springs Residential Treatment Center, Courtland, AL 
(2008)
* Youth Bridge Therapeutic Group Home and Substance Abuse 
Program, Fayetteville, AL (2011)

* Youth Farm Campus, Peoria, IL (2009).

Reports of sexual victimization
*********************************

Since BJS first developed uniform definitions of sexual 
victimization, juvenile correctional administrators have enhanced 
their abilities to report uniform data on sexual victimization. 
In 2012, administrators in all 49 state juvenile systems and the 
District of Columbia recorded both attempted and completed 
nonconsensual sexual acts (versus completed acts only). Arkansas 
did not report any state-level data after it placed all of its 
youth in locally or privately operated juvenile facilities.

Administrators in the 47 state juvenile systems and the District 
of Columbia were also able to report allegations of abusive 
sexual contact separately from nonconsensual sexual acts, an 
increase of two systems since 2007. All state juvenile systems 
were able to report data on staff sexual misconduct using survey 
definitions. Two systems were unable to separate staff sexual 
harassment from misconduct, and one did not track allegations of 
staff sexual harassment in a central database.

Administrators of locally operated juvenile facilities were less 
likely than state juvenile administrators to report sexual 
victimization based on the definitions provided. Nearly a fifth 
(18%) of the 148 locally operated juvenile correctional 
facilities selected in 2012 did not record abusive sexual 
contacts separately from the more serious nonconsensual sexual 
acts. One local juvenile correctional facility did not record 
allegations of abusive sexual contact and one based counts of 
nonconsensual sexual acts on completed acts only. All local 
juvenile correctional facilities kept records on allegations of 
nonconsensual sexual acts, and all facilities counted all 
allegations of nonconsensual sexual acts (rather than counting 
only those that were substantiated).

Most administrators of local juvenile facilities were able to 
report staff-on-youth sexual victimization based on the SSV 
definitions. Administrators of all local facilities except one 
recorded allegations of staff sexual misconduct, while one 
recorded substantiated incidents only. One did not record 
allegations of staff sexual harassment. Sixteen percent were 
unable to separate allegations of staff sexual harassment from 
allegations of staff sexual misconduct.

Administrators of all sampled privately operated juvenile 
facilities except one kept records on allegations of both types 
of youth-on-youth sexual victimization (nonconsensual sexual acts 
and abusive sexual contact). A quarter (25%) of these 
administrators were unable to separate abusive sexual contact 
from nonconsensual sexual acts. One privately operated facility 
recorded only substantiated incidents of nonconsensual sexual 
acts, and two recorded completed acts only. All administrators of 
privately operated facilities kept records on staff-on-youth 
sexual abuse. Four recorded only substantiated incidents of staff 
sexual misconduct, and 32 (18%) were unable to separate staff 
sexual harassment from staff sexual misconduct.

Nonresponse adjustments
**************************

In each year, survey responses were weighted to produce national 
estimates by type of correctional facility. Data from all state 
systems received a weight of 1.00 because they were all selected 
with certainty and had 100% survey participation.

Data from locally and privately operated juvenile facilities were 
assigned an initial weight equal to the inverse of the 
probability that they would be selected. Within each stratum, a 
nonresponse weighting adjustment factor was calculated by summing 
the product of the measure of size (population on the census 
frame) for each active facility and the initial sampling weight 
of each selected facility in each stratum and dividing by the sum 
of the product of the measure of size and the initial sampling 
weights of each responding facility.

		  nh
 		Σi=1 MOShi × Whi × ACTIVEhi
	NRh = 	__________________________
		  nh
 		Σi=1 MOShi × Whi × RESPONDhi
where
NRh = nonresponse weighting adjustment factor for stratum h
nh = number of sampled facilities in stratum h
Whi= sample weight for facility i in stratum h
MOShi = measure of size (population) for facility i in stratum h.
The final weight, FWhi, for each responding facility is
	FWhi = Whi × NRh

As a result, the sum of the final weights in each stratum equaled 
the sum of weights of the active facilities in each stratum.

Tests of statistical significance
************************************

Estimated standard errors were calculated using SUDAAN 
***Footnote 3 Research Triangle Institute. (2013). SUDAAN Release 
11.0.1, Research Triangle Park, NC***. For summary statistics, 
the 2007, 2008, 2009, 2010, 2011, and 2012 data files were 
treated separately. For each year, the sampling and weighting 
information was retained for each stratum. Each file had 8 
strata: 1 certainty stratum (including state systems and large 
locally or privately operated facilities selected with 
certainty); 4 noncertainty strata representing detention 
facilities in the Midwest, Northeast, South, and West; 2 
noncertainty strata representing noncommitment and commitment 
private facilities; and 1 noncertainty stratum representing 
locally operated facilities.

Substantiated incident data files were combined and treated as 
one file. The sampling information for each year was retained by 
treating each facility-level sample as its own stratum, for a 
total of 48 separate strata, and then combining strata within 
years to obtain 20 separate strata to ensure sufficient data for 
calculation of standard errors.

Estimates of the standard errors are included in the appendix 
tables. These standard errors may be used to construct confidence 
intervals around survey estimates (e.g., numbers, rates, and 
percentages) and around differences between these estimates. For 
example, based on estimates in table 3 and standard errors in 
appendix table 3, the 95% confidence interval around the 
percentage of youth-on-youth allegations that were substantiated 
was 25.2% plus or minus 1.96 times 1.8%, resulting in a 
confidence interval of 21.7% to 28.7%.

To facilitate the analysis, differences in the estimates of 
sexual victimization for subgroups in the tables have been tested 
for significance at the 95% confidence level. For example, the 
difference in percentage of youth-on-youth allegations in state 
systems (32.4%) compared to locally or privately operated 
facilities (20.4%) is statistically significant at the 95% 
confidence level (table 3). In all tables that provide detailed 
comparisons, statistical differences at the 95% confidence level 
have been designated with two asterisks (**). The comparison 
group has been designated with one asterisk (*).

Other BJS reports on sexual victimization 
in juvenile facilities
*********************************************

Jurisdiction- and facility-level counts are provided in the 
companion report, Survey of Sexual Violence in Juvenile 
Correctional Facilities, 2007–12 - Statistical Tables (NCJ 
249143, BJS web, January 2016). The tables in this report provide 
counts of allegations and substantiated incidents by type of 
victimization for every jurisdiction and facility that responded 
to the 2007–12 surveys. Each table includes a measure of 
population size (based on the number of youth held at yearend) as 
a basis of comparison. However, the survey results should not be 
used to rank systems or facilities.

The SSV has annually collected official records on allegations 
and substantiated incidents of youth-on-youth and staff-on-youth 
victimization since 2004. Past reports of sexual victimization in 
juvenile facilities include--

* Sexual Violence Reported by Juvenile Correctional Authorities, 
2005–06 (NCJ 215337, BJS web, July 2008).

* Sexual Violence Reported by Correctional Authorities, 2004 (NCJ 
210333, BJS web, July 2005).

The SSV is one of a number of BJS data collections that are 
conducted to meet the mandates of the Prison Rape Elimination Act 
of 2003 (P.L. 108–79). BJS also collects data on the incidence 
and prevalence of sexual victimization directly from victims 
through surveys of youth held in state juvenile systems and 
locally or privately operated facilities that hold adjudicated 
youth under state contract. Past reports based on victim self-
reports include--

* Sexual Victimization in Juvenile Facilities Reported by Youth, 
2012 (NCJ 241708, BJS web, June 2013).

* Sexual Victimization in Juvenile Facilities Reported by Youth, 
2008–09 (NCJ 228416, BJS web, January 2010).

************************************************************
The Bureau of Justice Statistics of the U.S. Department of 
Justice is the principal federal agency responsible for measuring 
crime, criminal victimization, criminal offenders, victims of 
crime, correlates of crime, and the operation of criminal and 
civil justice systems at the federal, state, tribal, and local 
levels. BJS collects, analyzes, and disseminates reliable and 
valid statistics on crime and justice systems in the United 
States, supports improvements to state and local criminal justice 
information systems, and participates with national and 
international organizations to develop and recommend national 
standards for justice statistics. William J. Sabol is director.

This report was written by Allen J. Beck and Ramona R. Rantala. 
Ramona R. Rantala and Jessica Stroop verified the report.

Greta B. Clark carried out data collection and processing under 
the supervision of Stephen G. Simoncini, Census Bureau, U.S. 
Department of Commerce. Linda Gehring and Patricia Torreyson 
assisted in the data collection. Suzanne M. Dorinski drew the 
facility samples and provided sampling weights.

Irene Cooperman and Jill Thomas edited the report, and Barbara 
Quinn produced the report.

January 2016, NCJ 249145
************************************************************

**************************************************
Office of Justice Programs
Innovation * Partnerships * Safer Neighborhoods
www.ojp.usdoj.gov
**************************************************

**********************
10/19/2016/JER/10:55am
**********************



