U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Programs
Bureau of Justice Statistics

Stalking Victims in the United States - Revised

Shannan Catalano, Ph.D., BJS Statistician

September 2012, NCJ 224527
-----------------------------------------------------------
This file is text without graphics and many of the tables. 
A Zip archive of the tables in this report in Comma-
delimited format (CSV) and the full report including tables 
and graphs in PDF format are available at:
http://www.bjs.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbdetail&iid=1121
-----------------------------------------------------------

An estimated 3.3 million persons age 18 or older were 
victims of stalking during a 12-month period. Stalking is 
defined as a course of conduct directed at a specific person 
that would cause a reasonable person to feel fear. The data 
for this report are from the Supplemental Victimization 
Survey (SVS) conducted in 2006 as part of the National Crime 
Victimization Survey (NCVS). The SVS identified seven types 
of harassing or unwanted behaviors consistent with a course 
of conduct experienced by stalking victims. The survey 
classified individuals as stalking victims if they responded 
that they experienced at least one of these behaviors on at 
least two separate occasions. In addition, the individuals 
must have feared for their safety or that of a family member 
as a result of the course of conduct, or have experienced 
additional threatening behaviors that would cause a 
reasonable person to feel fear. 

The SVS measured the following stalking behaviors:

* making unwanted phone calls

* sending unsolicited or unwanted letters or e-mails

* following or spying on the victim

* showing up at places without a legitimate reason

* waiting at places for the victim

* leaving unwanted items, presents, or flowers

* posting information or spreading rumors about the victim 
on the internet, in a public place, or by word of mouth.

While individually these acts may not be criminal, 
collectively and repetitively these behaviors may cause a 
victim to fear for his or her safety or the safety of a 
family member. These behaviors constitute stalking for the 
purposes of this study. The federal government, all 50 
states, the District of Columbia, and U.S. territories have 
enacted laws making stalking a criminal act, although the 
elements defining the act of stalking differ across states 
(see Stalking Laws on page 3).
The SVS also identified victims who experienced the 
behaviors associated with stalking but neither reported 
feeling fear as a result of such conduct nor experienced 
actions that would cause a reasonable person to feel fear. 
This report characterizes such individuals as harassment 
victims. These instances of harassment might eventually have 
risen to the definitional requirement for stalking. However, 
at the time of the interview, the offender’s actions and 
victim’s responses did not rise to the threshold of stalking 
victimization as measured by the SVS.
Few national studies have measured the extent and nature of 
stalking in the United States. The Department of Justice 
Office on Violence Against Women funded the 2006 SVS to 
enhance empirical knowledge about stalking (see 
Methodology). The SVS, which represents the largest study of 
stalking conducted to date, incorporated elements contained 
in federal and state laws to construct a working definition 
of stalking.
-----------------------------------------------------------
Errata: The original report, released in January 2009, was 
written by Katrina Baum, Ph.D., Shannan M. Catalano, Ph.D., 
and Michael R. Rand of the Bureau of Justice Statistics, and 
Kristina Rose of the National Institute of Justice. See page 
2 for details about the revisions.
-----------------------------------------------------------
**************************************
***********
Highlights
***********
* During a 12-month period, an estimated 1.5% of persons age 
18 or older were victims of stalking.

* The percentage of stalking victims was highest for 
individuals who were divorced or separated (3.3%), compared 
to those married, never married, or widowed.

* Nearly 7 in 10 stalking victims knew their offender in 
some capacity.

* A greater percentage of females were stalked than males; 
however, females and males were equally likely to experience 
harassment.
****************************************

**************************************
************************************
Revisions to Stalking Victims in the 
United States initially released 
January 2009 
**********************************

The report Stalking Victimization in the United States was 
initially released in January 2009. Recently, two errors in 
the analysis were identified: some responses regarding 
“repetitive and unsolicited communications” were incorrectly 
classified as stalking or harassment; and the population 
used to generate percents incorrectly used persons age 12 or 
older instead of persons age 18 or older. Implementing these 
corrections resulted in revisions to point estimates of 
stalking and harassment victim counts and percentages for 
various demographic and victim characteristics. In addition, 
previous estimates were presented as victimization rates per 
1,000 persons. The revised report presents stalking and 
harassment as a prevalence estimate. Prevalence is defined 
as the proportion of the population that experienced an 
event or condition within a specified period of time.

In the sample selection procedure for the 2009 report, 170 
cases where victims reported receiving “repetitive and 
unsolicited communications” were actually spam email, 
internet scams, and contacts from telemarketers or bill 
collectors. The survey respondents were instructed to 
exclude these types of incidents. A total of 133 cases were 
erroneously included in the harassment category and 37 cases 
were incorrectly included in the stalking victimization 
category (table 1). When these cases are excluded, the 
estimate of persons who experienced behaviors consistent 
with either stalking or harassment dropped to 5.3 million 
from 5.9 million.

In conjunction with the National Crime Victimization Survey, 
the Supplemental Victimization Survey (SVS), the data source 
for this report, was administered to persons age 18 or 
older. However, the estimates presented in the 2009 release 
were generated using populations for persons age 12 or 
older. The population base for the two age groups varies by 
demographic characteristics (table 2). Using populations for 
persons age 18 or older, the estimated percentage of the 
population experiencing stalking increased from 1.4% to 
1.5%. 

This revised report is not a comprehensive update of the 
original report. The first five tables and figures presented 
in the original report and the associated text have been 
revised, reflecting the new numerator and denominator and 
statistical testing. These tables cover the key stalking and 
harassment variables. Also, the Methodology and some 
appendix material received slight revision. The original 
report, tables and other related documents are no longer 
available on the BJS website or in print. The SVS dataset is 
available to users at the National Archive of Criminal 
Justice Data at www.icpsr.umich.edu/icpsrweb/NACJD/.
***************************************
This report presents information on stalking victims. 
Harassment is discussed where appropriate to provide fuller 
context. Persons interested in viewing the SVS data in its 
entirety may obtain the data file from the University of 
Michigan’s Archive of Criminal Justice Data at 
www.icpsr.umich.edu/NACJD.

**********************************
During a 12-month period, an estimated 
1.5% of persons age 18 or older were 
a victim of stalking
***********************************

An estimated 5.3 million U.S. residents age 18 or older 
experienced behaviors consistent with either stalking or 
harassment in the 12 months preceding the SVS interview 
(table 3). Of the 5.3 million victims, more than half 
experienced behavior that met the definition of stalking. 
Approximately 1.5% of persons age 18 or older experienced 
the repetitive behaviors associated with stalking in 
addition to feeling fear or experiencing behaviors that 
would cause a reasonable person to feel fear. About 0.9% of 
persons age 18 or older were classified as victims of 
harassment who experienced a course of conduct consistent 
with stalking but who did not report feeling fear. Many 
victims of stalking reported being stalked over a period of 
months or years, and 11% of victims said they had been 
stalked for 5 years or more (figure 1).

**********************************

*************
Stalking Laws
*************

While the federal government, all 50 states, the District of 
Columbia, and U.S. territories have enacted criminal laws to 
address stalking, the legal definition of stalking varies 
across jurisdictions. State laws vary regarding the element 
of victim fear and emotional distress, as well as the 
requisite intent of the stalker.  Some state laws specify 
that the victim must have been frightened by the stalking, 
while others require only that the stalking would have 
caused a reasonable person to experience fear.  In addition, 
states vary on what level of fear is required. Some state 
laws require prosecutors to establish fear of death or 
serious bodily harm, while others require only that 
prosecutors establish that the victim suffered emotional 
distress. Interstate stalking is defined by federal law 18 
U.S.C. § 2261A.
**********************************

**********************************
Unwanted phone calls and message 
were the most common type of stalking 
behavior experienced 
**********************************

Stalking victims were about twice as likely to report 
experiencing following or spying on the victim, showing up 
at places without a legitimate reason, or waiting outside 
(or inside) places for the victim than individuals who were 
harassed. For example, 34% of stalking victims reported that 
the offender followed or spied on them, compared to 12% of 
harassment victims who reported experiencing this behavior 
(table 4). Thirty-two percent of stalking victims reported 
that the offenders showed up in places where they had no 
legitimate purpose being; approximately 12% of harassment 
victims reported this type of unwanted behavior. Also, 29% 
of stalking victims stated that the offender waited in 
places for them, while 10% of harassment victims reported 
this type of behavior.
**********************************
Risk of victimization varied more 
for stalking than for harassment
**********************************

A greater percentage of females experienced stalking than 
males (table 5). During the study period, 2.2% of females 
experienced at least one stalking victimization compared to 
0.8% of males. Males and females were equally likely to 
experience harassment.

*******
Age
*******

The percentage of persons stalked diminished with age. 
Persons ages 18 to 19 and 20 to 24 experienced the highest 
prevalence of stalking victimization. About 2.9% per 1,000 
persons ages 18 to 19 were stalked during the study period, 
and 2.8% of persons ages 20 to 24 experienced this type of 
victimization.

**********************************
Race and Hispanic origin of victim
**********************************

A lower percentage of Asians and Pacific Islander (0.6% of 
persons age 18 or older) experienced stalking than whites 
(1.5%), blacks (1.4%), and persons of two or more races 
(4.1%). Non-Hispanics and Hispanics were equally likely to 
experience stalking. During the study period, 1.5% of non-
Hispanics experienced stalking. The percentage for Hispanics 
during this period was 1.3% for persons age 18 or older.
****************
Marital status
****************

The percentage of individuals who were divorced or separated  
and stalked was 3.3%--a higher percent than for persons of 
other marital statuses. A higher percentage of individuals 
who had never been married (2.4%) were stalked than persons 
who were married (0.8%) or widowed (0.7%).

***********
Income
***********

As with crime more generally, persons residing in households 
with higher incomes experienced a lower percentage of 
stalking than those from households with lower incomes. The 
percentage of individuals in households with an annual 
income of $7,499 or less and those with an income from 
$7,500 to $14,999 experienced about the same percentage of 
stalking. However, the percentage of individuals living in 
these households experienced a higher percentage of stalking 
than persons in households with an annual income at or above 
$25,000.

*************
Relationship
*************

Nine percent of victims were stalked by a stranger, and 
nearly 70% of all victims knew their offender in some 
capacity (table 6). Stalking victims most often identified 
the stalker as a former intimate (20%) or a friend, 
roommate, or neighbor (15%).

****************************************
**************
Methodology
**************

The Supplemental Victimization Survey (SVS) was administered 
as a supplement to the Bureau of Justice Statistics’ (BJS) 
National Crime Victimization Survey (NCVS) during January 
through June, 2006. All NCVS respondents age 18 and older 
were eligible for the supplement. About 65,270 persons 
participated in the supplemental survey. The response rate 
for eligible individuals was 83%. 

The estimates presented in this report are annual prevalence 
estimates for persons age 18 or older victimized by stalking 
or other harassing behaviors during the 12 months prior to 
the interview. The interviews were conducted during the 
first 6 months of 2006; therefore, the majority of the 
stalking behaviors occurred during 2005. 
The Office on Violence Against Women (OVW) and BJS convened 
a 1-day forum with experts in the area of stalking and 
violence against women. Researchers, law enforcement 
officials, prosecutors, and victim advocates comprised the 
expert group. Also included in the group were 
representatives from the Census Bureau, the federal agency 
that carries out survey development and data collection for 
BJS. The purpose of the 1-day forum was to discuss 
definitional and methodological issues surrounding the crime 
of stalking, as well as to determine where gaps in current 
information on stalking existed and how the SVS could 
further the research and knowledge regarding this crime.

Following this meeting, a small federal working group was 
formed with representatives from OVW, BJS, and the Census 
Bureau. The working group met weekly for approximately 12 
months until a satisfactory survey instrument was completed 
and approved. During the last phase of the survey 
development, the Census Bureau conducted cognitive 
interviews with stalking victims around the United States to 
test the instrument before administering the SVS in the 
field. Revisions were made to the instrument to incorporate 
findings from these interviews.

The name of the SVS intentionally does not indicate that the 
focus of the survey is stalking. This decision was made to 
avoid biasing the responses of individuals and the 
subsequent estimates. The respondent had to state that they 
experienced all of the following in order for a course of 
behavior to be counted as stalking victimization:

* At least one of the harassing behaviors in the stalking 
screener

* Harassing behavior more than one time on separate days

* At least one of multiple harassing contacts during the 
12 months prior to the interview

* Fear for their own or a family member’s safety or 
experience of another crime committed by the offender that 
would make a reasonable person fearful (see the Screener 
questions box).

Victims of harassment met all the requirements for stalking 
except those associated with induced fear or the commission 
of additional associated crimes. Harassing acts by bill 
collectors, telephone solicitors, or other sales people were 
excluded from the estimates of stalking and harassment. 

***************************  
Standard error computations
***************************
Comparisons of percentages and counts made in this report 
were tested to determine if observed differences were 
statistically significant. Differences described as higher, 
lower, or different passed a test at the .05 level of 
statistical significance (95% confidence level). Differences 
described as somewhat, lightly, marginally, or some 
indication passed a test at the .10 level of statistical 
significance (90% confidence level). Caution is required 
when comparing estimates not explicitly discussed in the 
report.

****************************************
Screener questions for stalking behaviors
****************************************

Now, I would like to ask you some questions about any 
unwanted contacts or harassing behavior you may have 
experienced that frightened, concerned, angered, or annoyed 
you. Please include acts committed by strangers, casual 
acquaintances, friends, relatives, and even spouses and 
partners. I want to remind you that the information you 
provide is confidential.

Not including bill collectors, telephone solicitors, or 
other sales people, has anyone, male or female, EVER – 
frightened, concerned, angered, or annoyed you by... 

a.	making unwanted phones calls to you or leaving messages?

b. sending unsolicited or unwanted letters, e-mails, or 
other forms of written correspondence or communication?

c. following you or spying on you?

d. waiting outside or inside places for you such as your 
home, school, workplace, or recreation place?

e. showing up at places where you were even though he or she 
had no business being there?

f. leaving unwanted items, presents, or flowers?

g. posting information or spreading rumors about you on the 
Internet, in a public place, or by word of mouth?

h. none
***********************************
Actions that would cause a reasonable 
person to feel fear
***********************************

1. In order to frighten or intimidate you, did this person 
attack or attempt to attack...
 
a. a child

b. another family member

c. a friend or co-worker

d. a pet 

2. During the last twelve months, did this person attack or 
attempt to attack you by...

hitting, slapping, or knocking you down

choking or strangling you

raping or sexually assaulting you

attacking you with a weapon

chasing or dragging with a car

attacking you in some other way


3. Other than the attacks or attempted attacks you just told 
me about, during the last 12 months, did this person 
threaten to...

a.	kill you

b.	rape or sexually assault you

c.	harm you with a weapon

d.	hit, slap, or harm you in some other way

e. harm or kidnap a child

f.	harm another family member

g.	harm a friend or co-worker

h.	harm a pet

i harm or kill himself/herself

4. What were you most afraid of happening as these unwanted 
contacts or behaviors were occurring?
 
a.	death

b.	physical/bodily harm


c.	harm or kidnap respondent’s child

d.	harm current partner/boyfriend/girlfriend

e.	harm other family members

f.	don’t know what would happen

******************************
Questions used to measure fear
*****************************

How did the behavior of (this person/these persons) make you 
feel when it FIRST started? Anything else?

a. anxious/concerned

b. annoyed/angry

c. frightened

d. depressed

e. helpless

f. sick

g. suicidal

h. some other way–specify

2. How did you feel as the behavior progressed? Anything 
else?

a. no change in feelings

b. anxious/concerned

c. annoyed/angry

d. frightened

e. depressed

f. helpless

g. sick

h. suicidal

i. some other way–specify

********************************************
The Bureau of Justice Statistics is the statistical agency 
of the U.S. Department of Justice. James P. Lynch is the 
director.

This report was revised by Shannan Catalano, Ph.D., and 
Jennifer  L. Truman verified the report. The original 
report, released in January 2009, was written by Katrina 
Baum, Ph.D., Shannan Catalano, Ph.D., and Michael Rand, 
Bureau of Justice Statistics, and Kristina Rose, National 
Institute of Justice . 

Catherine Bird and Jill Thomas edited the report and Barbara 
Quinn produced the report under the supervision of Doris J. 
James.

September 2012, NCJ 224527
****************************************

*************************
Office of Justice Programs
Innovation * Partnerships 
* Safer Neighborhoods
www.ojp.usdoj.gov
**************************

9/26/2012/JER/12:55am
