U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Programs
Bureau of Justice Statistics

----------------------------------------------------------
This report is one in a series. More recent editions 
may be available. To view a list of all reports in the 
series go to http://www.bjs.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbse&sid=77

This file is text only without graphics and many of the
tables. A Zip archive of the tables in this report in
spreadsheet format (.csv) and the full report including
tables and graphics in .pdf format are available on BJS
website at: http://www.bjs.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbdetail&iid=4758
-----------------------------------------------------------

*******************
Technical Report
*******************

Tribal Crime Data Collection Activities, 2013


Steven W. Perry, BJS Statistician


The Tribal Law and Order Act (TLOA), enacted on July 29, 
2010, requires the Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS) to (1) 
establish and implement a tribal data collection system and 
(2) support tribal participation in national records and 
information systems (P.L. 111-211, 124 Stat. 2258, § 
251(b)). The act further requires the director of BJS to 
consult with Indian tribes to establish and implement this 
data collection system. The BJS director is required to 
report to Congress within one year of enactment, and 
annually thereafter, the data collected and analyzed in 
accordance with the act. This report describes activities in 
support of BJS’s tribal crime data collection system and 
summarizes findings and program enhancements for FY 2013. 

A total of 566 tribal entities in the contiguous 48 states 
and in Alaska were eligible for funding and services from 
the Bureau of Indian Affairs (BIA) in 2013. In 2010, there 
were 334 federally and state-recognized American Indian 
reservations. An estimated 4.8 million people lived on 
American Indian reservations or in Alaska Native villages in 
the U.S. in 2010. About a quarter (1.1 million) of these 
individuals classified themselves as American Indian or 
Alaska Native (AIAN).***Footnote 1,2 See Indian entities 
recognized and eligible to receive services from the United 
States Bureau of Indian Affairs at 
http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/FR-2013-05-06/pdf/2013-
10649.pdf. For more information about federally recognized 
tribes, reservations, and Alaska Native village statistical 
areas, see http://www.bjs.gov/content/pub/pdf/tcdca12.pdf.  
***

The tribal justice system in Indian country varies across 
tribal nations and regions of the country. Criminal 
jurisdiction in Indian country--federally recognized 
reservations, tribal communities, and identified trust 
lands--varies by type of crime committed, whether the 
offender or victim is a tribal member, and the state in 
which the offense occurred. Due to the sovereign status of 
federally recognized tribes in the United States, crimes 
committed in Indian country are often subject to concurrent 
jurisdiction between multiple criminal justice agencies.

This update includes summaries of BJS’s effort to—

* enhance current state and local criminal justice 
statistics to include more information on agencies serving 
tribal lands

* support tribal reporting to the FBI’s Uniform Crime 
Reporting (UCR) Program and tribal award eligibility for the 
Edward Byrne Memorial Justice Assistance Grant (JAG) Program 
(figure 1)

* study the handling of AIAN juvenile and adult criminal 
cases in the federal justice system

* enhance current funding programs to support tribal 
participation in regional and national criminal justice 
databases.

*******************************************************
***********
HIGHLIGHTS
***********

* BJS released a solicitation in 2013 to survey the tribal 
activities and caseloads of all state and local law 
enforcement agencies and all local prosecutors’ offices that 
provided services on tribal lands.

* BJS designed a national survey of tribal courts. 
BJS expanded the survey of jails in Indian country to 
explore other offense types, including burglary, larceny-
theft, and public intoxication.

* BJS is preparing a report that documents the processing 
of American Indian or Alaska Native (AIAN) juvenile and 
adult cases in the federal justice system.

* The BJS website continues to serve as the central source 
for DOJ tribal statistics and funding opportunities for 
improved data reporting in national record systems. 

* The number of tribal law enforcement agencies reporting 
crime data in the FBI’s Uniform Crime Reporting (UCR) 
Program increased from 143 in 2010 to 168 in 2011. 

* Tribes received $404,317 through the Bureau of Justice 
Assistance’s 2013 Edward Byrne Memorial Justice Assistance 
Grant (JAG) Program. 

* BJS announced multiple funding opportunities in 2013 to 
improve tribal criminal history records and the reporting 
of persons prohibited from receiving or possessing a firearm 
under state or federal law.
*******************************************************

*************************************
Tribal data collections during 2013
*************************************

During FY 2013, BJS focused on improving its understanding 
of the role of state, local, and tribal justice agencies 
serving on tribal lands. Current ongoing surveys were 
enhanced to incorporate items to measure the unique roles of 
law enforcement and prosecutors. In addition, BJS continues 
to prepare for a new census of tribal courts in the U.S. and 
to enhance other ongoing BJS efforts to improve Indian 
country justice statistics. 

Law enforcement
****************

The Census of State and Local Law Enforcement Agencies 
(CSLLEA) is conducted about every 4 years. CSLLEA provides 
data on the over 18,000 state, local, and tribal law 
enforcement agencies operating in the U.S. CSLLEA captures 
data on each agency’s number of sworn and civilian personnel 
and the range of law enforcement functions each agency 
performs. The census collected data from about 178 tribal 
law enforcement agencies operating in Indian country in 2008 
and about 171 in 2000.

To better understand the role played by nontribal state and 
local justice agencies with jurisdiction over Indian country 
or tribal lands, BJS is enhancing the next CSLLEA, which 
will go into the field in early 2014. The 2013 CSLLEA will 
include questions that ask every U.S. law enforcement agency 
if it provides services on tribal lands. From the census, 
BJS will have a complete list of all state and local law 
enforcement offices that served tribal lands in 2013. 
Building on the availability of this list at the end of 
2014, BJS plans to conduct a more in-depth study of the 
activities of nontribal law enforcement agencies that 
service tribal lands. This new survey, the 2014 Census of 
Law Enforcement Agencies that Serve Tribal Lands, will go 
into the field in 2015. It will document the tribal 
caseloads of these agencies and the nature of the law 
enforcement services provided. The survey will also provide 
an understanding of the legal and structural procedures and 
processes in place for fighting crime on tribal lands based 
on federal mandates or consensual jurisdiction arrangements 
between tribal and state governments.

Prosecutors
************

The 2013 National Census of State Court Prosecutors will 
survey all of the estimated 2,400 state prosecutors’ offices 
litigating felony cases in state courts of general 
jurisdiction. The data gathered in 2014 will include 
information on caseloads, annual budgets, tenure, salaries, 
and office staffing (including attorneys, investigators, 
victim advocates, and support personnel). This survey will 
ask if the office provides services to tribal lands. If so, 
respondents will be asked to complete items that explore 
administrative and legal issues related to their handling of 
felony cases arising on tribal lands. The prosecutor census 
will contain a 1-page section focused on Indian country 
justice statistics, including the nature of the 
jurisdiction, sources of authority, case types, and 
reciprocity between tribal, state, and intergovernmental 
agreements.

While this section of the 2013 prosecutor census will enable 
BJS to better understand the role and relationship between 
the state and local prosecutors’ offices and Indian country 
justice, more detail is needed. As BJS did in the area of 
law enforcement, BJS will use the list generated by the 2013 
census of all prosecutors’ offices that serve Indian country 
or tribal lands as a starting point for a more complete 
investigation of procedures and workloads related to crime 
on tribal lands. The 2014 Census of Prosecutors’ Offices 
that Serve Tribal Lands will solicit detailed information 
on administrative procedures and practices, tribal 
caseloads, provided services, and the capabilities of the 
agencies to report detailed data on the tribal matters they 
handle.

The 2014 Census of Law Enforcement Agencies that Serve 
Tribal Lands and the 2014 Census of Prosecutors’ Offices 
that Serve Tribal Lands could have been developed and 
implemented through separate BJS solicitations. However, 
BJS determined that the developmental work needed to acquire 
the detailed understanding of the critical issues--and the 
related statistical data--that each survey should capture 
would be duplicative, so the two surveys were combined into 
one solicitation. This combination ensures that the items 
developed for the separate surveys will address the same 
range of topics in a similar fashion, which will allow the 
resulting data to be combined for a more detailed 
understanding of tribal justice in specific geographic areas 
or for tribal entities.

Tribal courts in the U.S.
**************************

In 2013, BJS continued the development of the National 
Survey of Tribal Court Systems (NSTCS-13). In support of 
the survey, BJS has met with federal and tribal partners 
to help better understand the administrative and operational 
characteristics of tribal justice systems.

More specifically, BJS has met with tribal members and 
justice professionals, participated in various Indian 
country-related meetings, initiated direct federal-tribal 
contact, established a tribal justice panel, and convened 
a panel of tribal court judges. BJS also sent a letter that 
announced the NSTCS-13 and its significance to all 566 
federally and state-recognized tribes across the U.S., 
inviting the tribal nations to participate and provide input 
in the design and development of the survey instrument. 
The BIA was also consulted for the development of questions 
related to the Court of Federal Regulations (CFR).

Through its outreach efforts, BJS has identified about 300 
U.S. tribal courts that will receive the survey in FY 2014. 
The NSTCS-13 will gather information on the administration 
and operation of tribal courts, staffing and budgets, 
appellate courts, juries, juvenile and adult caseloads, 
prosecution and indigent defense services, enhanced 
sentencing authority and expanded jurisdiction, and access 
to regional and national criminal justice record systems. 
As currently planned, the NSTCS-13 will be a comprehensive 
survey for tribal courts in the lower 48 states, which 
includes a supplement for Alaskan tribes and villages and 
a supplement for the CFR.

Jails in Indian country
************************

The Survey of Jails in Indian Country (SJIC) is BJS’s only 
national data collection that provides an annual source of 
data on the estimated 80 Indian country jails and detention 
facilities. Indian country jails are owned or operated by 
tribal authorities or the BIA and confine persons before or 
after adjudication. Inmates sentenced to jails usually have 
a sentence of 1 year or less. The SJIC provides data on 
inmate counts from each jail by sex, age, and supervision 
status; offense charged; annual admissions and releases; 
rated capacity and level of occupancy; jail staffing; and 
counts of inmate deaths and suicide attempts.

Over the years, the SJIC survey has expanded to gather data 
on inmate offenses at the time of admission, population 
measurements (e.g., average daily population and offense 
categories), and inmate health services and facility 
programs. In the past, BJS has also enhanced the set of 
categories for most serious offense to include domestic 
violence, aggravated and simple assault, rape and sexual 
assault, and other violent offenses. In the 2103 survey, 
BJS expanded the other offense category with options for 
burglary, larceny-theft, and public intoxication.

Federal justice statistics
***************************

Last year, The Urban Institute received funding from BJS 
to determine the extent to which data from BJS’s Federal 
Justice Statistics Program (FJSP) could be used to identify 
and describe tribal youth processed in the federal justice 
system. After conducting interviews with tribal and federal 
officials to better understand the nature and quality of the 
FJSP data, The Urban Institute prepared and BJS released 
Tribal Youth in the Federal Justice System, NCJ 234218, BJS 
Web, June 2011. This report documents the prevalence, 
characteristics, and outcomes of tribal and nontribal youth 
handled in the federal criminal justice system.

During FY 2013, BJS continued to work with federal justice 
agencies that contribute data to the FJSP to determine the 
criteria that could be used to identify federal cases 
handled in Indian country. By yearend 2013, BJS will produce 
a new set of summary information using federal 
administrative data from arrest to imprisonment. The data 
spans from FY 2009 through 2011 and includes information 
about juveniles and adults processed by the federal justice 
system for crimes occurring in Indian country. In addition, 
the Federal Criminal Case Processing query tool on the BJS 
website will be enhanced to enable users to create 
customized tables that detail the handling of Indian country 
cases.

National Crime Victimization Survey (NCVS) 
offender race categories expanded
******************************************

The National Crime Victimization Survey (NCVS) is the 
nation’s primary source of information on criminal 
victimization. The NCVS collects information on nonfatal 
crimes reported and not reported to the police against 
persons age 12 or older from a nationally representative 
sample of U.S. households. Prior to 2012, the NCVS asked 
victims to report the race of the offender(s) by using one 
of three racial categories: white, black, and other races. 
For both substantive and technical reasons, and to comply 
with the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) reporting 
guidelines on race and Hispanic origin, in 2012 the NCVS 
expanded the offender race response categories to include an 
item on Hispanic origin and five racial categories: white; 
black; American Indian or Alaska Native (AIAN); and Asian, 
Native Hawaiian, or other Pacific Islander. BJS found that 
many victims knew their offenders, so victims could reliably 
report the offender’s race and Hispanic origin. In addition, 
respondents are still allowed to respond “Don’t know” when 
uncertain. BJS expects to receive the 2012 NCVS data in mid-
2013, and a complete report on the changes in racial coding 
is forthcoming. As a result of these changes, beginning with 
the 2012 data, the NCVS will be able to capture information 
on victimizations committed by offenders perceived by the 
victims to be AIAN.

BJS Indian country justice statistics webpage 
**********************************************

The new webpage serves as a repository for information and 
updates to BJS tribal data collections. The page provides 
links to the latest victimization, law enforcement, courts, 
corrections, and criminal justice data improvement 
information (figure 2). Links to the FBI’s extract files of 
violent and property offenses known to tribal law 
enforcement by state from 2008 to 2011 are available on the 
BJS website. BJS is exploring the possibility of developing 
a data query tool that allows users to create tables on 
various tribal justice statistics, including courts, the 
appellate system, caseloads, and indigent defense.

Tribal participation in national records 
and information systems 
******************************************

During 2013, BJS has focused on three primary areas to 
improve tribal participation in national record and 
information systems: expand tribal reporting to the UCR 
Program, eligibility increases for tribal JAG awards, and 
expand tribal funding eligibility to include the National 
Criminal History Improvement Program (NCHIP) and the 
National Instant Criminal Background Check System (NICS) Act 
Record Improvement Program (NARIP). 

Offenses reported by tribal 
law enforcement agencies 
*****************************


The FBI asks law enforcement agencies to report eight crime 
types to the UCR: four violent crimes (i.e., murder, 
forcible rape, robbery, and aggravated assault) and four 
property crimes (i.e., burglary, larceny-theft, motor 
vehicle theft, and arson). These eight crimes are often 
considered the barometer of the overall crime problem in a 
jurisdiction. In the past, it was common practice for tribal 
law enforcement agencies to report their UCR data to the 
BIA. The BIA would then combine the data and report the 
aggregated counts to the FBI, thereby making it impossible 
for the FBI to report crime data at the tribal level. 
Without tribe-specific crime data from the FBI, tribes were 
unable to receive some crime-based federal funding.

BJS worked with the BIA, FBI, and tribes to change these 
reporting practices. As a result, the overall number of 
tribal law enforcement agencies with identifiable crime data 
in the FBI’s UCR Program increased from 2008 to 2011 (figure 
3). A total of 168 AIAN tribal law enforcement agencies had 
disaggregated data published in the FBI’s annual report, 
Crime in the United States, 2011, compared to 12 tribal law 
enforcement agencies in the 2008 report. Tribal law 
enforcement agencies reported about 26,500 violent and 
property crimes occurring on tribal lands in 2011 (table 1).

In 2011, 72% of violent offenses reported by tribal law 
enforcement agencies could be traced back to the originating 
tribal reservation, up from 6% in 2008. Among these 
offenses, the reporting tribal law enforcement agency was 
identified in the majority of all reports of murder and 
nonnegligent manslaughter (95%), robbery (88%), and 
aggravated assault (89%).

From 2008 to 2011, the proportion of property offenses 
reported by tribal law enforcement agencies that were 
traceable to the tribe increased from 13% to 88%. Among 
these property offenses, the majority of all reports of 
burglary (92%), larceny-theft (88%), motor vehicle theft 
(87%), and arson (93%) could be linked to the tribe 
reporting the crime.

Tribes and the Edward Byrne Memorial 
Justice Assistance Grant (JAG) Program 
******************************************

A total of $2,926,229 was made available in 113 awards to 
tribal governments through the JAG Program from 2008 to 2013 
(table 2). The Bureau of Justice Assistance administers the 
JAG Program. BJS calculates the JAG formula-based award 
amounts using specifications outlined in the legislation. 
JAG awards may be used for the following seven purpose 
areas: law enforcement; prosecution and courts; prevention 
and education; corrections and community corrections; drug 
treatment; planning, evaluation, and technology improvement; 
and crime victim and witness programs.

Nationally, the total funds available for JAG have steadily 
decreased since 2009, but the proportion allocated to tribes 
has remained relatively stable since 2010.

The total 2013 JAG funding allocation for tribal nations was 
approximately $404,317, a 14% decrease from the $471,375 
available for allocation in 2012. The overall number of 
tribes eligible for JAG awards decreased from 22 in 2012 
to 21 in 2013.

The five largest total tribal government JAG allocations 
in 2013 were awarded to the Navajo Nation ($78,223), Rosebud 
($33,042), Coeur D’Alene Tribe ($23,964), Oglala Sioux Tribe 
($23,139), and Standing Rock Sioux Tribe ($23,102). Four of 
the five tribes also received the highest awards in 2012 
(the Oglala Sioux Tribe was not in the top five in 2011). 
All of the tribes that were eligible for direct awards in 
2013 were from 11 states.

From 2008 to 2013, about 75% of all direct tribal JAG awards 
went to tribal governments in Arizona ($887,442), Montana 
($537,084), North Dakota ($394,251), and South Dakota 
($380,946). In 2013, the Hoopa Valley tribe became the first 
tribe in California to be eligible for a JAG award 
($10,810).

National Criminal History Improvement 
Program (NCHIP) and Indian country
******************************************

In 2013, BJS announced the continuation of the NCHIP. 
Federally and state-recognized tribal governments are 
eligible to apply. Tribes may submit applications as part of 
a multi-tribe consortium. NCHIP serves as an umbrella for 
various record improvement activities and funding streams, 
each of which has unique goals and objectives. BJS strongly 
encourages states and tribes to ensure the integrated 
functioning of record improvement initiatives, regardless of 
the funding source. No tribe has received NCHIP funding 
since tribes became eligible funding recipients in FY 2011.

The goal of the NCHIP grant program is to improve the 
nation’s safety and security by enhancing the quality, 
completeness, and accessibility of criminal history record 
information by ensuring the nationwide implementation of 
criminal justice and noncriminal justice background check 
systems. Despite the tremendous progress made toward 
criminal record improvements among states, several 
significant shortcomings remain among tribal justice 
agencies. 

BJS has identified several limitations confronting tribal 
nations. Most tribes do not have the capabilities or 
requisite technologies to support the transmittal of records 
to the national systems, either through their own 
infrastructure or via the state. Additionally, many tribes 
have not yet converted their manual or other nonautomated 
records to electronic means. Some entities are not yet 
submitting qualifying records to the National Crime 
Information Center (NCIC) Protection Order File, and the FBI 
reports continued problems with the appropriate flagging 
of protection orders regarding the prohibition for firearm 
purchases.

National Instant Criminal Background Check 
System (NICS) Act Record Improvement Program 
(NARIP) and Indian Country
******************************************

In 2013, BJS announced the continuation of the NARIP. 
Federally and state-recognized Indian tribal governments 
are eligible to apply. The NARIP requires Federal Firearms 
Licensees to contact the NICS before transferring a firearm 
to an unlicensed person to obtain information on whether 
the proposed transferee is prohibited from receiving or 
possessing a firearm under state or federal law.

he NARIP seeks to address the gap in information available 
to NICS about prohibiting mental health adjudications and 
commitments and other prohibiting factors. Filling these 
information gaps will better enable the system to operate 
as intended to keep guns out of the hands of persons 
prohibited by federal or state law from receiving or 
possessing firearms. The automation of records will also 
help reduce delays for law-abiding gun purchasers. The NARIP 
authorizes a grant program to assist states and tribes in 
providing certain information to the NICS and prescribes 
grant penalties for noncompliance with the act’s record-
completeness goals. NARIP funds have not been awarded to 
a tribal government since the program’s inception in 2009.

The NARIP also requires that grants be made to each state 
or tribal government, consistent with plans for the 
integration, automation, and accessibility of criminal 
history records, for use by the court systems to improve 
automation and transmittal to federal and state repositories 
of (1) criminal history dispositions, (2) records relevant 
to determining whether a person has been convicted of a 
misdemeanor crime of domestic violence or whether a person 
is the subject of a prohibiting domestic violence protection 
order, and (3) prohibiting mental health adjudications and 
commitments.

*****************************
Previously released reports
*****************************

* Jails in Indian Country, 2012 (NCJ 242187)

* Tribal Crime Data Collection Activities, 2012 (NCJ 239077)

* Tribal Crime Data Collection Activities, 2011 (NCJ 234518)

* Jails in Indian Country, 2011 (NCJ 238978)

* Jails in Indian Country, 2010 (NCJ 236073)

* Jails in Indian Country, 2009 (NCJ 232223)

* Jails in Indian Country, 2008 (NCJ 228271)

* Tribal Law Enforcement, 2008 (NCJ 234217)

* Summary: Tribal Youth in the Federal Justice System (NCJ 
234218)

* State Prosecutors’ Offices with Jurisdiction in Indian 
Country, 2007 (NCJ 234241)

* Jails in Indian Country, 2007 (NCJ 223760)

* Improving Criminal History Records in Indian Country, 
2004-2006 (NCJ 218913)

* Jails in Indian Country, 2004 (NCJ 214257)

* Jails in Indian Country, 2003 (NCJ 208597)

* Census of Tribal Justice Agencies in Indian Country, 2002 
(NCJ 205332)

* American Indians and Crime (NCJ 203097)

* Jails in Indian Country, 2002 (NCJ 198997)

* Jails in Indian Country, 2001 (NCJ 193400)

* Jails in Indian Country, 2000 (NCJ 188156)

* Tribal Law Enforcement, 2000 (NCJ 197936)

* Jails in Indian Country 1998–1999 (NCJ 173410)

* American Indians and Crime (NCJ 173386)

************************
BJS sponsored research
************************

Summary: Tribal Youth in the Federal Justice System, 1999–
2008 (NCJ 234218), produced by the Urban Institute, May 2011

************************************************
The Bureau of Justice Statistics, located in the Office of 
Justice Programs, U.S. Department of Justice, collects, 
analyses, and disseminates statistical information on crime, 
criminal offenders, victims of crime, and the operation of 
justice systems at all levels of government. William J. 
Sabol is acting director. 

This report was written by Steven W. Perry. Alexia Cooper 
provided statistical review and verification of the report.
Morgan Young and Jill Thomas edited the report, and
Barbara Quinn produced the report, under the supervision of 
Doris J. James.

August 2013, NCJ 242584
************************************************

************************************************
Office of Justice Programs
Innovation * Partnerships * Safer Neighborhoods
www.ojp.usdoj.gov
************************************************

************************
8/15/13/JER/10:05am
************************
