U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Programs
Bureau of Justice Statistics

Tribal Crime Data Collection Activities, 2012
Steven W. Perry, BJS Statistician

September 2012, NCJ 239077
------------------------------------------
This file is text without graphics and many of 
the tables. A Zip archive of the tables in 
this report in Comma-delimited format (CSV) 
and the full report including tables and graphs 
in PDF format are available at:
http://www.bjs.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbdetail&iid=4493
----------------------------------------------
*************
Introduction
*************

The Tribal Law and Order Act (TLOA), enacted July 29, 2010, 
requires the Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS) to 
(1) establish and implement a tribal data collection system 
and (2) support tribal participation in national records and 
information systems (P.L. 111-211, 124 Stat. 2258, § 251(b)). 
The act further requires that the director of BJS consult 
with Indian tribes to establish and implement this data 
collection system. The BJS director is required to report to 
Congress within one year of enactment, and annually 
thereafter, the data collected and analyzed in accordance 
with the act. 

This report describes activities in support of BJS’s tribal 
crime data collection system and summarizes findings and 
program enhancements between 2008 and 2012. This analysis 
includes data from the 2010 U.S. Census, the Census of State 
and Local Law Enforcement Agencies (CSLLEA), the FBI’s 
Uniform Crime Reporting (UCR) Program, the Edward Byrne 
Memorial Justice Assistance Grant (JAG) Program, and the 
Federal Justice Statistics Program (FJSP).

The tribal justice system in Indian country varies across 
tribal nations and regions of the country. Criminal 
jurisdiction in Indian country—federally recognized 
reservations, tribal communities, and identified trust lands—
varies by type of crime committed, whether the offender or 
victim is a tribal member, and the state in which the offense 
occurred. Due to the sovereign status of federally recognized 
tribes in the United States, crimes committed in Indian 
country are often subject to concurrent jurisdiction between 
multiple criminal justice agencies. 

Advances in the quality and quantity of tribal crime data 
created additional funding opportunities for American Indian 
tribes in 2010. As a result of improved reporting and the 
disaggregation of crime data about individual tribes, the 
annual Edward Byrne Memorial Justice Assistance.

********************************
*************
Highlights
*************

* In 2010, the self-identified American Indian and Alaska 
Native (AIAN) population totaled 5.2 million, or 1.7% of the 
estimated 308.7 million people in the United States.

* About 3.5 million (76%) of the 4.6 million people living on 
American Indian reservations or in Alaska Native villages in 
2010 were not AIAN.

* Tribally operated law enforcement agencies in Indian 
country employed 3,043 full-time equivalent (FTE) personnel 
in 2008.

* From 2008 to 2011, about $2 million in Edward Byrne 
Memorial Justice Assistance Grant (JAG) program awards were 
allocated to tribal governments.

* The FBI’s Crime in the U.S., 2010 included crime data from 
144 tribal law enforcement agencies, up from 12 tribal 
agencies in the 2008 report.

* From 2008 to 2010, tribal law enforcement agencies across 
the U.S. reported about 72,000 violent and property crimes to 
the FBI’s Uniform Crime Reporting Program.

* Suspects investigated for violent offenses in Indian 
country totaled 23% of all federal investigations for violent 
offenses in FY 2010.

In 2002, about 188 tribes reported they had some form of a 
tribal justice system.***Footnote 1 Census of Tribal Justice 
Agencies in Indian Country, 2002, NCJ 205332, BJS website, 
December 2005.*** In September 2008, American Indian tribes 
operated 178 law enforcement agencies located in 
28 states and employed about 3,000 full-time sworn personnel. 
***Footnote 2 Compendium of Tribal Crime Data, 2011, 
NCJ 234459, BJS website, June 2011.*** Indian country housed 
2,239 inmates in about 80 jails and detention facilities at 
midyear 2011. 

Gaps exist in the available information on the tribal justice 
system, such as the understanding of existing and emerging 
issues in the administration and operations of tribal courts 
in the U.S; their annual caseloads; the implementation of 
TLOA enhancements; and selection criteria for judges, 
prosecutors, and public defenders. In August 2011, BJS 
awarded a multi-year grant to conduct a National Survey of 
Tribal Court Systems to address some of these concerns. In 
addition, BJS initiated the development and design of an 
Indian country justice statistics webpage with the goal of 
pulling together all available statistical data on the tribal 
justice system in one place.
 
***********************
2010 Census and race
***********************

To adequately understand the nature and context of American 
Indian crime and justice, the results of the 2010 U.S. Census 
of Population and Housing prove useful. These results provide 
information about the number and demographic characteristics 
of American Indians and Alaska Natives (AIAN) who reside in 
the U.S., where they live, their tribal affiliations, and 
residential patterns within Indian country and off 
reservation lands.
 
The 2010 Census asked individuals to self-identify their 
race. Respondents were able to select one or more race 
categories, as well as their Hispanic or Latino origin 
(ethnicity). AIAN is the label given to persons whose 
ancestors originate from North, Central, or South America and 
who maintain tribal affiliation or community attachment. 

In April 2010, the total self-identified AIAN population 
accounted for 5.2 million, or 1.7%, of the estimated 308.7 
million people in the United States. ***Footnote 3 U.S. 
Census Bureau (2011). Overview of Race and Hispanic Origin: 
2010. Retrieved from 
http://www.census.gov/prod/cen2010/briefs/c2010br-02.pdf.***


 This includes people who identified themselves as AIAN only 
(56%) or AIAN in combination with at least one other race 
category (44%) (table 1). Between 2000 and 2010, the number 
of people who self-reported themselves as AIAN (either alone 
or in combination with at least one other race) increased by 
26.7%, a growth rate almost three times that of the overall 
U.S. population (9.7%) (not shown in table). 

Between 2000 and 2010, the number of American Indians and 
Alaska Natives who described themselves as being of 
multiracial increased 39.2%, compared to an 18.4% increase in 
those who described themselves as being a single race. As a 
result, the percentage of American Indians and Alaska Natives 
who described themselves as being of more than one race 
increased from 40% in 2000 to 44% in 2010.

In 2010, about 23% of AIAN people classified themselves as 
being of Hispanic or Latino origin. This proportion was 
similar whether they described themselves as being a single 
race (23%) or multiracial (22%).

*****************************
AIAN grouping or affiliation 
*****************************

In the 2010 Census, persons who identified themselves as AIAN 
on the questionnaire were asked to report their enrolled 
tribe or principal tribal affiliation. Respondents could 
report one or more tribal affiliation. Census information on 
tribal affiliation is based on self-identification and 
therefore is not limited to federally or state-recognized 
tribes or actual tribal enrollment. 

AIAN persons in the United States may belong to a tribe--or a 
band or clan--that has a distinct history, culture, and often 
a separate language. In 2010, among the total 5.2 million 
self-described AIAN persons (either of one race or 
multiracial), 3.4 million (65%), indicated a tribal 
affiliation (not shown in table).***Footnote 4 U.S. Census 
Bureau (2011). The American Indian and Alaska Native 
population: 2010. Retrieved from 
http://www.census.gov/prod/cen2010/briefs/c2010br-10.pdf.*** 
AIAN persons of a single race were more likely to report a 
tribal grouping, compared to AIAN persons identifying as two 
or more races. In 2010, 70% (or 2.9 million) of AIAN persons 
who reported a single race specified a tribal grouping, 
compared to 60% (or 1.4 million) of AIAN persons who reported 
they were two or more races. 

In 2010, ten tribes comprised 40% of the AIAN population who 
report affiliation with one or more tribes (table 2). The 
Cherokee tribe had the largest AIAN population (819,000) in 
the U.S., followed by the Navajo (332,000), Choctaw 
(196,000), Mexican American Indian (175,000), Chippewa 
(170,000), Sioux (170,000), Apache (112,000), Blackfeet 
(105,000), Creek (88,000), and Iroquois (81,000).

Over half (56%) of AIAN persons in 2010 classified themselves 
as being of a single race. Among the 10 largest tribes in 
2010, the proportion of AIAN persons that classified 
themselves as a single race varied by tribe (figure 2). 
Persons who described themselves as Navajo had the highest 
proportion (86%) of individuals who identified with a single 
race in 2010. Among the 332,000 persons affiliated with the 
Navajo, 286,000 reported being of a single race. In 
comparison, among the 105,000 persons that reported 
affiliation with the Blackfeet tribe 27,000 (26%) indicated 
they were of a single race.

*****************************
American Indian reservations 
and Alaska Native villages
*****************************
 
A total of 565 tribal entities are recognized and eligible 
for funding and services from the Bureau of Indian Affairs. 
There were 334 federally and state-recognized American Indian 
reservations in 2010. In the U.S., 4.8 million people lived 
on American Indian reservations or in Alaska Native villages. 
A quarter (or 1.1 million) of these individuals classified 
themselves as AIAN. (See Methodology for more information 
about federally recognized tribes, reservations, and Alaska 
Native village statistical areas.)

Most (77% or 3.5 million) of the 4.6 million people living on 
American Indian reservations in the continental U.S. did not 
identify as AIAN during 2010 (table 3). A total of 243,000 
people resided within Alaska Native village statistical 
areas, and about 78,000 (or 32%) self-identified as AIAN. 

During 2010, a minority (23% or 1.1 million) of the 5.2 
million AIAN persons in the U.S. lived on American Indian 
reservations or in Alaska Native villages. A greater 
proportion of AIAN persons who lived in tribal areas 
identified themselves as being of one race (84%) than 
multiracial (16%). About 67% of the AIAN-only population 
lived outside of tribal areas, compared to 92% of the AIAN 
multiracial population. 

The Census Bureau ranked the American Indian reservations 
based on the number of AIAN persons (either of one race or 
multiracial) living on the reservation.***Footnote 5 U.S. 
Census Bureau (2011). The American Indian and Alaska Native 
Population: 2010. Retrieved from 
http://www.census.gov/prod/cen2010/briefs/c2010br-10.pdf.*** 
Navajo Nation was the largest reservation with more than 
169,000 identifying as AIAN. The next largest reservations 
with more than 10,000 persons identifying as AIAN included 
Pine Ridge (17,000), Fort Apache (13,000), Gila River 
(11,000), Osage (10,000), San Carlos (10,000), Rosebud 
reservation and trust land (10,000) (table 4). 

Among reservations, the Navajo Nation had the largest total 
(including AIAN and non-AIAN residents) population in 2010 
(174,000). The Osage Reservation in Oklahoma had the second 
largest total population (47,000), and it had the largest 
proportion (79%) of residents that were not AIAN. 

Alaska Native villages were also ranked by AIAN population 
(either of one race or multiracial). The three Alaska Native 
village statistical areas with the largest AIAN populations 
in 2010 were: Knik (7,000), Bethel (4,000), and Kenaitze 
(3,000).

Among the Alaska Native villages in 2010, Knik (66,000) had 
the largest total population, followed by Kenaitze (33,000) 
and Chickaloon (23,000). About 90% of the residents of these 
villages were not AIAN.

-----------------------
Tribal law enforcement
-----------------------

**********************************
Tribal sworn full-time equivalent 
(FTE) law enforcement staffing 
**********************************
Tribally operated law enforcement agencies provide a broad 
range of public safety services, such as responding to calls 
for service, investigating crimes, enforcing traffic laws, 
executing arrest warrants, serving process, and conducting 
search and rescue operations within the boundaries of tribal 
lands in the U.S. 

In September 2008, AIAN tribes operated 178 law enforcement 
agencies that employed at least one full-time sworn officer 
with general arrest powers in the continental U.S.***Footnote 
6 For additional information on the Bureau of Indian Affairs 
police and operations see 
http://www.bia.gov/WhoWeAre/BIA/OJS/DOLE/index.htm.*** About 
90% of tribally operated law enforcement agencies were 
general purpose police departments, and the others were 
special jurisdiction agencies responsible for enforcing 
natural resources laws.

Tribally operated law enforcement agencies in 2008 employed 
3,043 sworn full-time equivalent (FTE) personnel (table 5). 
Collectively, tribes operated law enforcement agencies in 28 
states. The largest tribal law enforcement agency, the Navajo 
Police Department, employed 393 FTE personnel in Arizona, New 
Mexico, and Utah. Washington (24), Arizona (22), Oklahoma 
(19), and New Mexico (17) had the largest numbers of tribal 
law enforcement agencies (not shown in table).
 
In addition to tribally operated law enforcement agencies, 
the Bureau of Indian Affairs (BIA), within the Department of 
the Interior (DOI), operated 42 agencies that provided law 
enforcement services in Indian country.6 These agencies 
police Indian tribes and reservations that do not have their 
own police force and oversee other tribal police 
organizations. As federal police officers, BIA police enforce 
federal laws relating to Indian country and, in some 
instances, are granted authority to enforce tribal law by 
tribal ordinance or statute. Nationwide, BIA employed an 
estimated 277 full-time sworn personnel in 2008.

Alaska is a Public Law 280 state. (See Methodology for more 
information about Public Law 280.) Alaska Native tribes 
generally do not have police departments, but many have 
Village Public Safety Officers (VPSO) who reside in the 
community. The VPSO Program began as a means of providing 
rural Alaskan communities with needed public safety services 
at the local level. For additional information, see 
http://www.dps.state.ak.us/ast/vpso/.

***************************************
Tribal Uniform Crime Reporting Program 
training and technical assistance
***************************************

The FBI’s Uniform Crime Reporting (UCR) Program is a national 
data collection system that captures information on crimes 
known to law enforcement agencies across the country. Among 
their many uses, the UCR data are used to distribute federal 
funds to state and local justice systems. In the past, many 
tribal justice systems were ineligible to receive some 
federal funds because they did not contribute data to the UCR 
Program.

Between 2009 and 2010, over 140 individual law enforcement 
officials, representing almost 70 tribal nations across the 
U.S., received training on the UCR Program sponsored by BJS 
in coordination with the FBI. The purpose of the two-day 
training was to expand the number of tribal agencies 
reporting to the UCR and to improve the accuracy of the 
reported data. 

These UCR trainings addressed the unique needs and problems 
faced by Indian country sworn personnel who are responsible 
for reporting data to the UCR. In addition to the standard 
UCR training, 21 tribal law enforcement agencies also 
completed training on the FBI’s National Incident Based 
Reporting System (NIBRS) (table 6).***Footnote 7 National 
Incident Based Reporting System (NIBRS) is an incident-based 
reporting system that collects more comprehensive and 
detailed data on crime from local, state, and federal law 
enforcement agencies.****

***************************************
******************************
Tribal Data Exchange Process:
****************************** 

How do tribal crime statistics get into the UCR?
From 2009 to 2012, BJS funded the Recovery Act: Tribal Crime 
Data Collection, Analysis, and Estimation Project to improve 
tribal crime data reporting. The goal of this project was to 
enhance the utility of tribal crime and justice data by 
increasing the number of tribes reporting crime data to the 
FBI’s Uniform Crime Reporting (UCR) Program, and in doing so  
increasing the number of tribes eligible for the Edward Byrne 
Memorial Justice Assistance Grant (JAG) Program.

In order to accomplish this goal, BJS formed a tribal federal 
coordinating committee composed of representatives from BJS, 
the FBI, and the Bureau of Indian Affairs (BIA) at the 
Department of Interior. An important activity of the federal 
coordinating committee was to implement the Tribal Data 
Exchange Process (TDEP) developed by BJS. 

TDEP enables the integration of tribal justice data into 
regional and national criminal justice systems, such as the 
UCR. TDEP illustrates to stakeholders the conceptual process 
of collecting, validating, verifying, and disseminating 
Indian country crime and justice information. This model is 
premised upon collaboration between federal and tribal 
organizations and provides a culturally sensitive approach to 
information-sharing. TDEP simplifies the process into four 
primary steps involving the custody of the data (figure 3).
**************************************

********************************
Offenses known to tribal law 
enforcements agencies between 
2008 and 2010
********************************

The FBI asks law enforcement agencies to report eight crime 
types to the traditional UCR Program: four violent crimes 
(murder, forcible rape, robbery, and aggravated assault) and 
four property crimes (burglary, larceny-theft, motor vehicle 
theft, and arson). These eight crimes are often considered 
the barometer of the overall crime problem in a jurisdiction. 
From 2008 to 2010, tribal law enforcement agencies across the 
U.S. reported about 72,000 violent and property crimes to the 
UCR Program (table 7).  

Of the approximately 17,000 violent crimes reported by tribal 
law enforcement agencies between 2008 and 2010, 77% were 
aggravated assaults, 15% were forcible rapes, 5% were 
robberies, and 3% were criminal homicides. During the same 
time, tribal law enforcement agencies reported approximately 
54,000 property crimes to the FBI: 55% were larceny-thefts, 
26% were burglaries, 14% were motor vehicle thefts, and 5% 
were arsons.

***************************************
Tribe-specific reporting of crime data 
***************************************

From 2008 to 2010, the overall number of tribal law 
enforcement agencies with identifiable crime data in the 
FBI’s UCR Program increased. In 2010, 144 AIAN tribal law 
enforcement agencies had disaggregated data published in the 
FBI’s annual Crime in the United States. report, compared to 
only 12 tribal law enforcement agencies in the 2008 report. 
In 2010, 79% of violent offenses reported by tribal law 
enforcement agencies could be traced back to the originating 
tribal reservation, up substantially from 1% in 2008 (figure 
4). Between 2008 and 2010, the proportion of property 
offenses reported by tribal law enforcement agencies that 
were traceable to the tribe increased from 13% to 88%.

********************************
Tribes and Justice Assistance 
Grant (JAG) Program 
********************************

A total of $2,050,537 was made available to tribal 
governments through the Edward Byrne Memorial Justice 
Assistance Grant (JAG) Program between 2008 and 2011 (table 
8). The Bureau of Justice Assistance (BJA) administers the 
JAG Program. BJS calculates the JAG formula-based award 
amounts using specifications outlined in the legislation. JAG 
awards may be used for the following seven purposes areas: 
law enforcement; prosecution and courts; prevention and 
education; corrections and community corrections; drug 
treatment; planning, evaluation, and technology improvement; 
and crime victim and witness programs.

The total 2011 JAG funding allocation for tribal nations was 
approximately $632,000, a 322% increase over the $150,000 
allocation in 2008. In addition, the overall number of tribes 
eligible for JAG awards increased from 5 in 2008 to 23 in 
2011. The five largest total tribal government JAG 
allocations in 2011 were awarded to the Blackfeet ($91,922), 
Navajo Nation ($73,720), Standing Rock Sioux Tribe ($42,527), 
Rosebud ($39,878), and Choctaw ($35,657). Four of the five 
tribes also received the highest awards in 2010 (the Standing 
Rock Sioux Tribe was not included). All of the tribes that 
were eligible for direct awards in 2011 were from 11 states. 
From 2008 to 2011, about 77% of all direct tribal JAG awards 
went to tribal governments in Arizona ($633,958), Montana 
($405,960), North Dakota ($279,557), and South Dakota 
($255,276).

------------------------
Tribal court systems
------------------------

The tribal justice systems promote self-determination, 
advance and protect the rights of self-government, and fight 
crime and violence in Indian country. The number of cases 
handled in tribal courts across the U.S. is unknown. Some 
criminal and civil issues are handled directly by indigenous 
forums or tribal courts, some are sent through the federal 
court system, and others are handled by state courts. The 
court systems operating in Indian country vary by tribe. The 
Indian country judicial system revolves around a core of five 
legal institutions: indigenous forums (also known as 
traditional courts), Court of Indian Offenses (Code of 
Federal Regulations (CFR)), inter-tribal courts, the courts 
of appeal, and tribal courts of general jurisdiction. For a 
definition of the tribal justice system, see Methodology.

BJS has actively coordinated and collaborated with federal 
and tribal partners to develop and design the 2012 National 
Survey of Tribal Court Systems (NSTCS-12). The NSTCS-12 is 
part of BJS’s multifaceted effort to expand its statistical 
activities related to tribal crime and justice issues. 

*******************************
2012 National Survey of Tribal 
Court Systems
*******************************

Through the NSTCS-12, BJS will gather information to improve 
the nation’s understanding of the administrative and 
operational characteristics of tribal justice systems, 
including budgets, staffing, caseloads and case process, 
indigent defense services, implementation of various enhanced 
sentencing provisions of the Tribal Law and Order Act (TLOA), 
and various indigenous or traditional dispute forums 
operating within Indian country. To facilitate this effort, 
BJS has undertaken the following steps.

Since December 2011, BJS has coordinated regular meetings 
with the various Department of Justice (DOJ) components, 
including the Office of Tribal Justice; FBI; Office for 
Access to Justice Initiative; National Institute of Justice; 
BJA; Office for Victims of Crime; Office of Juvenile Justice 
and Delinquency Prevention; Sex Offender Sentencing, 
Monitoring, Apprehending, Registering, and Tracking Office; 
and the DOI’s BIA. The various DOJ components described the 
types of information about tribal courts relevant to their 
respective programs and roles. They also provided guidance to 
address emerging TLOA issues.

In March 2012, the director of BJS sent a letter to all 
federally and state-recognized tribes across the U.S. 
announcing the new survey and its significance, as well as 
inviting participation and input from tribal nations in the 
design and development of the survey instrument. The NSTCS-12 
design and development process includes, but is not limited 
to 1) conducting outreach to and collaborating with tribal 
justice agencies and experts, 2) verifying contact 
information for all tribal courts in the U.S., 3) identifying 
subject matter and policy topics, 4) exploring methods to 
ensure high response rates, and 5) determining the types of 
follow-up required.

********************************
Outreach and collaboration with 
tribal justice systems
********************************

Since 2011, BJS has actively conducted (and will continue to 
conduct) outreach with tribal members and justice 
professionals through its participation and attendance at 
various Indian country-related conferences or meetings:

* Office of Justice Programs Tribal Justice, Safety and 
Wellness Conference, New Mexico, December 2011

* Indian Law and Order Commission Field Hearing, Washington, 
DC, March 2012

* Bureau of Justice Assistance Tribal Civil and Criminal 
Legal Assistance Program Planning and Coordination Meeting, 
Washington, DC, June 2012

* Justice Department’s Tribal Nations Leadership Council, 
Washington, DC, July 2012

* 2012 National Tribal Judicial Conference, Minnesota, 
October 2012

* Office for Victims of Crime 13th National Indian Nations 
Conference, California, December 2012.
The NSTCS-12 is also being developed and designed in 
consultation with tribal justice professionals. The following 
organizations serve as partners for the NSTCS-12 and met at 
the Office of Justice Programs in May 2012:

* American Indian Development Associates, New Mexico

* Hamline University School of Law, Minnesota

* Kansas University School of Law’s Tribal Law and Government 
Center

* National Judicial College, the National Tribal Judicial 
Center, Nevada

* Standing Rock Sioux Tribe, South Dakota

* The Supreme Court of the Navajo Nation, Arizona

* Syracuse University College of Law, the Center for 
Indigenous Law, Governance, and Citizenship 

* Tanana Chiefs Conference, Alaska

* Tribal Law and Policy Institute, California

* University of Colorado at Boulder, American Indian Law 
Clinic

* University of North Dakota School of Law’s Tribal Judicial 
Institute.

BJS has also assembled a panel of tribal judges and court 
administrators to serve as consultants to the project. BJS 
selected tribal court personnel in similar positions to those 
that will actually complete the instrument. BJS met with the 
panel in Rapid City, South Dakota in August 2012. The 
following tribal courts are formal partners and nine will be 
field testing the NSTCS-12 questionnaire:

* Organized Village of Kake, Alaska

* Central Council of Tlingit and Haida Tribes, Alaska

* Citizen Potowatomi Nation, Oklahoma

* Eastern Band of Cherokee Supreme Court, North Carolina
Fort Peck, Montana

* Intertribal Court of Southern California, California

* Navajo Nation Supreme Court, Arizona

* Pokagon Band of Potawatomi, Michigan

* Pueblo of Tesuque, New Mexico

* Rosebud Sioux Tribal Court, South Dakota

* Sisseton-Wahpeton Oyate, Prairie Island Indian Community, 
Turtle Mountain, and Mille Lacs Band of Ojibwe, North Dakota
 
* Tulalip Tribes, Washington.

Following the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) approval 
for the NSTCS-12 form, BJS will submit the survey to 
approximately 300 federally recognized tribal justice systems 
in the United States. The anticipated response period for the 
NSTCS-12 is from March 2013 through July 2013. BJS will 
prepare a report of the data collected in FY2014. BJS will 
also provide public access to the NSTCS-12 data file on the 
BJS website, along with topical pages containing text, tables 
and graphics on a wide range of tribal justice issues.?

*********************
NSTCS-12 Methodology:
**********************

Tribal courts vary considerably across the U.S. and a single 
survey instrument would not suffice for this endeavor. 
Therefore, the proposed survey instrument will include a core 
survey and two modules or supplements. 

* The core survey will be administered to all tribal courts 
in the lower 48 states;

* Alaska module: the 200 plus tribes in Alaska will receive 
an extract of the core survey with questions specifically 
targeting the courts operating in the natives villages; and  

* Court of Federal Regulations (CFR): The 20 plus CFR courts 
operating on behalf of BIA will receive a simplified 
instrument that captures the critical items not collected in 
the administrative processes by the Department of Interior.

The NSTCS-12 will serve as an authoritative source for tribal 
court statistics, foster greater transparency in addressing 
the problems of crime and justice in Indian country, and 
enrich tribal eligibility for justice program funding 
resources, prevention programs, and justice services. The 
tribal justice professionals have identified substantial 
benefits, both empirical and practical, of the NSTCS-12 data 
collection and subsequent analyses for tribal nations, 
including: 

* define the organizational structure of tribal courts.

* describe the magnitude of tribal court workload and the 
spectrum of work.
 
* identify and define the Alaska Native village courts 
system.


* demonstrate funding and service needs for tribal courts.

* demonstrate the integrity of the tribal judicial processes.
*
provide a voice to educate the federal government and other 
agencies about the important work and effectiveness of tribal 
courts and justice systems.

* include tribes in the national dialogue on justice systems.

* help the federal government fulfill the trust 
responsibility to Indian nations through accurate and 
reliable information.

-----------------------------
Tribal jails and detention 
centers in Indian country
------------------------------

BJS initiated the Survey of Jails in Indian Country (SJIC) in 
1998 as a component of the Annual Survey of Jails (ASJ). The 
SJIC includes all known Indian country correctional 
facilities operated by tribal authorities or the Bureau of 
Indian Affairs (BIA), U.S. Department of the Interior.

The number jails or detention centers operating in Indian 
country rose 16% from 69 facilities in 1998 to 80 as of 2011. 
The recent survey collected data on the number of inmates and 
percent of capacity occupied based on the average daily 
population (ADP), midyear population, and peak population in 
facilities in June 2011. Also, the survey gathered 
information on staffing, offense types, and conviction 
status, as well as an addendum that collected in-depth data 
on inmates, health services and facility programs.

Based on the recent results from Jails in Indian Country, 
2011 (NCJ 238978, BJS website, September 2012) about 78,700 
American Indian or Alaska Natives were under correctional 
supervision—either at federal, state, local, or tribal 
facilities—in the United States. About 3% (2,239) of all 
American Indians or Alaska Natives under correctional  
supervision were confined in 80 Indian country jails across 
the U.S. at midyear 2011. Additional and detailed results 
from the Jails in Indian Country reports are available on the 
BJS website.

-----------------------------------
AIAN in the federal justice system
----------------------------------- 

United States attorneys prosecute violations of federal laws 
in Indian country. Section 1153 of U.S. Title 18 grants 
jurisdiction to federal courts over Indians who commit in 
Indian country any of the crimes listed under the Major 
Crimes Act of 1885, regardless of whether the victim was an 
Indian or non-Indian. At the federal level, Indian country 
means all land within the limits of any Indian reservation 
under the jurisdiction of the United States government, 
including all dependent communities and Indian allotments as 
described in 18 USC § 1151. Data on suspects investigated and 
charged in U.S. district court come from BJS’s Federal 
Justice Statistics Program (FJSP). These data do not identify 
the race of suspects but do identify whether the offense 
occurred in Indian country.

*************** 
Investigations 
***************

Criminal referrals, or matters, are submitted to the U.S. 
attorneys by federal investigative agencies—Drug Enforcement 
Agency, FBI, and Bureau of Indian Affairs—and state and local 
investigative agencies. The U.S. attorney decides the 
appropriateness of bringing criminal charges and may initiate 
prosecution. 

In fiscal year 2010, U.S. attorneys investigated 195,260 
suspects in matters from across the United States for 
violation of federal laws. Just over 1% (2,283) were for 
alleged offenses occurring in Indian country (table 9).

A total of 6,353 suspects in 2010 were investigated by 
federal prosecutors for a violent offense. The 1,479 suspects 
investigated for violent offenses in Indian country 
represented 23% of all federal investigations for violent 
offenses in fiscal year 2010. Violent crimes were the 
majority (67%) of offenses investigated by U.S. attorneys in 
Indian country in fiscal year 2010. The number of Indian 
country suspects investigated by U.S. attorneys for violence 
declined 3%, from 1,525 in 2000 to 1,479 in 2010. The number 
of Indian country suspects investigated for property, drug, 
and other offenses increased 57%, from 475 in 2000 to 746 in 
2010. Over half (55%) of the total 2,283 Indian country 
investigations in 2010 were in the judicial districts of 
Arizona, South Dakota and New Mexico (figure 5).

**************
Charges filed 
**************

At the conclusion of the investigation of a criminal matter, 
U.S. attorneys may decline prosecution, file criminal charges 
in a U.S. district court, or refer the matter to a U.S. 
magistrate or a state jurisdiction. In fiscal year 2010, U.S. 
attorneys filed criminal cases against 100,253 defendants in 
all federal district courts. About 1% (1,192) of these 
involved cases in Indian country (table 10). 

In fiscal year 2010, 3,493 defendants were charged with a 
violent offense in cases filed in U.S. district court during 
fiscal year 2010. The 727 Indian country defendant cases made 
up 21% of the total. Sixty-three percent of all defendants 
charged in U.S. district courts for crimes in Indian country 
were charged with violent crimes, compared to about 4% 
nationally. Indian country suspects were more likely to be 
charged in U.S. district court for violent crimes relative to 
other offenses because federal jurisdiction focuses on major 
crimes committed on tribal lands.

Overall, the number of federal district court filings for all 
violent crime increased by 29%, from 78,000 in 2000 to 
100,300 in 2010. The number of all filing against Indian 
country defendants for violent crimes increased 7% from 677 
in 2000 to 727 in 2010. 

***********************************
Improving federal justice statistics 
in Indian country
***********************************


During FY 2013, BJS will coordinate with federal justice 
agencies that contribute data to the Federal Justice 
Statistics Program (FJSP) to determine the criteria they use 
to flag federal cases handled in Indian country. BJS will 
produce summary information about youth and adults processed 
by the federal justice system for crimes occurring in Indian 
country using federal administrative data that spans from 
arrest to imprisonment for fiscal years 2009-2011. In the 
future, the Federal Criminal Case Processing query tool on 
the BJS website will allow data users to create customized 
tables on Indian country cases as a standard feature.   

-------------------------
Indian country justice 
statistics webpage
-------------------------

To ensure Indian country justice statistics are easily 
located and accessible from a central source, BJS is 
developing the Indian country justice statistics webpage to 
serve as a repository link for crime and justice information 
and statistical data related to Indian county or tribal 
justice systems (figure 6). 

This webpage will include links to American Indian or tribal-
specific 1) publications and products, 2) statistical data 
collections, 3) funding sources; 4) other relevant non-DOJ 
statistical data, and 5) a questions and answers section. 
Currently available on the site are the 2008 through 2010 
published violent and property crime data files disaggregated 
by tribe.

**************
Methodology
**************

The Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS) is the principal 
statistics agency in the Department of Justice. BJS collects, 
analyzes, publishes, and disseminates information on crime, 
criminal offenders, crime victims, and criminal justice 
operations. BJS also provides financial and technical support 
to state, local, and tribal governments to improve their 
statistical capabilities and the quality and the utility of 
their criminal history records. BJS provides statistical 
information to the President, Congress, other officials, and 
the public with accurate, timely, and objective data about 
crime and the management of criminal justice. 

This report is comprised of a compilation of analyses from 
various data collected by federal statistical agencies and 
organizations. 

*************************************
2010 Census of Population and Housing
*************************************

The U.S. Census counts every resident in the United States. 
It is mandated by Article I, Section 2 of the Constitution 
and takes place every 10 years. The data collected by the 
decennial census determine the number of seats each state has 
in the U.S. House of Representatives and are also used to 
distribute billions in federal funds to local communities. 
National and state population totals from the 2010 Census 
were released in December 2010 (see 
http://2010.census.gov/2010census/about/).

* Race and ethnicity: The Census Bureau collects information 
on race based on the U.S. Office of Management and Budget’s 
(OMB) 1977 Revisions to the Standards for the Classification 
of Federal Data on Race and Ethnicity. Federal standards 
require that race and Hispanic or Latino origin (ethnicity) 
are asked as separate questions, as race and ethnicity 
represent distinct concepts. 

* Alternate population estimates: The estimate of 5.2 million 
American Indian and Alaska Native (AIAN) people living in the 
United States in 2010 is based on self-reports of race. This 
and other estimates published throughout the report do not 
include any statistical imputation procedures to account for 
nonrespondents or for people who described themselves as some 
other race on the 2010 Census questionnaire. The Census 
Bureau reconciles the 2010 Census race categories with the 
race categories that appear in administrative data by 
recoding the some other race responses in the 2010 Census to 
one or more of the five 1997 Office of Management and Budget 
(OMB) race categories: White, Black or African American, 
AIAN, Asian, and Native Hawaiian and Other Pacific Islander. 
The first estimates for July 2011 indicated there are 6.5 
million AIAN in the U.S., including the statistically imputed 
some other race responses (see 
http://www.census.gov/popest/methodology/2011-stco-char-
meth.pdf).

* Federally recognized tribes: Information on federally 
recognized tribes can be found in the Federal Register, Vol. 
75, No. 190, October 1, 2010, entitled Indian Entities 
Recognized and Eligible to Receive Service from the United 
States Bureau of Indian Affairs, Department of the Interior, 
Bureau of Indian Affairs, issued by the Office of Management 
and Budget (see 
http://www.bia.gov/idc/groups/xofa/documents/document/idc0120
38.pdf and 
http://www.bia.gov/idc/groups/xofa/documents/document/idc0120
39.pdf).

* Designated reservations and Alaska Native village 
statistical areas: Not every federally recognized tribe in 
the U.S. has designated tribal lands or reservations. 
American Indian reservation areas include federal 
reservations, off-reservation trust land, Oklahoma tribal 
statistical areas, state reservations, and federally or 
state-designated American Indian statistical areas. Alaska 
Native villages refer to tribal lands or areas located in the 
state of Alaska.

************************************
Census of State and Local Law 
Enforcement Agencies (CSLLEA) 2008 
************************************

The Bureau of Justice Statistics’ (BJS) Census of State and 
Local Law Enforcement Agencies (CSLLEA) is conducted every 4 
years to provide a complete enumeration of agencies and their 
employees. Employment data are reported by agencies for sworn 
and non-sworn (civilian) personnel and, within these 
categories, by full-time or part-time status. The CSLLEA 
provides national data on the number of state and local law 
enforcement agencies and employees for local police 
departments, sheriffs’ offices, state law enforcement 
agencies, and special jurisdiction agencies. It also serves 
as the sampling frame for BJS surveys of law enforcement 
agencies. The 2008 CSLLEA form was mailed to 20,110 agencies 
that were determined to be potentially operating on the 
reference date of September 30, 2008 (see 
http://www.bjs.gov/content/pub/pdf/csllea08.pdf). 

* Public Law 280: Public Law 280 (Pub.L. 83-280, August 15, 
1953, codified as 18 U.S.C. § 1162, 28 U.S.C. § 1360, and 25 
U.S.C. §§ 1321–1326) is a federal law establishing a method 
whereby states may assume jurisdiction over reservation 
Indians. Public Law 83-280 (commonly referred to as Public 
Law 280 or P.L. 280) conferred jurisdiction from the federal 
government to six mandatory state governments: California, 
Minnesota (except the Red Lake Reservation), Nebraska, Oregon 
(except the Warm Springs Reservation), Wisconsin, and Alaska. 
Public Law 280 also permitted other states to acquire 
jurisdiction at their option. The optional P.L. 280 states 
assumed jurisdiction either in whole or in part over Indian 
country within their boundaries: Nevada, Idaho, Iowa, 
Washington, South Dakota, Montana, North Dakota, Arizona, and 
Utah. Under the Act, states, local sheriffs and state law 
enforcement agencies take tribal members to state courts for 
prosecution in cases arising from criminal matters within 
reservation boundaries.

*********************************************
Offenses known to law enforcement, 2008-2010
*********************************************

The FBI’s Uniform Crime Reporting (UCR) Program collects 
offenses that come to the attention of law enforcement for 
selected violent crimes and property crimes, as well as data 
regarding clearances of these offenses. Data are collected on 
four violent crimes: murder and non-negligent manslaughter, 
forcible rape, robbery, and aggravated assault. Data are 
collected on four property crimes: burglary, larceny-theft, 
motor vehicle theft, and arson (see http://www.fbi.gov/about-
us/cjis/ucr/crime-in-the-u.s/2010/crime-in-the-u.s.-
2010/tables/10tbl11.xls/view).

*******************************
Edward Byrne Memorial Justice 
Assistance Grant (JAG) Program
********************************

The JAG Program is administered by the Bureau of Justice 
Assistance (BJA) and authorized under Public Law 109-162.  It 
is the leading source of federal justice funding to state and 
local jurisdictions. The JAG Program provides states, tribes, 
and local governments with critical funding necessary to 
support a range of program areas, including law enforcement; 
prosecution and courts; crime prevention and education; 
corrections and community corrections; drug treatment and 
enforcement; planning, evaluation, technology improvement; 
and crime victim and witness initiatives. All JAG allocations 
(eligibility information) are calculated by BJS based on the 
statutory JAG formula and published in an annual technical 
report, Justice Assistance Grant (JAG) program (see 
https://www.bja.gov/ProgramDetails.aspx?Program_ID=59). The 
report includes a detailed step-by-step breakdown of the JAG 
award calculation process.

*************************
2012 National Survey of 
Tribal Court Systems 
*************************

The National Survey of Tribal Court Systems (NSTCS-12) is 
part of a multifaceted effort by BJS to expand its 
statistical activities related to American Indian and Alaska 
Native crime and justice issues. The goal of the NSTCS-12 is 
to provide baseline information upon which to build a tribal 
court statistics infrastructure that will improve the 
nation’s understanding of the organization and operational 
characteristics of courts in Indian country. Each federally 
recognized tribe in the U.S. will be contacted to verify and 
determine the operation of a recognized judicial system.  
Respondents will complete an automated or paper version of 
the NSTCS-12. Tribal courts should expect to receive the 
survey materials in early 2013. 

As defined in the Indian Tribal Justice Technical and Legal 
Assistance Act of 2000 (PL 106-559), the term tribal court, 
tribal court system, or tribal justice system means the 
entire judicial branch, and employees thereof, of an Indian 
tribe. This includes, but is not limited to, traditional 
methods and forums for dispute resolution, trial courts, 
appellate courts, including inter-tribal appellate courts, 
alternative dispute resolution systems, and circuit rider 
systems, established by inherent tribunal authority whether 
or not they constitute a court of record.

*****************************************
Federal Justice Statistics Program (FJSP)
******************************************

The Federal Justice Statistics Program provides annual data 
on workload, activities, and outcomes associated with federal 
criminal cases. Information is acquired on all aspects of 
processing in the federal justice system, including arrests, 
initial prosecution decisions, referrals to courts or 
magistrates, court dispositions, sentencing outcomes, 
sentence length, and time served. The program collects data 
from the Executive Office for U.S. Attorneys (EOUSA), the 
Pretrial Services Agency (PSA), the Administrative Office of 
the U.S. Courts (AO), the U.S. Sentencing Commission (USSC), 
and the Federal Bureau of Prisons (BOP).

***********************************************
The Bureau of Justice Statistics is the statistical agency of 
the U.S. Department of Justice. James P. Lynch is the 
director.

This report was written by Steven W. Perry. Mark Motivans 
provided statistical review and verification of the report.
Vanessa Curto and Jill Thomas edited the report, and 
Tina Dorsey produced the report, under the supervision of 
Doris J. James.

October 2012, NCJ 239077

***********************************************

************************************
Office of Justice Programs
Innovation * Partnerships 
* Safer Neighborhoods
www.ojp.usdoj.gov
************************************

*********************
9/27/2012/JER/1:00pm
*********************





























































