U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Programs
Bureau of Justice Statistics

-------------------------------------------------------
This file is text only without graphics and many of the
tables. A Zip archive of the tables in this report in
spreadsheet format (.csv) and the full report including
tables and graphics in .pdf format are available on BJS
website at: 
http://www.bjs.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbdetail&iid=5323

This report is one in a series. More recent editions 
may be available. To view a list of all in the series 
go to http://bjs.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbse&sid=77
-------------------------------------------------------

Technical report

Tribal Crime Data Collection Activities, 2015

Steven W. Perry, BJS Statistician

**************
 Background
**************

The Tribal Law and Order Act (TLOA), enacted on July 29, 
2010, requires the Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS) to (1) 
establish and implement a tribal data collection system and 
(2) support tribal participation in national records and 
information systems (P.L. 111-211, 124 Stat. 2258, § 251(b)). 
The act further requires the director of BJS to consult with 
Indian tribes to establish and implement this data collection 
system. The BJS director is required to report to Congress 
annually the data collected and analyzed in accordance with 
the act. This report describes activities in support of BJS’s 
tribal crime data collection system and summarizes findings 
and program enhancements for fiscal year (FY) 2015. 

A total of 566 tribal entities in the contiguous 48 states 
and in Alaska were eligible for funding and services from the 
Bureau of Indian Affairs (BIA) in 2015 ***Footnote 1 See 
Indian Entities Recognized and Eligible to Receive Services 
from the United States Bureau of Indian Affairs at 
http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/FR-2014-01-29/pdf/2014-
01683.pdf***. In 2010, there were 334 federally and state-
recognized American Indian reservations. An estimated 4.8 
million people lived on American Indian reservations or in 
Alaska Native villages in the United States in 
2010 ***Footnote 2 For more information about federally 
recognized tribes, reservations, and Alaska Native village 
statistical areas, see 
http://www.bjs.gov/content/pub/pdf/tcdca12.pdf.***. About a 
quarter (1.1 million) of these individuals classified 
themselves as American Indian or Alaska Native (AIAN).

*************
Highlights
*************

* BJS released a solicitation to conduct the 2016 National 
Survey of Tribal Law Enforcement Agencies, the first BJS 
statistical collection targeting Bureau of Indian Affairs 
agencies and tribal law enforcement agencies in the lower 48 
states and Alaska.

* BJS convened a panel of justice professionals from state, 
local, and tribal law enforcement agencies and prosecutor 
offices to inform the planning and development of two surveys 
of state and local justice agencies in P.L. 280 and non-P.L. 
280 jurisdictions that service tribal lands.

* Data collection for the National Survey of Tribal Court 
Systems began in February 2015.

* At midyear 2013, a total of 2,287 inmates were confined in 
79 Indian country jails—a 3.3% decrease from the 2,364 
inmates confined at midyear 2012.

* At midyear 2014, local jails held about 10,400 American 
Indian and Alaska Native (AIAN) inmates (both tribal and 
nontribal AIAN), which was 1.4% of the total (744,600) jail 
inmate population. Nearly half (47%) of all AIAN jail inmates 
were in western states.

* During 2012, 2,482 AIAN (both tribal and nontribal) were 
arrested and booked by federal law enforcement agencies, 
1,355 were sentenced in U.S. district courts, 1,735 entered 
federal prison, and 1,683 exited federal prison.

* The number of tribal law enforcement agencies reporting 
crime data to the FBI’s Uniform Crime Reporting Program 
increased from 12 in 2008 to 158 in 2012 and 2013. 

* Tribes received $266,348 through the Bureau of Justice 
Assistance’s 2015 Edward Byrne Memorial Justice Assistance 
Grant Program. 

* BJS announced multiple funding opportunities in 2015 to 
improve tribal criminal history records and the reporting of 
persons prohibited from receiving or possessing a firearm 
under state or federal law.

The tribal justice system in Indian country varies across 
tribal nations and regions of the country. Criminal 
jurisdiction in Indian country—federally recognized 
reservations, tribal communities, and identified trust lands—
varies by type of crime committed, whether the offender or 
victim is a tribal member, and the state in which the offense 
occurred. Due to the sovereign status of federally recognized 
tribes in the United States, crimes committed in Indian 
country are often subject to concurrent jurisdiction among 
multiple criminal justice agencies.

More than 300 tribes in the United States are located in 
either mandatory or optional Public Law 280 jurisdictions. 
Public Law 83-280 (commonly referred to as Public Law 280 or 
P.L. 280) conferred jurisdiction from the federal government 
to six state governments: California, Minnesota (except the 
Red Lake Reservation), Nebraska, Oregon (except the Warm 
Springs Reservation), Wisconsin, and Alaska. These are 
mandatory P.L. 280 states. Public Law 280 also permitted nine 
other states to acquire optional jurisdiction either in whole 
or in part over Indian country within their boundaries: 
Nevada, Idaho, Iowa, Washington, South Dakota, Montana, North 
Dakota, Arizona, and Utah. In states where P.L. 280 does not 
apply, the federal government retains criminal jurisdiction 
for major crimes committed in Indian country Footnote *** 3 
Federal jurisdiction in Indian country is contained under the 
Indian Country Crimes Act (18 U.S.C. § 1152), the Indian 
Country Major Crimes Act (18 U.S.C. § 1153), and the 
Assimilative Crimes Act (18 U.S.C. § 13)***.

This report summarizes BJS’s effort to-- 

* release a solicitation to collect statistical data from 
tribal law enforcement agencies in the lower 48 states, 
Village Public Safety Officers (VPSOs) in Alaska, and BIA 
agencies

* collect data on tribal courts in the United States

* develop two data collections on state and local criminal 
justice agencies serving tribal lands

* support tribal crime data reporting to the FBI’s Uniform 
Crime Reporting (UCR) Program and calculate tribal award 
eligibility for the Edward Byrne Memorial Justice Assistance 
Grant (JAG) Program (figure 1, figure 2)

* study the handling of AIAN juvenile and adult criminal 
cases in the federal justice system

* enhance current funding programs to support tribal 
participation in state, regional, and national criminal 
justice databases.

*************************************
Tribal data collections during 2015
*************************************

During FY 2015, BJS focused on improving its understanding of 
the role of state, local, and tribal justice agencies serving 
tribal lands. Current ongoing surveys were enhanced to 
incorporate items to measure the unique roles of law 
enforcement and prosecutors offices. While enhancing other 
ongoing efforts to improve Indian country justice statistics, 
BJS fielded its national census of tribal courts, designed 
two targeted surveys of state and local justice agencies 
serving tribal lands, and released a solicitation to conduct 
a new census of tribal law enforcement agencies.

***************** 
Law enforcement 
*****************

The Census of State and Local Law Enforcement Agencies 
(CSLLEA) is conducted about every 4 years. CSLLEA provides 
data on the more than 18,000 state, local, and tribal law 
enforcement agencies operating in the United States. A census 
is currently in the field with a limited number of items 
designed to identify nontribal state and local justice 
agencies with jurisdiction over Indian country or tribal 
lands. BJS will use the results of this census to establish a 
universe list to conduct a more in-depth study of the 
activities of nontribal law enforcement agencies that serve 
tribal lands. 

**************
Prosecution
**************

The ongoing 2014 National Survey of Prosecutors (NSP) covers 
the estimated 2,330 state prosecutor offices litigating 
felony cases in state courts of general jurisdiction. The NSP 
is collecting data on caseloads, annual budgets, tenure, 
salaries, and office staffing (i.e., attorneys, 
investigators, victim advocates, and support personnel). It 
is also collecting limited information (such as the nature of 
the jurisdiction; sources of authority; case types; and 
reciprocity between tribal, state, and intergovernmental 
agreements) from prosecutor offices that work in Indian 
country. The list of prosecutor offices serving tribal lands 
collected in the NSP will be used to provide a universe for a 
more in-depth survey. 

State and local justice agencies serving tribal lands
******************************************************

A little understood aspect of the tribal justice system is 
the role played by nontribal state and local law enforcement 
agencies and prosecutor offices that provide and support 
criminal justice functions and services on tribal lands. To 
fill this information gap, BJS is designing two related 
survey instruments: one for these law enforcement agencies 
and one for these prosecutor offices. The surveys will 
document tribal activities and caseloads and will provide an 
understanding of the legal and structural procedures and 
processes in place for fighting crime on tribal lands based 
on federal mandates or consensual jurisdiction arrangements 
between tribal and state governments.

In December 2014, BJS formed an expert panel made up of 
state, local, and tribal law enforcement officers and 
prosecutors from P.L. 280 and non-P.L. 280 jurisdictions to 
inform the survey design. Participants in the panel meeting 
included representatives from--

* Alaska State Troopers, Alaska

* Apache Junction Police Department, Arizona

* Riverside County Sherriff’s Office, California

* San Diego District Attorney’s Office, California

* Sycuan Tribal Police Department, California

* Roosevelt County Sherriff’s Office, Montana

* South Dakota Highway Patrol, South Dakota

* Cherokee Nation Marshal Service, Oklahoma

* Miccosukee Tribal Police Department, Oklahoma

* Association of Prosecuting Attorneys, Washington, D.C.

* National Sheriffs Association, Indian Affairs Committee, 
Washington, D.C.

* International Association of Chiefs of Police, Indian 
Country Law Enforcement Section, Washington, D.C.

BJS pilot tested drafts of the law enforcement and prosecutor 
surveys during May and June 2015.  Data collection for the 
Census of State and Local Law Enforcement Agencies Serving 
Tribal Lands and the Census of State and Local Prosecutor 
Offices Serving Tribal Lands is scheduled to begin in early 
2016, pending approval from the Office of Management and 
Budget.

Tribal law enforcement in Indian country
******************************************

In April 2015, BJS released a solicitation to conduct the 
2016 Census of Tribal Law Enforcement Agencies (CTLEA). This 
is the first BJS data collection targeted solely at tribal 
law enforcement agencies. The survey will be designed to 
capture unique attributes of these agencies. It will include 
information on--

* criminal jurisdiction 

* staffing and recruitment

* officer training

* budgets and sources of funding

* equipment

* administrative and management information systems
services and support provided

* agreements with other criminal justice entities
interactions with federal, state, regional, and local 
agencies

* access to and participation in local, regional, state, and 
federal data systems (e.g., the National Crime Information 
Center (NCIC))

* access to and use of offender housing options

* and access to and use of investigative support services. 

The CTLEA will collect information from all tribal law 
enforcement agencies, VPSOs in Alaska, and law enforcement 
agencies operated by the BIA. Due to their inherent 
differences, each type of agency will have its own customized 
survey form with a common core of items and a set of items 
designed to collect the unique attributes of each agency 
type.

Tribal courts in the United States
************************************

In FY 2015, BJS continued the development and implementation 
of the National Survey of Tribal Court Systems (NSTCS). The 
NSTCS is BJS’s first statistical collection focusing on 
tribal justice systems since 2002. The survey is gathering 
information on the administrative and operational 
characteristics of tribal justice systems (including budgets, 
staffing, caseloads, and case processes), indigent defense 
services, pretrial and probation programs, protection orders 
and domestic violence, and juvenile cases. It will also 
collect data on the implementation of various enhanced 
sentencing provisions under the TLOA and the operation of 
various indigenous or traditional dispute forums within 
Indian country.

BJS has developed three separate but compatible survey 
instruments customized to the various types of tribal courts:

NSTCS–Lower 48 focuses on the approximately 180 tribal courts 
in the lower 48 states. The courts are located in non-P.L. 
280 states (with federal jurisdiction for major crimes) and 
P.L. 280 states (in which major crime jurisdiction 
transferred to the state courts). In both types of courts, 
tribes may hold concurrent jurisdiction for crimes involving 
AIAN and primary jurisdiction for most civil matters 
occurring on tribal lands.

NSTCS–Alaska focuses on about 220 Alaska tribal councils. 
Compared with tribes in the lower 48 states, Alaska tribes 
tend to be smaller, have fewer resources, are geographically 
remote, and have less formally organized tribal courts. The 
tribes in Alaska reside in village areas, unlike tribes in 
the lower 48 states that reside on reservations. 

NSTCS–CFR is the first BJS data collection that includes 
courts operated under Courts of Federal Regulations (CFR). A 
CFR court, using federal laws, generally acts as a tribe’s 
judicial system until the tribe establishes its own court. A 
CFR court is a trial court in which parties present their 
cases before a magistrate. Appeals may be taken from the 
trial court to the Court of Indian Appeals. Seven CFR courts 
serve about 20 tribes in the United States.

The following organizations serve as partners for the NSTCS:

* Bureau of Indian Affairs’ Office of Justice Services 

* American Indian Development Associates, New Mexico

* Hamline University School of Law, Minnesota

* Kansas University School of Law’s Tribal Law and Government 
Center

* National Judicial College, the National Tribal Judicial 
Center, Nevada

* Standing Rock Sioux Tribe, South Dakota

* The Supreme Court of the Navajo Nation, Arizona

* Syracuse University College of Law, the Center for 
Indigenous Law, Governance, and Citizenship, New York 

* Tanana Chiefs Conference (TCC), Alaska

* Tribal Law and Policy Institute (TLPI), California 

* University of Colorado at Boulder, American Indian Law 
Clinic

* University of North Dakota School of Law’s Tribal Judicial 
Institute

* American Probation and Parole Association, Kentucky

The data collection period for the NSTCS is February to 
August 2015. Through its data collection agent, Kauffman and 
Associates, BJS mailed out approximately 595 surveys—to 426 
courts or forums identified in the lower 48 states and 
Alaska, to 7 BIA CFR courts, and to 162 tribes for which the 
existence of a court was unknown *** Footnote 4 Inter-tribal 
courts and their individual participant tribes received the 
surveys. Once the data are collected, BJS will reconcile the 
responses to ensure no duplicate estimates are reported***. 
As part of the planned nonresponse follow-up strategy, BJS 
has enlisted the support of several Native American 
organizations—TLPI, TCC, Bristol Bay Native Association, and 
National American Indian Court Judges Association.

Jails in Indian country
*************************

The Survey of Jails in Indian Country (SJIC) is BJS’s only 
national data collection that provides annual data on the 
estimated 79 Indian country jails and detention facilities. 
BJS initiated the SJIC in 1998 as a component of the Annual 
Survey of Jails. The SJIC includes all known Indian country 
facilities operated by tribal authorities or the BIA.

The most recent survey collected data on the number of 
inmates, percentage of capacity occupied based on the average 
daily population, midyear population, and peak population in 
the facilities in June 2013. The survey also gathered 
information on staffing, offense types, and conviction 
status. The findings of the SJIC data are in Jails in Indian 
Country, 2013 (NCJ 247017, BJS web, July 2014). The report 
showed that the number of jails or detention centers 
operating in Indian country increased 16%, from 68 facilities 
in 2004 to 79 in 2013.  At midyear 2013, a total of 2,287 
inmates were confined in Indian country jails—a 3.3% decrease 
from the 2,364 inmates confined at midyear 2012. During the 
12-month period ending June 2013, the average number of 
inmates per operating facility remained relatively stable, 
from 30 inmates at midyear 2012 to 29 inmates at midyear 
2013. The average number of inmates per operating facility 
increased nearly 11% from 2000 to 2010, but this increase has 
been less than 3% from 2010 to 2013. For the 79 tribal 
facilities operating in June 2013, the average expected 
length of stay for inmates was about 6 days.

Since 2010, about 31% of inmates held in Indian country jails 
have been confined for a violent offense, a decline from 
about 39% each year from midyear 2004 to midyear 2009. At 
midyear 2013, domestic violence (15%) and aggravated or 
simple assault (10%) accounted for the largest percentage of 
violent offenders. Inmates held for unspecified violence (5%) 
and rape or sexual assault (2%) accounted for 7% of the jail 
population.
 
Patterns of decline were also observed among inmates held for 
alcohol- and drug-related offenses. Inmates held for driving 
while intoxicated (DWI) or driving while under the influence 
of drugs or alcohol (DUI) offenses declined from 17% of the 
total inmate population in 2000 to 8% at midyear 2013. 
Inmates held for a drug law violation (8% in 2000) decreased 
to 4% at midyear 2013.
 
In 2013, BJS enhanced the SJIC offense category questionnaire 
item to include burglary, larceny-theft, and public 
intoxication. The enhancement allowed for better 
classification of previously unspecified offenses. As a 
result, reported offenses at midyear 2013 included public 
intoxication (17%), burglary (2%), and larceny-theft (1%). 
During FY 2015, BJS completed data collection for the 2014 
SJIC.

Federal justice statistics
****************************

The Federal Justice Statistics Program (FJSP) provides annual 
data on workload, activities, and outcomes associated with 
federal criminal cases. It acquires information on all 
aspects of processing in the federal justice system, 
including arrests, initial prosecution decisions, referrals 
to courts or magistrates, court dispositions, sentencing 
outcomes, sentence length, and time served. The FJSP collects 
data from the U.S. Marshals Service, the Executive Office for 
U.S. Attorneys, the U.S. Office of Probation and Pretrial 
Services, the Administrative Office of the U.S. Courts, the 
U.S. Sentencing Commission, and the Federal Bureau of 
Prisons. Through FJSP, BJS compiles comprehensive information 
describing suspects and defendants processed in the federal 
criminal justice system.

The FJSP captures an offender’s race, but it does not provide 
information on tribal membership. During 2012 (the most 
recent federal data available), 2,482 AIAN were arrested and 
booked by federal law enforcement agencies, 1,355 were 
sentenced in U.S. district courts, 1,735 entered federal 
prison, and 1,683 exited federal prison. At fiscal yearend 
2012, 3,672 AIAN were held in federal prison (1.8% of all 
prisoners) *** Footnote 5 Generated using the Federal Criminal 
Case Processing Statistics (FCCPS) tool at 
http://www.bjs.gov, March 2015. AIAN in these analyses 
include persons living on and off tribal lands and persons 
who are and are not tribal members***.

The majority of cases filed from Indian country involving 
AIAN were in the judicial districts of South Dakota, Arizona, 
New Mexico, Montana, and North Dakota.

With funding from BJS, the Urban Institute published a 
special analysis of Indian country cases in the federal 
justice system using FJSP data in Examining Indian Country 
Cases in the Federal Justice System (NCJ 248656, February 
2015). The report focuses on adult and juvenile cases 
processed in the federal system. Key findings include--

* The FBI investigated more than half (51%) of 6,137 Indian 
country suspects in matters referred to U.S. attorneys from 
2009 to 2011.

* Five federal judicial districts (Arizona, South Dakota, 
North Dakota, New Mexico, and Montana) accounted for nearly 
three-quarters (73%) of all Indian country matters referred 
to and resolved by U.S. attorneys between 2009 and 2011. 

* The number of Indian country suspects in matters concluded 
by U.S. attorneys increased by 15%, from 1,940 in 2009 to 
2,220 in 2011.

* The number of Indian country defendants in cases filed in 
48 federal districts with Indian country responsibility 
increased from 1,235 in 2009 to 1,395 in 2011.

National Crime Victimization Survey (NCVS) 
*********************************************

The NCVS is the nation’s primary source of information on 
criminal victimization. The NCVS collects information on 
nonfatal crimes reported and not reported to the police 
against persons age 12 or older from a nationally 
representative sample of U.S. households. The annual Criminal 
Victimization report publishes victimization estimates of 
self-identified AIAN.

In September 2014, BJS released Criminal Victimization, 2013 
(NCJ 247648, BJS web). From 2012 to 2013, the rate of violent 
victimization—rape or sexual assault, robbery, aggravated 
assault, and simple assault—reported among AIAN remained 
relatively stable, meaning no difference was detected from 
the 46.9 per 1,000 persons age 12 or older in 2012 and 56.3 
in 2013.

NCVS estimates of victimization among AIAN remain a concern 
because statistics are often misinterpreted to be referring 
to persons residing in Indian country or on tribal lands. 
However, NCVS reports on AIAN victimizations refer to 
respondents who reside largely outside of Indian country. In 
addition, the NCVS does not determine if the self-identified 
AIAN has tribal membership or affiliation. The NCVS sample 
was not originally designed to measure crime in Indian 
country or among Indian country residents. In 1999, two 
questions were added regarding American Indian reservations 
or Indian lands, asking (1) whether the household was located 
on an American Indian reservation or on Indian lands and (2) 
whether the crime incident occurred on an American Indian 
reservation or on tribal lands. BJS is exploring the utility 
and quality of these measures for generating estimates of 
AIAN criminal victimizations.

Tribal participation in national records 
and information systems
***********************************************
 
During 2015, BJS continued to focus on improving tribal 
participation in national record and information systems by 
working to expand tribal reporting to the UCR Program and 
tribal funding eligibility for the National Criminal History 
Improvement Program (NCHIP) and the National Instant Criminal 
Background Check System (NICS) Act Record Improvement Program 
(NARIP). 

Offenses reported by tribal law enforcement agencies
*****************************************************

The FBI asks law enforcement agencies to report eight crime 
types to the UCR: four violent crimes (i.e., murder, rape, 
robbery, and aggravated assault) and four property crimes 
(i.e., burglary, larceny-theft, motor vehicle theft, and 
arson) ***Footnote 6 In 2012, the Department of Justice 
announced a change to the definition of rape for the UCR 
Program’s Summary Reporting System (Summary). The old 
definition of forcible rape was “The carnal knowledge of a 
female forcibly and against her will.” Many agencies 
interpreted this definition as excluding a long list of sex 
offenses that are criminal in most jurisdictions, such as 
offenses involving oral or anal penetration, penetration with 
objects, and rapes of males. The new Summary definition of 
rape is “Penetration, no matter how slight, of the vagina or 
anus with any body part or object, or oral penetration by a 
sex organ of another person, without the consent of the 
victim.” The new definition of rape went into effect on 
January 1, 2013***. Beginning in 2009, BJS worked with the 
BIA, FBI, and tribes to increase tribal reporting to the UCR. 
Since that time, the overall number of tribal law enforcement 
agencies with identifiable crime data in the FBI’s UCR 
Program has increased. A total of 158 AIAN tribal law 
enforcement agencies with identifiable crime data (compared 
to 12 in 2008) reported 12 months of crime information to the 
FBI’s UCR Program and had their disaggregated data published 
in the FBI’s annual report, Crime in the United States, 2013.

Prior to 2008, the FBI’s Crime in the United States (CIUS) 
reports combined most reports from tribal law enforcement 
agencies into a general tribal grouping under the BIA. As a 
result, crimes reported by individual agencies could not be 
distinguished by type, which limited agencies’ ability to 
apply for some grant funding. In 2013, 88% of violent 
offenses reported by tribal law enforcement agencies could be 
traced back to the originating tribal reservation, up from 6% 
in 2008. From 2008 to 2013, the proportion of property 
offenses reported by tribal law enforcement agencies that 
were traceable to the tribe increased from 13% to 83%.

With the improvement in data reporting, the number of 
identifiable tribal law enforcement agencies reporting crimes 
varies each year; therefore, their aggregated yearly crime 
counts cannot be used for in-depth trending and comparisons. 
However, the FBI’s UCR data can be used to explore the volume 
of crimes being reported annually from Indian country. For 
example, the 158 tribal law enforcement agencies reported 
that about 28,320 violent and property crimes occurred on 
tribal lands in 2013 (appendix table 1, appendix table 2).

Tribes and the Edward Byrne Memorial 
Justice Assistance Grant Program
******************************************** 

A total of $3,543,186 was made available in 144 direct awards 
to tribal governments through the JAG Program from 2008 to 
2015 (appendix table 3). The Bureau of Justice Assistance 
administers the JAG Program. BJS calculates the JAG formula-
based award amounts using specifications outlined in the 
legislation. JAG awards may be used for the following seven 
purpose areas: law enforcement; prosecution and courts; 
prevention and education; corrections and community 
corrections; drug treatment; planning, evaluation, and 
technology improvement; and crime victim and witness 
programs.

The total funds available for JAG have steadily decreased 
since 2009. The total 2015 JAG funding allocation to tribes 
was approximately $266,348, a 24% decrease from $350,609 
allocated in 2014. The overall number of tribes eligible for 
JAG awards decreased from 18 in 2014 to 13 in 2015 
*** Footnote 7 JAG awards, as well as the number of 
identifiable tribal law enforcement agencies reporting data 
to the UCR, have increased since 2008; however, it remains 
difficult to determine exactly how tribal crime has changed. 
The difficulty is linked to differences in the requirements 
for inclusion in the CIUS and JAG award process. 
Specifically, to be included in the CIUS count of tribal law 
enforcement, a tribal law enforcement agency must submit 12 
months of complete offense data to the UCR Program. However, 
to be eligible for JAG funding, a tribe must be a federally 
recognized entity and have at least one law enforcement 
agency that submitted violent crime data to the FBI for at 
least 3 years in the past 10 years. If a tribe has multiple 
law enforcement agencies that fulfill these requirements, the 
data are aggregated together for grant allocation purposes 
but the agencies would be reported separately in the CIUS. 
For more information on the JAG Program, see 
http://www.bjs.gov/content/pub/pdf/jagp14.pdf***.

The five largest JAG allocations to tribal governments in 
2015 were awarded to the Navajo Nation ($58,802), Rosebud 
($38,038), San Carlos Apache ($25,593), Minnesota Chippewa 
Tribe ($21,075), and Standing Rock Sioux Tribe ($18,786).
 
National Criminal History Improvement Program 
(NCHIP) and Indian country
***********************************************

In 2015, BJS announced the continuation of the NCHIP. 
Federally recognized tribal governments are eligible to 
apply, and tribes may submit applications as part of a 
multi-tribe consortium. NCHIP serves as an umbrella for various 
record improvement activities and funding sources, each of 
which has unique goals and objectives. BJS strongly 
encourages states and tribes to ensure the integrated 
functioning of record improvement initiatives, regardless 
of the funding source. 

The goal of the NCHIP is to improve the nation’s safety and 
security by enhancing the quality, completeness, and 
accessibility of criminal history record information by 
ensuring the nationwide implementation of criminal justice 
and noncriminal justice background check systems. Despite the 
progress made toward criminal record improvements among 
states, several significant shortcomings remain among tribal 
justice agencies. 

BJS has identified several limitations confronting tribal 
nations. Most tribes do not have the capabilities or 
requisite technologies to support the transmission of records 
to the national systems, either through their own 
infrastructure or via the state. Additionally, many tribes 
have not yet converted their manual or other nonautomated 
records to electronic versions. Some entities are not yet 
submitting qualifying records to the NCIC Protection Order 
File, and the FBI reports continued problems with the 
appropriate flagging of protection orders regarding the 
prohibition for firearm purchases.

National Instant Criminal Background Check 
System Act Record Improvement Program (NARIP)
***********************************************
  
In 2015, BJS announced the continuation of the NARIP. 
Federally recognized Indian tribal governments are eligible 
to apply. The NARIP helps states and tribal governments 
identify individuals prohibited by federal or state law from 
possessing firearms.

The NARIP seeks to address the gap in information available 
to National Instant Criminal Background Check System (NICS) 
about prohibiting mental health adjudications and 
commitments, and other prohibiting factors. Filling these 
information gaps will better enable the system to operate as 
intended to keep guns out of the hands of persons prohibited 
by federal or state law from receiving or possessing 
firearms. The automation of records will also help reduce 
delays for law-abiding persons to purchase guns. The NARIP 
authorizes a grant program to help states and tribes provide 
certain information to the NICS and prescribes grant 
penalties for noncompliance with the act’s goals for 
completeness of records.

The NARIP provides that grants shall be made to each state or 
tribal government, consistent with plans for the integration, 
automation, and accessibility of criminal history records, 
for use by the court systems to improve automation and 
transmittal to federal and state repositories of (1) criminal 
history dispositions, (2) records relevant to determining 
whether a person has been convicted of a misdemeanor crime of 
domestic violence or whether a person is a subject of a 
prohibiting domestic violence protection order, and (3) 
prohibiting mental health adjudications and commitments.

**********************************************
BJS Indian country justice statistics webpage
**********************************************
 
This webpage serves as a repository for information on and 
updates to BJS tribal data collections. The page provides 
links to the latest victimization, law enforcement, courts, 
corrections, and criminal justice data improvement 
information. Links to the FBI’s extract files of violent and 
property offenses known to tribal law enforcement by state 
from 2008 to 2013 are available on the BJS website. 

*****************************
Previously released reports
*****************************

Tribal Crime Data Collection Activities, 2014 (NCJ 246917)

Jails in Indian Country, 2013 (NCJ 247017)

Tribal Crime Data Collection Activities, 2013 (NCJ 242584)

Jails in Indian Country, 2012 (NCJ 242187)

Tribal Crime Data Collection Activities, 2012 (NCJ 239077)

Tribal Crime Data Collection Activities, 2011 (NCJ 234518)

Jails in Indian Country, 2011 (NCJ 238978)

Jails in Indian Country, 2010 (NCJ 236073)

Jails in Indian Country, 2009 (NCJ 232223)

Jails in Indian Country, 2008 (NCJ 228271)

Tribal Law Enforcement, 2008 (NCJ 234217)

Summary: Tribal Youth in the Federal Justice System 
(NCJ 234218)

State Prosecutors’ Offices with Jurisdiction in Indian 
Country, 2007 (NCJ 234241)

Jails in Indian Country, 2007 (NCJ 223760)

Improving Criminal History Records in Indian Country, 
2004–2006 (NCJ 218913)

Jails in Indian Country, 2004 (NCJ 214257)

Jails in Indian Country, 2003 (NCJ 208597)

Census of Tribal Justice Agencies in Indian Country, 
2002 (NCJ 205332)

American Indians and Crime (NCJ 203097)

Jails in Indian Country, 2002 (NCJ 198997)

Jails in Indian Country, 2001 (NCJ 193400)

Jails in Indian Country, 2000 (NCJ 188156)

Tribal Law Enforcement, 2000 (NCJ 197936)

Jails in Indian Country 1998–1999 (NCJ 173410)

American Indians and Crime (NCJ 173386)

***********************
BJS-sponsored research
***********************

Adams, W., & Samuels, J. (2011). Tribal Youth in the Federal 
Justice System (NCJ 234549). Washington, DC: Urban Institute. 

Adams, W., Samuels, J., & Kelly, J. (2015). Examining Indian 
Country Cases in the Federal Justice System (NCJ 248656). 
Washington, DC: Urban Institute.

***********************************************************
The Bureau of Justice Statistics of the U.S. Department of 
Justice is the principal federal agency responsible for 
measuring crime, criminal victimization, criminal offenders, 
victims of crime, correlates of crime, and the operation of 
criminal and civil justice systems at the federal, state, 
tribal, and local levels. BJS collects, analyzes, and 
disseminates reliable and valid statistics on crime and 
justice systems in the United States, supports improvements 
to state and local criminal justice information systems, and 
participates with national and international organizations to 
develop and recommend national standards for justice 
statistics. William J. Sabol is director.

This report was written by Steven W. Perry. Todd Minton, 
Andrew Tiedt, Alexia Cooper, and Allina Lee provided 
statistical review and verification of the report.

Irene Cooperman and Jill Thomas edited the report. Tina 
Dorsey and Barbara Quinn produced the report.

July 2015, NCJ 248785
************************************************************

*************************************************
Office of Justice Programs
Innovation * Partnerships * Safer Neighborhoods
www.ojp.usdoj.gov
*************************************************

*************************
6/18/15 JER 12:45am
*************************
