U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Programs
Bureau of Justice Statistics

------------------------------------------------------

This file is text only without graphics and many of 
the tables. A Zip archive of the tables in this report 
in spreadsheet format (.csv) and the full report 
including tables and graphics in .pdf format are 
available on BJS website 
at: https://www.bjs.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbdetail&iid=6006

This reports is one in series. More recent editions 
may be available. To view a list of all reports in the 
series go to https://www.bjs.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbse&sid=77
------------------------------------------------------

*******************
Technical Report
*******************

**********************************************
Tribal Crime Data Collection Activities, 2017
**********************************************

Enacted in 2010, the Tribal Law and Order Act (TLOA) requires the 
Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS) to (1) establish and implement 
a tribal data collection system, (2) consult with Indian tribes 
to establish and implement this data collection system, and (3) 
annually report to Congress the data collected and analyzed in 
accordance with the act (P.L. 111-211, 124 Stat. 2258, § 251(b)). 
Indian country includes federally recognized reservations, tribal 
communities, and identified trust lands. Criminal jurisdiction in 
Indian country varies by type of crime committed, whether the 
offender or victim is a tribal member, and the state in which the 
offense occurred.

An estimated 4.8 million people lived on American Indian 
reservations or in Alaska Native villages in the United States in 
2010. ***Footnote 1 See The American Indian and Alaska Native 
Population: 2010 at 
https://www.census.gov/prod/cen2010/briefs/c2010br-10.pdf.*** A 
total of 566 tribal entities in the lower 48 states and in Alaska 
were eligible for funding and services from the Bureau of Indian 
Affairs (BIA) in 2017. ***Footnote 2 See Indian Entities 
Recognized and Eligible to Receive Services from the United 
States Bureau of Indian Affairs at 
https://www.federalregister.gov/articles/2016/01/29/2016-
01769/indian-entities-recognizedand-eligible-to-receive-services-
from-the-united-states-bureau-ofindian#h-4.*** There were 334 
federally and state-recognized American Indian reservations in 
2010, the most recent available data. ***Footnote 3 For more 
information about federally recognized tribes, reservations, and 
Alaska Native village statistical areas, see Tribal Crime Data 
Collection Activities, 2012 at 
https://www.bjs.gov/content/pub/pdf/tcdca12.pdf.***

Due to the sovereign status of federally recognized tribes in the 
United States, crimes committed in Indian country are often 
subject to concurrent jurisdiction among multiple criminal 
justice agencies. More than 300 tribes in the United States are 
under P.L. 83-280 jurisdictions (commonly referred to as P.L. 
280), *** Footnote 4 Pub.L. 83–280, August 15, 1953, codified as 
18 U.S.C. § 1162, 28 U.S.C. § 1360, and 25 U.S.C. §§ 1321–
1326).*** which established a method whereby the federal 
government could transfer mandatory jurisdiction over crimes in 
Indian country to states or states could acquire optional 
jurisdiction in whole or in part over Indian country within their 
boundaries. Sixteen states have established either mandatory or 
optional jurisdictions over crimes in Indian country. ***Footnote 
5 Federal jurisdiction in Indian country is established under the 
Indian Country Crimes Act (18 U.S.C. § 1152), the Indian Country 
Major Crimes Act (18 U.S.C. § 1153), and the Assimilative Crimes 
Act (18 U.S.C. § 13).*** 

Six states have mandatory criminal jurisdictions: Alaska, 
California, Minnesota (except the Red Lake Reservation), 
Nebraska, Oregon (except the Warm Springs Reservation), and 
Wisconsin. Ten states have acquired optional jurisdiction over 
crimes in Indian country: Arizona, Florida, Idaho, Iowa, Montana, 
Nevada, North Dakota, South Dakota, Utah, and Washington. In 
states where P.L. 280 does not apply, the federal government 
retains criminal jurisdiction for major crimes committed in 
Indian country.

************************************************************
*************
Highlights
*************

* During fiscal year 2017, the Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS) 
held meetings with justice professionals from federal, state, and 
tribal law enforcement offices to obtain input on the planning 
and development of the Census of Tribal Law Enforcement Agencies.

* The Survey of State and Local Law Enforcement Agencies Serving 
Tribal Lands and the Survey of State and Local Prosecutor Offices 
Serving Tribal Lands are awaiting final approval from the Office 
of Management and Budget (OMB).

* BJS anticipates releasing findings from the National Survey of 
Tribal Court Systems by the end of the year. 

* An estimated 2,510 inmates were confined in 76 Indian country 
jails at midyear 2015—a 5.5% increase from the 2,380 inmates 
confined in 79 facilities at midyear 2014.

* While most of the inmate population in Indian country jails 
were male, the percentage of female jail inmates increased from 
20% of all inmates in 2000 to 25% in 2015.

* During 2014, a total of 2,648 American Indian or Alaska Native 
(both tribal and nontribal) were arrested by federal law 
enforcement agencies, 1,417 were sentenced in U.S. district 
courts, 1,715 entered federal prison, and 1,763 exited federal 
prison.
************************************************************

This report summarizes efforts related to BJS’s tribal crime data 
collection system during fiscal year 2017, including--

* tribal data collection activities: the Survey of State and 
Local Law Enforcement Agencies Serving Tribal Land, the Survey of 
State and Local Prosecutor Offices Serving Tribal Lands, the 
Census of Tribal Law Enforcement Agencies (CTLEA), and the 
National Survey of Tribal Court Systems (NSTCS)

* tribal participation in national records and information 
systems, including the National Criminal History Improvement 
Program (NCHIP) and the National Instant Criminal Background 
Check System (NICS) Act Record Improvement Program (NARIP)

* BJS’s most recent statistical findings on jails in Indian 
country and the AIAN population in the federal justice system

* how to access tribal information on BJS.gov.

************************************************
Tribal data collections during fiscal year 2017
************************************************

Survey of State and Local Law Enforcement Agencies 
Serving Tribal Lands and Survey of State and Local 
Prosecutor Offices Serving Tribal Lands
****************************************************

BJS has designed two new data collections: the Survey of State 
and Local Law Enforcement Agencies Serving Tribal Lands and the 
Survey of State and Local Prosecutor Offices Serving Tribal 
Lands. These surveys will document activities and caseloads in 
the 16 states where jurisdiction has been transferred from the 
federal government to state governments under P.L. 280. The 
surveys will provide information on the legal and structural 
procedures in place to address crime on tribal lands.
 
The Survey of State and Local Law Enforcement Serving Tribal 
Lands will collect information on--

* criminal justice services provided to tribal lands

* points of contact between the tribes and law enforcement 
agencies

* exchange of criminal justice information and outcome of cases 
between state and local law enforcement agencies

* types of agreements between state and local law enforcement 
agencies and tribal governments 

* ability of state and local law enforcement to track crimes 
occurring on tribal lands separately from crimes occurring 
elsewhere in their jurisdiction.

The Survey of State and Local Prosecutor Offices Serving Tribal 
Lands will gather information on--

* prosecutors’ services provided to tribal lands

* points of contact between tribes and prosecutors’ offices

* exchange of information between state and local prosecutors and 
tribal governments (especially on protection orders)

* type of courts where crimes occurring on tribal lands are 
prosecuted (i.e., state courts, tribal courts, or both)

* the ability of state and local prosecutors to track cases 
occurring on tribal lands separately from crimes occurring 
elsewhere in their jurisdiction.

BJS has pilot tested initial drafts of the law enforcement and 
prosecutors’ surveys and following the test, the instruments were 
revised. They are awaiting final approval from the Office of 
Management and Budget (OMB).  

*******************************************
Census of Tribal Law Enforcement Agencies
*******************************************

BJS plans to conduct the Census of Tribal law Enforcement 
Agencies (CTLEA) in fiscal year 2017. This is the first BJS data 
collection targeted solely at tribal law enforcement agencies. 
The survey is designed to capture information on--

* criminal jurisdiction 

* staffing, officer training, budgets, and sources of funding

* workloads and arrests

* access to and participation in regional and national justice 
database systems

* special topics, such as human trafficking, domestic violence, 
and juvenile delinquency

* access to domestic violence and protection order registries

* monitoring of sex offenders on tribal lands

* reporting of crime data to the FBI Criminal Justice Information 
Services database

* special jurisdiction over non-Indian offenders for select 
domestic violence cases.

A total of 300 agencies will be asked to participate in the 
census, including tribal police departments, conservation and 
wildlife offices, tribal university or college police, and BIA 
police agencies (table 1). The CTLEA will cover information from 
all known tribally operated law enforcement agencies and police 
agencies operated by BIA. BJS has developed a customized data 
collection form for BIA agencies and one for tribal agencies. The 
forms have a common core of items and a set of items tailored to 
capture the unique characteristics of BIA and tribal agencies.

In FY 2016, BJS established a tribal justice and law enforcement 
panel to ensure that tribal governments and their law enforcement 
agencies have a central role in the development, design, and 
implementation of the census. The panel is comprised of tribal 
leaders and law enforcement representatives from across the 
country, along with representatives from the Department of 
Justice’s (DOJ) Office of Tribal Justice, the FBI’s Indian 
Country Crimes Unit, and the Department of Interior’s (DOI) 
Office of Justice Services. 

The tribal law enforcement agencies, justice organizations, and 
research institutions that participated on or advised the panel 
included--

* Hualapai Tribal Police Department 

* Navajo Department of Public Safety 

* Tulalip Tribal Police Department

* Saint Regis Mohawk tribal Police Department

* Tanana Chiefs Conference

* Aleutian Pribilof Islands Association

* White Earth Reservation Tribal Police Department

* Columbia River Inter-tribal Police Department

* Chickasaw Lighthorse Police Department

* Anadarko Law Enforcement Agency, BIA

* Mescalero Law Enforcement Agency, BIA

* Northern Cheyenne Law Enforcement Agency, BIA 

* Association of Village Council Presidents

* American Indian Development Associates, LLC 

* Tribal Law and Policy Institute 

* International Association of Chiefs of Police, Indian Country 
Law Enforcement Section

* University of Arizona, American Indian Studies Program.

The federal and state agencies that participated on the panel or 
provided input on the census included--

* U.S. Attorney’s Office for Montana, DOJ

* U.S. Attorney’s Office for the Western District, DOJ

* Office of Tribal Justice, DOJ 

* Office of Juvenile Justice and Delinquency Prevention, DOJ

* Office on Victims of Crime, DOJ

* National Institute of Justice, DOJ

* Community Oriented Policing Services, DOJ

* Office on Violence against Women, DOJ

* FBI, Indian Crimes Unit, DOJ

* BIA, DOI

* Alaska State Troopers.

In addition, as part of the outreach and collaboration plans for 
the CTLEA, the BJS acting director sent a letter announcing the 
census to all federally and state-recognized tribes across the 
United States. The letter also invited input from tribal nations 
on the design and development of the survey instrument.

In December 2016, BJS completed a pilot test of the CTLEA forms 
with seven tribal law enforcement agencies and two BIA law 
enforcement agencies. The test examined the estimated respondent 
burden and obtained feedback on the survey design, content, 
protocols for contacting respondents, and mode of data 
collection. As a result of the pilot tests, BJS and its data 
collection agent reduced the number of questions on the draft 
surveys to minimize the respondent burden and focus on the key 
core items.

In April 2017, the 60-day notice of the census was posted in the 
Federal Register. ***Footnote 6. Bureau of Justice Statistics; 
Agency Information Collection Activities; Proposed eCollection 
eComments Requested; New Collection: Census of Tribal Law 
Enforcement Agencies (CTLEA). See 
https://www.federalregister.gov/documents/2017/04/10/2017-
07077/bureau-of-justice-statistics-agency-information-collection-
activities-proposed-ecollection-ecomments.*** BJS received feedback
 during the public comment period from several agencies and 
organizations, including the Bureau of Justice Assistance in 
the Office of Justice Programs at the DOJ, the Criminal Justice 
Information Law Unit at the FBI’s Office of the General Counsel, 
and the Umatilla Indian Tribe. The comments included suggested 
edits to question wording and the addition or revision of 
response categories. The recommended changes included adding 
additional agency functions or duties, specific types of 
available training, budget components, and equipment types. 
During the summer of 2017, BJS plans to request final approval 
of the data collection from OMB.

National Survey of Tribal Court Systems
******************************************

On December 31, 2015, BJS concluded the data collection for the 
NSTCS and data processing and analysis of the survey data are 
ongoing. The NSTCS is BJS’s first statistical collection focusing 
solely on tribal justice systems since the 2002 Census of Tribal 
Justice Agencies, which gathered limited data on law enforcement, 
courts, and correction agencies. The NSTCS gathered information 
on--

* the administrative and operational characteristics of tribal 
justice systems (including budgets, staffing, the use of juries, 
and the appellate system)

* indigent defense services 

* pretrial and probation programs 

* protection orders

* criminal, civil, domestic violence, and juvenile caseloads 

* implementation of various enhanced sentencing provisions under 
the TLOA, 2010

* indigenous or traditional dispute forums operating within 
Indian country.

NSTCS used three separate but compatible survey instruments that 
were customized to the type and location of the tribal courts: 
tribal courts in the lower 48 states, Alaska Native villages, and 
the BIA’s Code of Federal Regulation (CFR) courts. BJS mailed 
surveys to 237 tribal courts or judicial forums identified in the 
lower 48 states, 75 in Alaska Native villages, and 7 BIA CFR 
courts (that have jurisdiction over 22 separate tribes or service 
areas). The survey had an overall response rate of 81%, which 
varied by the respondent type. The response rate was 83% for 
tribal courts in the lower 48 states, 72% for the judicial forums 
in Alaska Native villages, and 100% for the 7 CFR courts.

The development and implementation of the NSTCS received 
invaluable assistance from several organizations and tribes:

* American Indian Development Associates, New Mexico

* American Probation and Parole Association, Kentucky

* Bristol Bay Native Association

* BIA’s Office of Justice Services

* Hamline University School of Law, Minnesota

* Kansas University School of Law’s Tribal Law and Government 
Center

* National Judicial College, the National Tribal Judicial Center, 
Nevada

* National American Indian Court Judges Association

* Standing Rock Sioux Tribe, South Dakota

* Supreme Court of the Navajo Nation, Arizona

* Syracuse University College of Law, the Center for Indigenous 
Law, Governance, and Citizenship, New York

* Tanana Chiefs Conference

* Tanana Chiefs Conference, Alaska

* Tribal Law and Policy Institute

* Tribal Law and Policy Institute, California

* University of Colorado at Boulder, American Indian Law Clinic

* University of North Dakota School of Law’s Tribal Judicial 
Institute.

******************************************
Tribal participation in national records 
and information systems
******************************************

Since 2009, BJS has focused on improving tribal participation in 
national record and information systems through expanding tribal 
eligibility for funding under the National Criminal History 
improvement Program (NCHIP) and the National Instant Criminal 
Background Check System (NICS) Act Record Improvement Program 
(NARIP). These efforts continued in fiscal year 2017. The NCHIP 
program, initiated in 1995, provides grants to states, 
territories, and federally recognized tribes to improve the 
quality, timeliness, and immediate accessibility of criminal 
history records and related information. The National Instant 
Criminal Background Check System (NICS) Improvement Amendments 
Act of 2007 (Pub. L. No. 110-180 (NIAA)) was enacted in the wake 
of the April 2007 shooting tragedy at Virginia Tech. The NARIP 
provides grants to states and tribes to help automate and submit 
complete records to NICS on persons who are prohibited from 
purchasing or possessing a firearm under federal or state law.

Under NCHIP, tribes may submit applications individually or as 
part of a multi-tribe consortium. BJS strongly encourages states 
and tribes to strive for integrated record improvements 
regardless of the funding source. Despite tremendous progress 
made toward criminal record improvements among states, several 
significant shortcomings or challenges remain among tribal 
justice agencies. For example, many tribes do not have the 
capabilities or required technologies to support the transmission 
of records to national systems, either through their own 
infrastructure or via the state. Additionally, some tribes have 
not yet converted their manual records to electronic versions. 
Some entities are not yet submitting qualifying records to the 
National Crime Information Center Protection Order File, and the 
FBI reports continued issues with the appropriate flagging of 
protection orders regarding the prohibition for firearm 
purchases. 

While federally recognized tribes are eligible to apply for NARIP 
funding, it may only be used to achieve the goals for complete 
records directly related to NICS checks. NARIP seeks to address 
the gaps in information available to NICS on a person’s criminal 
history records, records of felony convictions, warrants, records 
of protective orders, convictions for misdemeanor involving 
domestic violence and stalking, drug arrests and convictions, 
records of mental health adjudications, and others. Filling these 
information gaps will better enable the NICS to operate as 
intended—to keep guns out of the hands of persons prohibited by 
federal or state law from receiving or possessing firearms. It 
will also reduce delays for law-abiding gun purchasers.

Jails in Indian country
***************************

The Survey of Jails in Indian Country (SJIC) is BJS’s only 
national data collection that provides annual data on Indian 
country jails and detention facilities. BJS initiated the SJIC in 
1998 as a component of the Annual Survey of Jails. The SJIC 
includes Indian country facilities operated by tribal authorities 
or BIA. The survey collects data on--

* percentage of capacity occupied based on the average daily 
population

* midyear population

* peak population

* staffing

* offense types

* conviction status.  

The findings of the most recent SJIC data are available in Jails 
in Indian Country, 2015 (NCJ 250117, BJS web, November 2016). 
Highlights are summarized below.

Inmate population
******************

At midyear 2015, an estimated 2,510 inmates were confined in 76 
Indian country jails. This was a 5.5% increase from the 2,380 
inmates confined at midyear 2014 in 79 facilities. During June 
2015, the number of inmates admitted to an Indian country jail 
(9,810) was four times the size of the average daily population 
(ADP) (2,390). Upon admission, an inmate’s expected average 
length of stay was about 7 days, up from 6 days the previous 
year. More than half (55%) of inmates in custody were convicted.

Inmate characteristics
************************

Since 2010, about 3 in 10 inmates held in Indian country jails 
were confined for a violent offense, a decline from a peak of 4 
in 10 in 2007. At midyear 2015, roughly 13% of inmates were held 
for domestic violence and 10% were held for aggravated or simple 
assault, which was similar to 2013 and 2014. Seven percent of 
inmates were held for driving while intoxicated or driving while 
under the influence of drugs or alcohol. Six percent of inmates 
were held for a drug law violation. About a fifth of offenders at 
midyear 2015 were held for public intoxication (17%), burglary 
(2%), and larceny-theft (1%). While most of the inmate population 
in Indian country jails were male, the percentage of female jail 
inmates increased from 20% of all inmates in 2000 to 25% in 2015. 
Less than a tenth (8%) of the population was age 17 or younger.

Indian country jail operations
********************************

At midyear 2015, the jail facilities in Indian country were rated 
to hold an estimated 3,800 inmates, which was up slightly from 
3,720 in 2014. Between June 2000 and June 2015, the overall rated 
capacity grew at twice the rate (up 83%) of the midyear inmate 
population (up 41%), which meant that occupied bed space 
declined. When measured relative to the ADP, the percentage of 
rated capacity occupied in Indian country jails was 58% in June 
2014 and 63% in June 2015. 

At midyear 2015, the population of Indian country jails ranged 
from no inmates in Fort Peck Transitional Living Unit to 228 
inmates in the facility for Nisqually Adult Corrections. Overall, 
12 facilities accounted for half of the inmate population in 
Indian country jails. An estimated 93% of inmates were held in 56 
facilities rated to hold 25 or more inmates. Of these, more than 
half (58%) of inmates were held in 20 facilities rated to hold 50 
or more inmates, and about a quarter (26%) of inmates were held 
in 20 facilities with a rated capacity of 24 or fewer inmates.

Indian country jail employees
*******************************
Indian country jails employed an estimated 1,690 persons at 
midyear 2015. About 70% (or 1,200) of employees were jail 
operations staff, including correctional officers and others who 
spent more than half of their time supervising inmates. The 
remaining staff (490) were administrative employees; educational 
staff; technical or professional staff; clerical, maintenance, or 
food service staff; or staff performing other functions. There 
have been about 2 inmates to every 1 jail operations employee 
since 2010.

Suicides in Indian country jails
**********************************

After peaking in 2002, attempted suicides in Indian country jails 
have declined significantly. During the 12-month period ending 
June 30, 2015, 68 facilities reported a total of 53 attempted 
suicides. Two deaths, including one suicide, were reported during 
this time period.

Federal justice statistics
****************************

The Federal Justice Statistics Program (FJSP) provides annual 
data on workload, activities, and outcomes associated with 
federal criminal cases. It acquires information on all aspects of 
processing in the federal justice system, including arrests, 
initial prosecution decisions, referrals to courts or 
magistrates, court dispositions, sentencing outcomes, sentence 
length, and time served. The FJSP collects data from the U.S. 
Marshals Service, the Executive Office for U.S. Attorneys, the 
U.S. Office of Probation and Pretrial Services, the 
Administrative Office of the U.S. Courts, the U.S. Sentencing 
Commission, and the Federal Bureau of Prisons.

The FJSP captures an offender’s race, but it does not provide 
information on tribal membership. During 2014 (the most recent 
federal data available), 2,648 AIAN were arrested and booked by 
federal law enforcement agencies, down from 2,882 in 2013. There 
were 1,417 AIAN sentenced in U.S. district courts in 2014, down 
from 1,429 in 2013. In 2014, 1,715 AIAN offenders entered federal 
prison and 1,763 offenders exited federal prison. At fiscal 
yearend 2014, 3,717 AIAN were held in federal prison (1.9% of all 
prisoners).

BJS Indian country justice statistics webpage
***********************************************

The BJS Indian country webpage presents information on and 
updates to BJS’s tribal data collections. ***Footnote 7 BJS 
Indian country justice statistics page is at 
http://www.bjs.gov/index.cfm?ty=tp&tid=200000.*** It provides 
links to the latest victimization, law enforcement, courts, 
corrections, and criminal justice data improvement information. 
Links to BJS’s FBI extract files on violent and property offenses 
known to tribal law enforcement by state from 2008 to 2015 are 
also available.

Previously released reports
*****************************

Jails in Indian Country, 2015 (NCJ 250117)

Tribal Crime Data Collection Activities, 2016 (NCJ 249939)

Tribal Crime Data Collection Activities, 2015 (NCJ 248785)

Jails in Indian Country, 2014 (NCJ 248974)

Tribal Crime Data Collection Activities, 2014 (NCJ 246917)

Jails in Indian Country, 2013 (NCJ 247017)

Tribal Crime Data Collection Activities, 2013 (NCJ 242584)

Jails in Indian Country, 2012 (NCJ 242187)

Tribal Crime Data Collection Activities, 2012 (NCJ 239077)

Tribal Crime Data Collection Activities, 2011 (NCJ 234518)

Jails in Indian Country, 2011 (NCJ 238978)

Jails in Indian Country, 2010 (NCJ 236073)

Jails in Indian Country, 2009 (NCJ 232223)

Jails in Indian Country, 2008 (NCJ 228271)

Tribal Law Enforcement, 2008 (NCJ 234217)

Summary: Tribal Youth in the Federal Justice System (NCJ 234218)

State Prosecutors’ Offices with Jurisdiction in Indian Country, 
2007 (NCJ 234241)

Jails in Indian Country, 2007 (NCJ 223760)

Improving Criminal History Records in Indian Country, 2004–2006 
(NCJ 218913)

Jails in Indian Country, 2004 (NCJ 214257)

Jails in Indian Country, 2003 (NCJ 208597)

Census of Tribal Justice Agencies in Indian Country, 2002 
(NCJ 205332)

American Indians and Crime (NCJ 203097)

Jails in Indian Country, 2002 (NCJ 198997)

Jails in Indian Country, 2001 (NCJ 193400)

Jails in Indian Country, 2000 (NCJ 188156)

Tribal Law Enforcement, 2000 (NCJ 197936)

Jails in Indian Country 1998–1999 (NCJ 173410)

American Indians and Crime (NCJ 173386)

BJS-sponsored research
************************

Examining Indian Country Cases in the Federal Justice System 
(NCJ 248656), produced by the Urban Institute, February 2015.

Summary: Tribal Youth in the Federal Justice System, 1999–2008 
(NCJ 234218), produced by the Urban Institute, May 2011.

***********************************************************
The Bureau of Justice Statistics of the U.S. Department of 
Justice is the principal federal agency responsible for measuring 
crime, criminal victimization, criminal offenders, victims of 
crime, correlates of crime, and the operation of criminal and 
civil justice systems at the federal, state, tribal, and local 
levels. BJS collects, analyzes, and disseminates reliable and 
valid statistics on crime and justice systems in the United 
States, supports improvements to state and local criminal justice 
information systems, and participates with national and 
international organizations to develop and recommend national 
standards for justice statistics. Jeri M. Mulrow is acting 
director.

This report was written by Devon Adams, Todd Minton, Mark 
Motivans, Steven W. Perry, and Suzanne Strong. Howard Snyder 
provided statistical review and verification of the report.

April Hanlin and Doris James edited the report. Tina Dorsey and 
Morgan Young produced the report.

July 2017, NCJ 250784
***********************************************************
************************************************
Office of Justice Programs
Building Solutions *Supporting Communities 
*Advancing Justice
www.ojp.usdoj.gov
************************************************

************************************************
6/30/2017/ JER/ 2:45pm
