U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Programs
Bureau of Justice Statistics

August 2012, NCJ 238536

Victimizations Not Reported 
to the Police, 2006-2010

Lynn Langton, BJS Statistician, 
Marcus Berzofsky, Chris Krebs, and 
Hope Smiley-McDonald, RTI International

---------------------------------------------
This file is text without graphics and many of the tables. A Zip archive 
of the tables in this report in Spreadsheet format (.cvs) and the full 
report including tables and graphs in .pdf format are available at:
http://bjs.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbdetail&iid=4393
---------------------------------------------

During the period from 2006 to 2010, 52% of all violent victimizations, 
or an annual average of 3,382,200 violent victimizations, were not 
reported to the police. Of these, over a third (34%) went unreported 
because the victim dealt with the crime in another way, such as reporting 
it to another official, like a guard, manager, or school official (figure 
1). Almost 1 in 5 unreported violent victimizations (18%) were not 
reported because the victim believed the crime was not important enough.

When crimes are not reported to the police, victims may not be able to 
obtain necessary services to cope with the victimization, offenders may 
go unpunished, and law enforcement and community resources may be 
misallocated due to a lack of accurate information about local crime 
problems. Understanding the characteristics of crimes unknown to police, 
victims who do not report crimes, and the reasons these crimes are not 
reported may help identify gaps in the provision of criminal justice 
services and inform police practice and policies. Using data from the 
National Crime Victimization Survey, this report examines trends in the 
types of crime not reported to police, the characteristics of unreported 
victimizations, and the victims’ rationale for not reporting these 
crimes. 
----------------------------------------------------
HIGHLIGHTS

* From 1994 to 2010, the percentage of serious violent crime—rape or 
sexual assault, robbery, or aggravated assault—that was not reported to 
police declined from 50% to 42%.

* The percentage of unreported violent crime victimizations that were not 
reported because the victim believed the police would not or could not do 
anything to help doubled from 10% 1994 to 20% in 2010.

* From 2006 to 2010, the highest percentages of unreported crime were 
among household theft (67%) and rape or sexual assault (65%) 
victimizations, while the lowest percentage was among motor vehicle theft 
(17%) victimizations.

* About 3 in 10 (31%) victimizations involving a weapon and an injury to 
the victim went unreported to police between 2006 and 2010.

* From 2006 to 2010, a greater percentage of victimizations perpetrated 
by someone the victim knew well (62%) went unreported to police, compared 
to victimizations committed by a stranger (51%).

* Among unreported intimate partner violent victimizations, 38% went 
unreported because the victim was afraid of reprisal or getting the 
offender in trouble.

* About 76% of violent crime victimizations that occurred at school were 
not reported to police.

* From 2006 to 2010, victimizations against youth ages 12 to 17 were more 
likely to go unreported than victimizations against persons in other age 
categories.
--------------------------------------------------------------



Although caution is warranted when comparing data from 2006 to other 
years, this report examines aggregate data from 2006 to 2010. (See 
Methodology for more information about the 2006 data collection.) The 
combination of five years of data diminishes the potential variation 
between data from 2006 and later years. 

------------------------------------------
Percentage of victimizations not reported to police declined from 1994 to 
2010
------------------------------------------

From 1994 to 2010, the percentage of serious violent crime—rape or sexual 
assault, robbery, or aggravated assault—that was not reported to police 
declined overall from 50% to 42% (figure 2). Unreported serious violent 
victimizations reached one of the lowest levels in 2002, when 34% of 
these victimizations were not reported to police. The decline in the 
percentage of unreported rape or sexual assault and aggravated assault 
victimizations from 1994 to 2010 contributed to the overall decline in 
unreported serious violent victimizations during this period (appendix 
table 2). No change was detected in the percentage of unreported 
robberies from 1994 to 2010. 

The percentage of property and simple assault victimizations not reported 
to police declined from 1994 to 2010. Despite an increase in 2006 and 
2007, the percentage of simple assaults not reported declined from 63% in 
1994 to 51% in 2010. The percentage of property crime victimizations not 
reported declined from 67% in 1994 to 60% in 2010. 

------------------------------------------
Percentage of unreported violent crime victimizations not reported 
because the victim believed the police would not or could not help 
doubled from 1994 to 2010
-----------------------------------------

Victims gave a variety of reasons for not reporting violent crime 
victimizations to the police. From 1994 to 2010 the most common reason 
was that the victim dealt with the victimization in another way, such as 
reporting it to another official or addressing it privately (figure 3).
 
In 1994, the percentage of unreported violent crime victimizations that 
were not reported because the victim believed the crime was not important 
enough to report (21%) was more than double the percentage that went 
unreported because the victim believed the police would not or could not 
help (10%). From 2005 to 2010, the percentage of victimizations that went 
unreported due to the belief that the police would not or could not help 
increased from 7% to 20%. In 2010, a greater percentage of unreported 
victimizations was not reported because the victim believed the police 
would not or could not help (20%), than was not reported because the 
victim did not think that the crime was important enough to report (15%).
-----------------------------------------
Trends in police-related reasons for not reporting violent crime

The percentage of unreported violent victimizations that were not 
reported because of a police-related reason (i.e., the police would not 
or could not do anything to help) nearly tripled from 2005 to 2010 (not 
shown in figure). Within the general category of police-related reasons 
for not reporting crime, victims gave a number of more specific reasons 
why violent crimes went unreported. An examination of trends in these 
more specific police-related reasons for not reporting a violent 
victimization provides a clearer understanding of the overall increase.

The increase in the percentage of unreported violent crime victimizations 
not reported for police-related reasons was driven by a rise in the 
percentage of victims who reported that the police would not think the 
crime was important enough to address, from 5% in 2005 to 12% in 2010 
(figure 4). The percentage of victims who said that the police would be 
ineffective or inefficient also increased from 2% in 1995 to 4% in 2010, 
as well as the percentage who thought that the police would be biased 
(from 1% in 1995 to 3% in 2010). The percentage of unreported 
victimizations that were not reported because the victim believed that 
the police could not do anything to help remained stable.
------------------------------------------

------------------------------------------
2 in 3 (65%) rape or sexual assault victimizations were not reported to 
police from 2006 to 2010
------------------------------------------

From 2006 to 2010, the two highest percentages of unreported crime were 
among household theft (67%) and rape or sexual assault (65%) 
victimizations, and the lowest percentage was among motor vehicle theft 
(17%) victimizations (table 1). About 46% of serious violent 
victimizations were not reported to police. In general, the percentage of 
unreported victimizations was lower for serious violent crime than simple 
assault (simple assault does not involve an injury or a weapon). However, 
a higher percentage of rape or sexual assault victimizations (65%) 
compared to simple assault victimizations (56%) went unreported during 
the five-year period.

The rationale for not reporting to police varied depending on the type of 
criminal victimization. For example, among unreported violent crime 
victimizations, the most common reason the crime was not reported was 
that the victim dealt with it in another way (34%). Among unreported 
property crime victimizations, the most common reason was that the victim 
believed the police would not or could not do anything to help (36%). A 
lower percentage of unreported serious violent crime (13%) were not 
reported because the victim believed that the crime was not important 
enough to report, compared to simple assault (21%) and property crime 
(30%) victimizations. A greater percentage of unreported rape or sexual 
assault (28%) and aggravated assault (22%) victimizations compared to any 
other type of criminal victimization were not reported because the victim 
was afraid of reprisal or getting the offender in trouble. 

------------------------------------------------------
From 2006 to 2010, 3 in 10 victimizations involving a weapon and an 
injury to the victim went unreported to police
-------------------------------------------------------

Violent crime victimizations in which the victim was injured (43%), the 
offender had a weapon (42%), or both (31%) were less likely to go 
unreported to police than victimizations in which there was neither an 
injury nor a weapon (59%) (table 2). About 3 in 10 victimizations (29%) 
involving a serious injury (e.g., the victim was knocked unconscious or 
sustained a broken bone, a gunshot or stab wound, or internal injuries) 
went unreported to police. About 4 in 10 victimizations (38%) involving a 
firearm went unreported. 

When the unreported victimization resulted in an injury and the 
perpetrator had a weapon, the most common reason the police were not 
notified was that the victim was afraid of reprisal or of getting the 
offender into trouble (42%). In comparison, when the unreported 
victimization involved an injury but no weapon (30%), a weapon without an 
injury (30%), or neither (38%), the most common reason for not reporting 
was that the victimization was dealt with in another way. 

-----------------------------------------------
Among unreported intimate partner violence victimizations, the most 
common reason for not reporting to police was fear of reprisal or getting 
the offender in trouble (38%)
-----------------------------------------------

From 2006 to 2010, victimizations perpetrated by someone who was well 
known to the victim (62%)—a neighbor, coworker, patient, or teacher—or by 
someone with whom the victim was casually acquainted (60%) were most 
likely to go unreported to police (table 3). About 46% of intimate 
partner violence (IPV) victimizations were not reported to police between 
2006 and 2010. The percentage of IPV victimizations not reported to 
police was about the same, regardless of whether the victimization was a 
simple assault (44%) or a serious violent crime (47%) (not shown in 
table). Among the unreported IPV victimizations, 38% went unreported 
because the victim was afraid of reprisal or getting the offender in 
trouble. 

From 2006 to 2010, over half (51%) of violent crime victimizations 
committed by a stranger went unreported to police. Of those, about 18% 
went unreported because the victim believed that the police would not or 
could not do anything to help. 

-------------------------------------------
About three-quarters of violent crime victimizations that occurred at 
school were not reported to police
-------------------------------------------

From 2006 to 2010, violent crime victimizations that took place at school 
(76%), in a public location (55%), or at work (56%) were more likely to 
go unreported to police than violent crime victimizations that took place 
in the home (42%) (table 4). The greatest percentage of unreported 
violent crime victimizations that occurred at school (50%) or work (47%) 
were not reported because the victim dealt with the crime in some other 
way, such as reporting it to another official such as a manager or school 
staff. Unreported violent crime victimizations that occurred in the home 
(27%) were more likely than unreported violent victimizations at school 
(6%), work (4%), or in a public location (7%) to go unreported because 
the victim was afraid of reprisal or getting the offender in trouble.

---------------------------------------------
A greater percentage of unreported violent victimizations against women 
(20%) than men (8%) were not reported because the victim was afraid of 
reprisal or getting the offender in trouble
---------------------------------------------

The demographic characteristics of violent crime victims  contributed to 
differences in the percentage of unreported victimizations and reasons 
for not reporting the crime to the police. From 2006 to 2010, a greater 
percentage of victimizations against men (55%) were not reported to 
police than victimizations against women (49%) (table 5). A greater 
percentage of victimizations against white non-Hispanics (54%) than black 
non-Hispanics (46%) went unreported to police. 

The rationale for not reporting a victimization to the police also varied 
depending on the demographic characteristics of violent crime victims. 
For example, from 2006 to 2010, a greater percentage of unreported 
violent victimizations against women (20%) than men (8%) were not 
reported to police because the victim was afraid of reprisal or getting 
the offender in trouble. 

In addition, from 2006 to 2010, unreported violent crimes against victims 
age 65 or older (33%) were more likely than violent crimes against 
victims ages 12 to 17 (10%) to go unreported because the victim believed 
that the police would not or could not do anything to help. A greater 
percentage of unreported crimes against victims age 17 or younger (42%) 
than victims age 65 or older (19%) were not reported to police because 
the victim handled it in another way.
 
-------------------------------------------
Over 20% of unreported violent victimizations against persons living in 
urban areas were not reported because the victim believed the police 
would not or could not help
--------------------------------------------

During the period from 2006 to 2010, victimizations against persons 
living in households with two or more children under age 12 were less 
likely to go unreported to police (46%) than victimizations involving 
households with no children (54%) or one child (53%) (table 6). A greater 
percentage of violent victimizations against persons in households with 
an income of $50,000 or more (56%) went unreported, compared to 
households with an income of less than $25,000 (50%).

Household characteristics associated with violent crime victimizations 
also contributed to differences in the rationale for not reporting 
victimizations to police. For instance, unreported violent victimizations 
against persons living in urban areas (21%) were more likely to not be 
reported because the victim believed that the police would not or could 
not do anything to help, in comparison to unreported victimizations 
against people living in suburban (12%) and rural (16%) areas.

--------------------------------------
Methodology
--------------------------------------

-------------------------------------
Survey coverage
-------------------------------------

The National Crime Victimization Survey (NCVS) is an annual data 
collection conducted by the U.S. Census Bureau for the Bureau of Justice 
Statistics (BJS). The NCVS collects information on nonfatal crimes, 
reported and not reported to the police, against persons age 12 or older 
from a nationally representative sample of households in the United 
States.

Survey results are based on data gathered from residents living 
throughout the United States, including people living in group quarters, 
such as dormitories, rooming houses, and religious group dwellings. The 
survey excludes persons living in military barracks and people living in 
institutional settings, such as correctional or hospital facilities. (For 
more detail, see the Survey Methodology for Criminal Victimization in the 
United States, 2007 on the BJS website at www.bjs.gov.) Victim self-
reports capture information about the number and characteristics of 
victimizations reported and not reported to law enforcement each year. 

---------------------------------------
Nonresponse and weighting adjustments
---------------------------------------

Estimates in this report use data from the 1994-2010 NCVS data files, 
weighted to produce annual estimates for persons age 12 or older living 
in U.S. households. The weights used in this analysis employ the series 
enumeration detailed in the report Methods for Counting High Frequency 
Repeat Victimizations in the National Crime Victimization Survey, NCJ 
237308, April 2012. Victimizations that occurred outside of the U.S. were 
excluded.

---------------------------------------
Standard error computations 
---------------------------------------

When national estimates are derived from a sample rather than the entire 
population, as is the case with the NCVS, it is important to be cautious 
when drawing conclusions about the size of one population estimate in 
comparison to another or about whether the population estimates are 
changing over time. Although one estimate may be larger than another, 
estimates based on responses from a sample of the population each have 
some degree of sampling error. The sampling error of an estimate depends 
on several factors, including the amount of variation in the responses, 
the size and representativeness of the sample, and the size of the 
subgroup for which the estimate is computed.

One measure of the sampling error associated with an estimate is the 
standard error. The standard error can vary from one estimate to the 
next. In general, an estimate with a smaller standard error provides a 
more reliable approximation of the true value than an estimate with a 
larger standard error for a given metric. Estimates with relatively large 
standard errors are associated with less precision and reliability and 
should be interpreted with caution.

The coefficient of variation (CV) is a measure of an estimate’s 
reliability and a means of comparing standard errors across metrics. The 
CV is the ratio of the standard error to the estimate. In this report, 
the CV was calculated for all estimates. In cases where the CV was 
greater than 50%, or the unweighted sample had ten or fewer cases, the 
estimate was noted with a “!” symbol (interpret data with caution; 
estimate based on 10 or fewer sample cases, or the coefficient of 
variation exceeds 50%).

Tests were conducted to determine whether differences in estimated 
numbers or percentages were statistically significant once sampling error 
was taken into account. Comparisons made in the text were tested for 
statistical significance at the p < .05 level to ensure that the 
differences were larger than might be expected due to sampling variation. 
Significance tests were conducted using statistical programs developed 
specifically for the NCVS by the U.S. Census Bureau. These programs take 
into consideration many aspects of the complex NCVS sample design when 
calculating estimates. Standard errors for average annual estimates were 
calculated based on the ratio of the sums of victimizations and 
respondents across years.

-----------------------------------------------
Methodological changes to the NCVS in 2006
----------------------------------------------
Methodological changes implemented in 2006 may have affected the crime 
estimates for that year to such an extent that they are not comparable to 
estimates from other years. Evaluation of 2007 and later data from the 
NCVS conducted by BJS and the Census Bureau found a high degree of 
confidence that estimates for 2007, 2008, 2009, and 2010 are consistent 
with and comparable to estimates for 2005 and previous years. The 
reports, Criminal Victimization, 2006, NCJ 219413, December 2007; 
Criminal Victimization, 2007, NCJ 224390, December 2008; Criminal 
Victimization, 2008, NCJ 227777, September 2009; Criminal Victimization, 
2009, NCJ 231327, October 2010; and Criminal Victimization, 2010, NCJ 
235508, September 2011, are available on the BJS website at 
http://www.bjs.gov.

Although caution is warranted when comparing data from 2006 to other 
years, the combination of five years of data in this report diminishes 
the potential variation between 2006 and later years. In general, 
findings do not change significantly if the year 2006 is excluded from 
the analysis.

-------------------------------------------
The Bureau of Justice Statistics is the statistical agency of the U.S. 
Department of Justice. James P. Lynch is the director.

This Special Report was written by Lynn Langton, BJS, Marcus Berzofsky, 
RTI International, Chris Krebs, RTI International, and Hope Smiley-
McDonald, RTI International. Erika Harrell verified the report.

Vanessa Curto and Jill Thomas edited the report and Barbara Quinn 
produced the report under the supervision of Doris J. James.

August 2012, NCJ 238536

---------------------------------------------

---------------------------------------------
Office of Justice Programs
Innovation * Partnerships * Safer Neighborhoods
www.ojp.usdoj.gov
----------------------------------------------

*******************
7/12/2012/TLD/2:45p
*******************





