U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Programs
Bureau of Justice Statistics

*****************************************************
This file is text only without graphics and many of 
the tables. A Zip archive of the tables in this 
report in spreadsheet format (.csv) and the full 
report including tables and graphics in .pdf 
format are available on BJSwebsite at: 
http://www.bjs.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbdetail&iid=5479
******************************************************

Special Report

Veterans in Prison and Jail, 2011–12

Jennifer Bronson, Ph.D., E. Ann Carson, Ph.D., and Margaret 
Noonan, BJS Statisticians, Marcus Berzofsky, Dr.P.H., RTI 
International

In 2011–12, an estimated 181,500 veterans (8% of all inmates in 
state and federal prison and local jail excluding military-
operated facilities) were serving time in correctional 
facilities. This represented a decrease from the estimated 
206,500 incarcerated veterans (9% of the total incarcerated 
population) in 2004, and was consistent with the decline in the 
number of veterans in the U.S. general population (figure 1). 
While the number of veterans in prison and jail increased along 
with growth in the overall number of persons incarcerated between 
1980 and 2008, the proportion of incarcerated veterans has 
declined, down from an estimated 24% of all persons incarcerated 
in state prison and jail in 1978 (federal inmates were not 
surveyed in 1978). 

In 1978, 19% of U.S. adult residents, 24% of prisoners, and 25% 
of jail inmates were military veterans. By 2011–12, veterans 
accounted for 9% of the general population, 8% of state and 
federal prisoners, and 7% of jail inmates.

*************************************************
*************
Highlights
*************

* The number of veterans incarcerated in state and federal prison 
and local jail decreased from 203,000 in 2004 to 181,500 in 2011–
12. 

* The total incarceration rate in 2011–12 for veterans (855 per 
100,000 veterans in the United States) was lower than the rate 
for nonveterans (968 per 100,000 U.S. residents).

* Non-Hispanic black and Hispanic inmates made up a significantly 
smaller proportion of incarcerated veterans (38% in prison and 
44% in jail), compared to incarcerated non-Hispanic black and 
Hispanic nonveterans (63% in prison and 59% in jail). 

* A greater percentage of veterans (64%) than nonveterans (48%) 
were sentenced for violent offenses.

* An estimated 43% of veterans and 55% of nonveterans in prison 
had four or more prior arrests.

* More than three-quarters (77%) of incarcerated veterans 
received military discharges that were honorable or under 
honorable conditions.

* An estimated two-thirds of veterans in prison (67%) and jail 
(66%) were discharged from military service between 1974 and 
2000.

* From 2001 to 2012, veterans discharged during Operation 
Enduring Freedom, Operation Iraqi Freedom, and Operation New Dawn 
accounted for 13% of veterans in prison and 25% of veterans in 
jail.

* Nearly half of veterans prison (48%) and jail (44%) served less 
than 3 years in the military.

* A quarter of veterans in prison (25%) and less than a third of 
veterans in jail (31%) reported that they had been in combat 
while in the military. 

* About half of all veterans in prison (48%) and jail (55%) had 
been told by a mental health professional they had a mental 
disorder.

* Incarcerated veterans who saw combat (60% in prison and 67% in 
jail) were more likely than noncombat veterans (44% in prison and 
49% in jail) to have been told they had a mental disorder.
*************************************************

This report uses data from the 2011–12 National Inmate Survey 
(NIS-3) to describe the demographic characteristics, military 
service, and disability and mental health status of incarcerated 
veterans in jails and state and federal prisons. Data from 
previous BJS surveys of inmates in prison and jail were used to 
establish historical trends regarding incarcerated veterans. To 
facilitate comparisons, estimates of nonveteran inmates were 
standardized to the veteran inmate population’s distribution by 
sex, age, race, and Hispanic origin. See Methodology for further 
information on computational procedures and data limitations.

*************************************
Veterans in prison and jail have 
decreased since 1998
*************************************

In 2011–12, about 131,500 veterans were incarcerated in prison 
(8% of the total prison population) and 50,000 were in jail (7% 
of the total jail population) (table 1). This represents a 6% 
decrease from the number of veterans incarcerated in prison in 
2004 (8,500 fewer inmates) and a 25% decrease from the number of 
veterans in jail in 2004 (16,500 fewer inmates).

While veterans made up a larger proportion of the incarcerated 
population than the general population in 1978 and 1985, the 
proportion of veterans in both the general and incarcerated 
populations was equal in 1998. Veterans were incarcerated at 
significantly higher rates than nonveterans in 1978 and 1985 and 
lower rates in 2004 and 2011–12. By 1998, a total of 948 
nonveterans per 100,000 adult U.S. nonveteran residents were 
incarcerated in prison or jail, compared to 882 veterans per 
100,000 adult U.S. veteran residents (figure 2).

In 2011–12, there were 619 veterans per 100,000 adult residents 
incarcerated in prison and 236 veterans per 100,000 adult 
residents in jail (table 2). The incarceration rate for veterans 
in prison increased 4% from 2004 to 2011–12 (from 598 to 619 per 
100,000), while the rate for nonveterans decreased 5% (from 687 
to 653). During the same period, the incarceration rate for 
veterans in jail decreased 17% (from 284 to 236 per 100,000 in 
2004), compared to a 4% decrease for nonveterans (from 328 to 
315).

In 2011–12, males accounted for 93% of nonveterans and 99% of 
veterans in prison (table 3). Similarly, males accounted for 87% 
of nonveterans and 97% of veterans in jail. Unless stated 
otherwise, analyses in the remainder of this report are limited 
to data on male inmates.

*************************************
On average, veterans in prison and 
jail were older than nonveterans
*************************************

Veterans incarcerated in jail were an average of 43 years of age, 
11 years older than nonveterans (age 32) (table 3). More than a 
quarter (27%) of veterans and nearly two-thirds (64%) of 
nonveterans in jail were ages 18 to 34. Almost 19% of veterans in 
jail were age 55 or older, compared to 3% of nonveterans. 
Veterans in prison averaged 49 years of age, 12 years older than 
nonveteran prison inmates. Thirteen percent of veterans and 47% 
of nonveterans were ages 18 to 34, and 33% of veterans and 6% of 
nonveterans were age 55 or older.

The race or Hispanic origin of veterans in prison and jail 
differed significantly from nonveterans. In prison, 50% of 
veterans and 27% of nonveterans were white, 27% of veterans and 
38% of nonveterans were black, and 11% of veterans and 26% of 
nonveterans were Hispanic. A higher proportion of non-Hispanic 
white veterans (44%) than nonveterans (31%) were in jail, while 
non-Hispanic blacks were equally represented among veterans (32%) 
and nonveterans (35%). Twenty-four percent of nonveterans and 11% 
of veterans in jail were Hispanic.

In both prison and jail, more veterans had been married at some 
point in their lives than nonveterans. Significantly more 
nonveterans (57% in prison and 61% in jail) than veterans (24% in 
prison and 32% in jail) had never been married. Forty-five 
percent of veterans in prison and 31% of veterans in jail were 
divorced, compared to 17% of divorced nonveterans in prison and 
12% in jail.

Incarcerated veterans had more years of formal education than 
nonveterans. A higher percentage of veterans in prison (20%) and 
jail (18%) than nonveterans (5% each in prison and jail) obtained 
at least a college degree.

*************************************
Incarcerated veterans were more likely 
to be convicted on a violent sexual 
offense and have fewer priors than 
nonveterans
*************************************

Veterans in prison reported fewer prior arrests and 
incarcerations than nonveterans (table 4). An estimated 43% of 
veterans and 55% of nonveterans in prison had four or more prior 
arrests, while 22% of veterans and 16% of nonveterans had one 
prior arrest. When standardized to the veteran population, 64% of 
veterans and 52% of nonveterans in prison were sentenced for 
violent offenses. An estimated 29% of both veterans and 
nonveterans in prison reported their most serious offense was a 
nonsexual violent crime, but a greater percentage of veterans 
(35%) than nonveterans (23%) was in prison for a violent sexual 
offense. When standardized to the veteran population, a larger 
proportion of nonveterans than veterans were in prison for 
property (17% for nonveterans compared to 12% for veterans), drug 
(19% compared to 14%), and DUI/DWI (4% compared to 3%) offenses.

An estimated 81% of veterans and 77% of nonveterans received 
sentences of 5 or more years, including sentences of life or 
death. More veterans (16%) than nonveterans (14%) in prison were 
serving life sentences, while fewer veterans (17%) than 
nonveterans (21%) were serving sentences of 1 to 4 years. 

About a third of veterans (32%) and a quarter of nonveterans 
(25%) in jail had not been previously incarcerated (table 5). 
Compared to nonveterans in jail, a larger proportion of veterans 
had one prior arrest and a smaller proportion had 11 or more 
prior arrests. Similar proportions of veterans (53%) and 
nonveterans (52%) in jail were unsentenced. Among jail inmates 
who were serving sentences, sentence length did not significantly 
differ based on veteran status. About 22% of both groups were 
sentenced to less than 1 year, 14% were sentenced to 1 to 4 
years, and 10% were sentenced to 5 years or more.

In 2011–12, a larger percentage of veterans than nonveterans was 
incarcerated in jail for a violent sexual offense. Nonveterans 
were more likely to be held for property offenses (25% for 
nonveterans compared to 21% for veterans) and drug offenses (23% 
of nonveterans compared to 18% of veterans).

*************************************
The majority of incarcerated veterans 
did not experience combat during 
their military service
*************************************

The majority of veterans in prison (75%) and jail (69%) reported 
that they did not experience combat while serving in the U.S. 
military (table 6)*** Footnote 1 ?Inmates may have served in more 
than one combat zone and/or more than one branch of the military 
***. Of those who saw combat in at least one conflict zone, 42% 
of veterans in prison and 24% in jail served in Vietnam. Among 
combat veterans serving prison terms in 2011–12, 27% (8,500 
inmates) fought in the Persian Gulf. Thirty-nine percent (12,000 
inmates) saw combat in some other action. A higher percentage of 
veterans in jail saw combat in Afghanistan (23%) or Iraq (42%) 
than veterans in prison (16% in Afghanistan and 26% in Iraq). 
Fifty-one percent of veterans in jail reported serving in other 
conflict zones while in the military.

The service branch profile of incarcerated veterans was similar 
for both jail and prison inmates. The majority (55%) of 
incarcerated veterans served in the U.S. Army, followed by the 
Navy (20%), Marine Corps (18%), Air Force (9%), and Coast Guard 
(2%). 

Almost half of veterans in prison (48%) and jail (44%) served in 
the U.S. military for less than 3 years, while about a quarter of 
prisoners (24%) and jail inmates (27%) had 5 years or more of 
military service. More than three-quarters (77% each) of veterans 
in prison and jail received discharges from the military that 
were honorable or general under honorable conditions. Less than 
10% of prisoners (5%) and jail inmates (6%) received dishonorable 
or bad conduct discharges.

Two-thirds of veterans incarcerated in prison (67%) and jail 
(66%) separated from the military between 1974 and 2000. A 
quarter of veterans (25% or 10,800) in jail left the military 
between 2001 and 2012, the Operation Enduring Freedom/Operation 
Iraqi Freedom/Operation New Dawn (OEF/OIF/OND) era. A higher 
percentage of veterans in prison served in Vietnam (16%) than 
OEF/OIF/OND (13%).

*************************************
Veterans in prison and jail were 
likely to report having been told 
they had post-traumatic stress disorder
*************************************

Past 30-day serious psychological distress (SPD) is measured by 
the K6 scale of nonspecific psychological distress ***Footnote 2 
The K6 scale is a six-question, self-reported mental health 
screener widely used in national surveys. It is not the same as a 
clinical diagnosis of a mental disorder(s) and is used here as an 
indicator that an inmate might have a current mental health 
problem. See Methodology***. When standardized to the veteran 
population, no significant difference was observed in the 
percentage of veterans (14%) and nonveterans (15%) in prison who 
had scores consistent with SPD (table 7). An estimated 48% of 
veterans and 36% of nonveterans in prison were ever told they had 
a mental disorder. Veterans in prison (23%) were twice as likely 
as nonveterans (11%) to report that a mental health professional 
ever told them they had post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD).

An estimated 29% of jail inmates had K6 scores consistent with 
SPD, and there was no significant difference between veterans and 
nonveterans. A higher percentage of veterans (26%) than 
nonveterans (19%) in jail reported they were currently being 
treated for a mental health problem.

A higher percentage of veterans (55%) than nonveterans (43%) in 
jail reported that, at some point in their lives, a mental health 
professional told them they had a mental disorder. The most 
common disorder for veterans (34%) and nonveterans (30%) was 
major depressive disorder. The proportion of veterans in jail who 
were ever told that they had PTSD (31%) was twice as high as 
nonveterans (15%).
***************************************************

*************************************
Incarcerated veterans with combat 
experience remained in the military 
longer than those without combat 
experience
*************************************

About 31,800 veterans in state and federal prisons and 14,700 
veterans in local jails reported that they experienced combat in 
a line or combat unit during their military service (table 8). 

Veterans with combat experience who were serving time in prison 
or jail were significantly more likely than those who did not see 
combat to have remained in the military longer and to have 
received an honorable discharge. Thirty-five percent of veterans 
in jail who left the military between 2001 and 2012 saw combat, 
compared to 21% of veterans in prison.

Significantly more incarcerated veterans who had seen combat 
reported they were told that they had a mental disorder at some 
point in their lives. This could be influenced by increased access to 
mental health services provided by the
military. Sixty-seven percent of veterans in jail who experienced 
combat reported they were told that they had 
a mental disorder, compared to 49% of veterans who were not in 
combat. The differences were smaller for current serious 
psychological distress (SPD), although more veterans in jail who 
had combat experience reported SPD. Thirty-one percent of 
veterans in jail who had combat experience and 27% who were not 
in combat reported current SPD, compared to 16% of veterans in 
prison with combat experience and 13% who were not in combat. d 
be influenced by increased access to mental health services 
provided by the military. Sixty percent of veterans in prison who 
experienced combat and 44% of those who were not in combat were 
told they had a mental disorder at some point in their lives. 
Sixty-seven percent of veterans in jail who experienced combat 
reported they were told that they had a mental disorder, compared 
to 49% of veterans who were not in combat. The differences were 
smaller for current serious psychological distress (SPD), 
although more veterans in jail who had combat experience reported 
SPD. Thirty-one percent of veterans in jail who had combat 
experience and 27% who were not in combat reported current SPD, 
compared to 16% of veterans in prison with combat experience and 
13% who were not in combat.  
****************************************************

*************************************
Veterans in prison and jail were more 
likely than nonveterans to report a
hearing or vision disability
*************************************

Inmates were asked if they had one or more of six disability 
types: hearing, vision, cognitive, ambulatory, self-care, or 
independent living (see Methodology). An ambulatory disability 
was the most common disability among veterans and nonveterans in 
prison (30% each of veterans and nonveterans) and jail (18% of 
veterans and 20% of nonveterans) (table 9). There were few 
significant differences between prisoners according to veteran 
status and disability. About 18% of veterans in prison reported a 
cognitive disability, 14% reported an independent living 
disability, and 11% reported a hearing disability. 

After adjusting for age and race, nonveterans in jail (8%) were 
less likely than veterans (14%) to report having a hearing 
disability. Rates for vision, cognitive, self care, and 
independent living were comparable between nonveterans and 
veterans.

**************
Methodology
**************

The National Inmate Survey
*************************************

The findings in this report come from the 2011–12 fielding of the 
National Inmate Survey (NIS-3). The NIS-3 was conducted in 233 
state and federal prisons, 358 local jails, and 15 special 
facilities (military, Indian country, and Immigration and Customs 
Enforcement (ICE)) between February 2011 and May 2012. RTI 
International collected the data under a cooperative agreement 
with the Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS).

The surveys were administered to 41,822 adult inmates in state 
and federal prison and 58,745 inmates in jail, for a total of 
100,567 adult inmates who participated.

Additional information on the methodology for sample selection of 
facilities and inmates can be found in Sexual Victimization in 
Prisons and Jails Reported by Inmates, 2011–12 (NCJ 241399, BJS 
web, May 2013).

Measurement of veteran status
*************************************

In this report, the analysis of veteran status was restricted to 
adult inmates in prison or jail excluding military prisons. This 
report contains measures of veterans incarcerated in state and 
federal prison and local jail. It does not include estimates of 
all incarcerated service members because it excludes inmates age 
17 or younger or in military, Indian country, or ICE facilities.

The veteran status module was administered to all inmates 
participating in the NIS-3. Survey respondents received the 
module before they were randomized to either the sexual 
victimization survey (90% of inmates) or the alternative survey 
(10% of inmates), and all inmates responded to the veteran 
module. The module on veteran status relied on inmates reporting 
their direct experience. It asked those who indicated they were a 
veteran about the branch of the military in which they served, 
whether they saw combat, the campaign(s) they fought in, their 
discharge type, and how long they served in the military.

Due to the small number of female respondents, it is not possible 
to make significant inferences about female veterans in prisons 
or jails. Therefore, except for the sex variable in table 3, this 
report excludes females from all analyses.

The audio computer-assisted self-interview questionnaire (listed 
as National Inmate Survey) is available on the BJS website.

Nonresponse bias analysis
*************************************

Bias occurs when the estimated prevalence of an outcome is 
different from the actual prevalence of the outcome for a given 
inmate. One potential source of bias is nonresponse. For each 
survey in the NIS-3, a nonresponse bias analysis was conducted to 
determine whether inmates who did not receive modules (due to the 
time constraints built into the survey) that may be associated 
with veteran status were different from inmates who did receive 
those modules. For both the sexual victimization survey 
respondents and the alternative survey respondents, the analysis 
consisted of assessing the level of missing data for key items.

Key findings from the nonresponse bias analysis for respondents 
to the sexual victimization survey include the following for both 
prisons and jails:

* All inmates completed the demographic and criminal history 
modules.

* All inmates received the facility climate module, which 
includes items on contact with family and friends.

* All inmates received the disciplinary experiences module.

* More than 99% of inmates received the mental health screener 
module. When “don’t know” and “refuse” responses were taken into 
account, more than 95% of inmates provided useable responses to 
the mental health screener items.

* Of the inmates who reported a mental health condition, more 
than 15% did not receive the full mental health module due to 
survey time constraints.

* More than 15% of inmates did not receive the disability module.

Key findings from the nonresponse bias analysis for respondents 
to the alternative survey include the following for both prisons 
and jails:

* All inmates received the demographic and criminal history 
modules.

* More than 99% of inmates received the mental health screener 
items and full mental health module. When “don’t know” and 
“refuse” responses were taken into account, more than 95% of 
inmates provided useable responses.

* More than 99% of inmates received the disability module.

Based on this analysis, the following was determined:

* A combined file consisting of respondents from the sexual 
victimization survey and alternative survey can be used to 
analyze veteran status and demographics, criminal history, 
contact with family and friends, and mental health screener 
items.

Weighting and nonresponse adjustments
*************************************

Responses from interviewed inmates were weighted to produce 
national-level estimates. Each interviewed inmate was assigned an 
initial weight corresponding to the inverse of the probability of 
selection within each sampled facility. A series of adjustment 
factors was applied to the initial weight to minimize potential 
bias due to nonresponse and to provide national estimates.

Methods to adjust for survey nonresponse are described in Sexual 
Victimization in Prisons and Jails Reported by Inmates, 2011–12 
(NCJ 241399, BJS web, May 2013). Once adjusted, weights were 
developed to account for survey nonresponse. An additional 
weighting adjustment was conducted to account for the potential 
bias introduced by nonresponse due to time constraints. Bias 
could result if the module nonrespondents were different from the 
module respondents. The adjustment for module nonresponse 
included a calibration of the weights so that the weight from a 
nonresponding inmate was assigned to a responding inmate with 
similar characteristics. 

Weight adjustments were conducted separately for the sexual 
victimization survey and the alternative survey so that each had 
weight totals representing the prison and jail populations by 
sex. For analyses that consisted of a combination of respondents 
to the sexual victimization and alternative surveys, an 
additional weight adjustment was made to ensure that weight 
totals were correct. In this adjustment, an inmate’s survey 
weight was adjusted by the probability of receiving the survey to 
which they were randomly assigned. As all inmates in the survey 
received the veteran module, this report includes additional 
responses that were properly weighted for inference to either the 
prison or jail population. The nonresponse bias analysis found 
that all inmates completed the demographic, criminal history, and 
veteran modules, so no response was necessary.

Standard errors and tests of significance
*************************************

As with any sample survey, the NIS-3 estimates are subject to 
error arising from their basis on a sample rather than a complete 
enumeration of the population of adult inmates in prison and 
jail. Differences in the estimates for subgroups in the tables 
have been tested and noted for significance at the 95% level of 
confidence. 

Standardization of nonveteran estimates
*************************************

When comparing two populations, differences found for some 
characteristics or conditions may be statistically different as a 
result of a true difference in the populations or due to 
differences in basic demographics that are associated with the 
outcome of interest. Standardizing the estimates is one method 
that can be used to determine if these demographic differences 
are the only reason for differences found in other 
characteristics or conditions.

Standardizing survey estimates consists of calibrating the survey 
weights for one population so that the distributions are 
identical for key demographic characteristics known for each 
population. This process was done using SUDAAN’s PROC DESCRIPT 
procedure. The resulting estimates are not a representation of 
the standardized population by themselves (i.e., generalizations 
about the population cannot be made from standardized estimates), 
but are appropriate estimates for comparison with other 
populations of interest. 

In this report, the nonveteran prison and jail populations were 
standardized to the distributions of race or Hispanic origin and 
age for veterans in jail and prison. The analyses in this report 
were limited to the male inmate population, so standardization by 
sex was not necessary.

Measuring serious psychological distress
*************************************

To determine whether inmates had an indicator of a current mental 
health problem, the NIS-3 included the K6 screening scale. The K6 
scale is a measure of past 30-day, nonspecific serious 
psychological distress (SPD) and is not a diagnostic tool. It was 
developed by Kessler and colleagues to estimate the prevalence of 
serious mental illness in noninstitutional settings and as a tool 
to identify possible cases of psychiatric disorder ***Footnote 3 
Kessler, R. C., Barker, P. R., Colpe, L. J., Epstein, J. F., 
Gfroerer, J. C., Hiripi, E., . . . Zaslavsky, A. M. (2003). 
Screening for serious mental illness in the general population. 
Archives of General Psychiatry, 60, 184-189. Kessler, R. C., 
Green, J. G., Gruber, M. J., Sampson, N. A., Bromet, E., Cuitan, 
M., . . . Zaslavsky, A. M. (2010). Screening for serious mental 
illness in the general population with the K6 screening scale: 
results from the WHO World Mental Health (WMH) survey initiative. 
International Journal of Methods in Psychiatric Research, 
19(Supp. 1), 4-22***. It has been used widely in epidemiological 
surveys in the United States and other countries including with 
prison populations.

The K6 scale consists of six questions that ask inmates to report 
how often during the past 30 days they had felt--

* nervous

* hopeless

* restless or fidgety

* so depressed that nothing could cheer them up

* everything was an effort

* worthless.

The response options were (1) all of the time, (2) most of the 
time, (3) some of the time, (4) a little of the time, and (5) 
none of the time. Following Kessler, the responses were recoded 
from 4 to 0, with 4 assigned to “all of the time” and 0 assigned 
to “none of the time.” A summary scale combining the responses 
from all six items, with a range of 0 to 24, was then produced. 
The summary score was then reduced to three categories: 0 to 7 
indicated no mental illness, 8 to 12 indicated an anxiety-mood 
disorder, and 13 or higher indicated SPD.

Measuring disability
*************************************

The disability module was administered to participating inmates 
in the NIS-3 for one of two reasons:

1. to ensure the sexual victimization survey length was 
similar for all participating inmates

2. as part of the alternative survey on mental and physical 
health, past drug and alcohol use, and treatment for 
substance abuse.

Inmates were randomly assigned to a core survey--90% received the 
sexual victimization survey and 10% received the alternative 
survey. Respondents in the 90% sample who completed the core 
sexual victimization survey in 45 minutes or less received the 
quasi-core 2, which contained the mental health and disability 
modules. Based on the time criteria, 31,048 prisoners and 47,427 
jail inmates randomly assigned to the sexual victimization survey 
completed the disability module. Of the inmates who received the 
alternative survey on mental and physical health, past drug and 
alcohol use, and treatment for substance abuse (10% of inmates 
surveyed), 4,237 prisoners and 5,958 jail inmates completed the 
disability module. Together, 35,285 prisoners, 88% of whom were 
in the sexual victimization survey sample (90% of inmates 
surveyed), answered the disability questions. Approximately 
53,385 jail inmates, 89% of whom were in the sexual victimization 
sample, answered the disability questions.

Disability data come from the 10% alternative sample only. This 
sample was a randomized set from the original sample of inmates 
in each facility, which allows all inmates in the United States 
to be independently represented. Nonresponse and 
poststratification adjustments were conducted on the 10% sample 
only using the frame information (sex, age, race or Hispanic 
origin, time since admission, and sentence length). National 
weights were benchmarked to the adult inmate population (age 18 
or older) by facility jurisdiction (prison or jail) and sex. 

The disability data from the 90% sample were not used due to 
bias. Respondents in the 90% sample who completed the disability 
module were less likely to report sexual victimization while 
incarcerated, less likely to report mental health problems, and 
less likely to speak English than inmates who did not receive or 
complete the disability module. These factors, particularly 
victimization and mental health status, are likely highly 
correlated with an inmate’s disability status and would introduce 
bias into the results. 

This report uses six questions to measure disability. The 
questions were modeled after the 2012 American Community Survey 
conducted by the U.S. Census Bureau. Inmates could report more 
than one disability.

1. Hearing disability--Are you deaf or do you have serious 
difficulty hearing?

2. Vision disability--Are you blind or do you have serious 
difficulty seeing even when wearing glasses?

3. Cognitive disability--Because of a physical, mental, or 
emotional problem, do you have serious difficulty 
concentrating, remembering, or making decisions?

4. Ambulatory disability--Do you have serious difficulty 
walking or climbing stairs?

5. Self-care disability--Do you have difficulty dressing or 
bathing?

6. Independent living disability--Because of a physical, 
mental, or emotional problem, do you have difficulty doing 
activities on your own such as going to meal time, going 
outside, working in or outside of this facility, going to 
classes, or attending programs?

Limitations of these data and assumptions that cannot be made 
about incarcerated adults who self-report a disability include 
the following:
 
* The etiology of an inmate’s disability is unknown. It might be 
congenital, genetic or biological, related to an illness or 
disease, or caused by something in the environment (i.e., a 
gunshot wound). The temporal relationship between the onset of 
the disability and the offense is also unknown. Therefore, it is 
inappropriate to make assumptions about whether or not a 
disability “caused” an inmate to commit an offense.

* The way in which the disability limits or impairs an inmate’s 
ability to function is unknown (e.g., daily struggles with many 
activities or occasional flare-ups only).

* Disability data were not verified against medical records or 
diagnostic information.

* Prevalence rates may be underestimated because some inmates 
with serious functional disabilities may have been unable to 
participate in the NIS-3 due to cognitive limitations that 
prevented them from fully understanding the informed consent 
procedures or the survey questions. In addition, some inmates 
with a particular disability (e.g., a hearing disability) may 
have had a harder time completing the survey than inmates who did 
not have a disability.

***************************************************
The Bureau of Justice Statistics of the U.S. Department of 
Justice is the principal federal agency responsible for measuring 
crime, criminal victimization, criminal offenders, victims of 
crime, correlates of crime, and the operation of criminal and 
civil justice systems at the federal, state, tribal, and local 
levels. BJS collects, analyzes, and disseminates reliable and 
valid statistics on crime and justice systems in the United 
States, supports improvements to state and local criminal justice 
information systems, and participates with national and 
international organizations to develop and recommend national 
standards for justice statistics. William J. Sabol is director.

This report was written by Jennifer Bronson, E. Ann Carson, and 
Margaret Noonan, BJS Statisticians, and Marcus Berzofsky, RTI 
International. Zhen Zeng, BJS statistician, and Glynis Ewing, RTI 
International, verified the report.

Irene Cooperman and Jill Thomas edited the report. Barbara Quinn 
produced the report.

December 2015, NCJ 249144
***************************************************

*************************************************
Office of Justice Programs
Innovation * Partnerships * Safer Neighborhoods
www.ojp.usdoj.gov
*************************************************

***********************
11/19/2015 9:30am JER 
***********************
