U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Programs
Bureau of Justice Statistics

--------------------------------------------------
This file is text only without graphics and many of the
tables. A Zip archive of the tables in this report in
spreadsheet format (.csv) and the full report including
tables and graphics in .pdf format are available on BJS
website at:http://bjs.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbdetail&iid=4557
--------------------------------------------------

Violent Victimization Committed by Strangers, 1993-2010

Erika Harrell, Ph.D., BJS Statistician

December 2012, NCJ 239424

In 2010, about 1.8 million nonfatal violent victimizations 
were committed by strangers, which was a 77% decline from 
7.9 million victimizations in 1993. Violent victimizations 
committed by strangers accounted for about 38% of all 
nonfatal violence in 2010. Simple assault made up the 
majority (60%) of victimizations committed by strangers 
during the year, followed by aggravated assault (20%), 
robbery (17%), and rape or sexual assault (2%). From 1993 
to 2008, among all homicides reported to the FBI 
for which the victim-offender relationship was known, 
between 21% and 27% of homicides were committed by 
strangers and between 73% and 79% were committed 
offenders known to the victims.

From 1993 to 2010, the rate of nonfatal violent 
victimization committed by strangers declined 81%, from 
37.7 victimizations per 1,000 persons age 12 or older to 
7.1 per 1,000 (figure 1). Similarly, during the 18-year 
period the rate of violence committed by offenders known 
to their victims dropped 73%, from 39.4 victimizations per 
1,000 persons age 12 or older to 10.5 per 1,000. The 
percentage decline in the rate of violence committed by 
strangers and the rate committed by offenders known to the 
victim from 1993 to 2010 was not statistically different.

************
Highlights
************
****************************************
* In 2010, strangers committed about 38% of nonfatal 
violent crimes, including rape/sexual assault, robbery, 
aggravated assault, and simple assault. 

* There was no statistical difference between the 
percentage decline for violence by strangers (81%) and by 
offenders known to the victims (73%) from 1993 to 2010.

* In 2005-10, more than half (52%) of all robberies were 
committed by strangers, down from nearly two-thirds (64%)  
in 1993-98.

* In 2005-10, strangers committed 62% of violent 
victimizations occurring in public places.

* In 2005-10, about 9% of violent victimizations that 
occurred in victims’ homes were committed by strangers.

* In 2005-10, about 10% of violent victimizations 
committed by strangers involved a firearm, compared to 5% 
committed by offenders known to the victim. 

* In 2005-10, about 22% of victims of violence committed 
by strangers were injured, compared to 31% of victims who 
knew the offender. 

* In 2010, more than half (55%) of violent victimizations 
by strangers were reported to police, although the 
percentage fluctuated from 1993 to 2010.

* From 2005 to 2008, about 43% of homicides known to have 
been committed by a stranger occurred during a robbery or 
argument.
****************************************

The estimates of nonfatal violent victimization committed 
by strangers are based on data from the Bureau of Justice 
Statistics’ (BJS) National Crime Victimization Survey 
(NCVS), which collects information on nonfatal crimes 
against persons age 12 or older reported and not reported 
to the police from a nationally representative sample of 
U.S. households. Because the NCVS is based on interviews 
with victims, it does not measure homicide. Information on 
homicide in this report was obtained from the FBI’s 
Uniform Crime Reporting (UCR) Program.

Trend estimates are based on annual estimates, while 
subgroup estimates are aggregated annual estimates for 
three time periods—1993 to 1998, 1999 to 2004, and 2005 to 
2010. For example, estimates for 1993-98 represent an 
average annual estimate for the 6-year period. This 
approach increases the reliability and stability of 
estimates which facilitates comparing subgroups over time.

*************************************
More than half of all robberies 
were committed by strangers
*************************************

Most of the decline in the rate of violence committed by 
strangers and by offenders the victims knew occurred from 
1993 to 2001 (figure 1). The rate of violence committed by 
strangers declined 65% from 1993 to 2001 and by 47% from 
2001 to 2010. Rates of violence committed by offenders 
known to the victims declined 54% from 1993 to 2001, 
compared to a 41% decrease from 2001 to 2010. There was no 
statistical difference between the percentage decline for 
violence committed by strangers and by offenders known to 
the victims from 1993 to 2010.

In 2005-10, more than half (52%) of all robberies were 
committed by strangers, down from nearly two-thirds (64%) 
in 1993-98. In 2005-10, a greater percentage of robberies 
(52%) were committed by strangers compared to aggravated 
assaults (42%), simple assaults (37%), and rape or sexual 
assault (24%) (table 1). The percentage of all nonfatal 
violence committed by strangers declined from an annual 
average 45% in 1993-98 to 39% in 2005-10. The percentage 
of robberies, aggravated assaults, and simple assaults 
committed by strangers also declined between the two 
periods, while the percentage of rapes and sexual assaults 
committed by strangers remained stable.

****************************************
Males experienced a larger decline than 
females in the rate of violence committed 
by strangers
****************************************

In 2010, males experienced violent victimizations by 
strangers at nearly twice the rate of females (figure 2). 
The rate of violence against males by strangers was 9.5 
victimizations per 1,000 males in 2010 compared to 4.7 
victimizations per 1,000 females. In 1993, the rate for 
males (56.9 violent victimizations per 1,000 males age 12 
or older) was nearly three times the rate for females 
(19.6 per 1,000 females). From 1993 to 2010, males 
experienced a larger decline (83%) than females (76%) in 
the rate of violence committed by strangers. 

Males experienced a 67% decline in the rate of violent 
victimization by strangers from 1993 to 2001, compared to 
a 49% decline from 2001 to 2010. Females experienced a 58% 
decline in the rate of violent victimization by strangers 
from 1993 to 2001, compared to a 42% decline from 2001 to 
2010.

****************************************
Young adults ages 18 to 24 were most 
likely to experience violent 
victimization by a stranger
****************************************

American Indians and Alaska Natives had the highest rate 
of violent victimization by strangers among all racial and 
ethnic groups in each time period (table 2). In 1999-04, 
white, black, and Hispanic victims had similar average 
annual rates of violent victimization by strangers. 
Between 1999-04 and 2005-10, the annual average rate of 
violence by strangers declined 37% for Hispanics, 35% for 
whites, and 15% for blacks. In 2005-10, the lowest rates 
of violent victimization by strangers were observed among 
Asians and Pacific Islanders (5.9 per 1,000), whites (9.2 
per 1,000), and Hispanics (9.8 per 1,000).

Persons ages 18 to 24 had the highest rate of violent 
victimization by strangers among all age groups in each 
time period. In 2005-10, the average annual rate of 
violent victimization committed by strangers against 
persons ages 12 to 17 was 15.5 per 1,000, slightly lower 
than the rate of 18.3 per 1,000 for persons ages 18 to 24.  
Persons age 65 or older experienced the lowest rate of 
violence by strangers (1.6 per 1,000). From 1993-98 to 
2005-10, the rate of violent victimization by strangers 
declined for each age group. 

In 2005-10, persons in households with average annual 
incomes of less than $7,500 had a higher average annual 
rate of violent victimization by strangers (20.2 per 
1,000) than any other income category.* The rate of 
violent victimization by strangers decreased for each 
income category across the three time periods.

In each time period, persons who were never married 
experienced the highest rates of violent victimization by 
strangers. In 2005-10, persons who were never married 
experienced 16.7 violent victimizations by strangers per 
1,000 persons, compared to 13.0 per 1,000 for persons who 
were divorced or separated, 5.7 for married persons, and 
2.2 for persons who were widowed. Over the three time 
periods, the average annual rate of violent victimization 
by strangers fell for each marital status.

The rate of violent victimization by strangers decreased 
for persons in each educational level measured from 1993-
98 to 2005-10. In 1993-98, the average annual rates of 
violent victimization by strangers against persons who had 
not completed high school (29.4 per 1,000) and those who 
were high school graduates (29.3 per 1,000) were lower 
than the rate for persons who had at least some college 
education (32.6 per 1,000). In 2005-10, the average annual 
rate of violent victimization by strangers did not differ 
statistically from one educational level to another (about 
10 per 1,000).

****************************************
Employed persons were more likely than 
persons not employed to be victimized 
by strangers
****************************************

Among persons age 16 or older, employed persons were more 
likely to experience violent victimization by strangers 
than persons who were not employed (table 3). Persons not 
employed included persons looking for work, not looking 
for work (such as retirees), and unable to work. Among 
employed persons, the average annual rate of violent 
victimization by strangers in 1993-98 was 36.7 per 1,000 
persons age 16 or older, compared to 11.2 per 1,000 in 
2005-10. Among persons not employed, the rate of violent 
victimization by strangers was 12.5 per 1,000 persons age 
16 or older in 1993-98, compared to 6.5 per 1,000 in 
2005-10. Across all time periods, employed persons had a 
lower average annual rate of violent victimization by 
strangers in the workplace than outside of the workplace.

****************************************
Urban residents experienced higher rates of violent 
victimization by strangers 
****************************************

Persons in urban areas had consistently higher rates of 
violent victimization by strangers than persons in 
suburban and rural areas (table 4). In 1993-98, the 
average annual rate of violent victimization by strangers 
for urban areas was 42.1 per 1,000 persons, compared to 
29.2 per 1,000 in suburban areas and 17.3 per 1,000 in 
rural areas. The rate of violent victimization by 
strangers decreased in urban, suburban, and rural 
locations in each time periods. In 2005-10, the average 
annual rates of violent victimization by strangers were 
slightly lower in all localities than the rates of violent 
victimization by offenders known to the victims.

****************************************
Persons residing in places with larger 
populations had higher rates of violent 
victimization by strangers 
****************************************

In 2005-10, places with populations of less than 50,000 
had the lowest rate of violence by strangers (7.9 per 
1,000) (table 5). Places with populations of 250,000 or 
more had similar rates of violence by strangers, ranging 
from 12.9 to 16.2 victimizations per 1,000. From 1999-04 
to 2005-10, for every population size, the rate of violent 
victimization by strangers declined.

In 2005-10, in places with populations of 249,999 or less, 
the rate of violence by strangers was lower than the rate 
of violence by persons known to the victims. In places 
with populations of 500,000 or more, the rate of violence 
by strangers was higher than the rate of violence by 
persons known to the victims in 2005-10.

****************************************
A higher proportion of violent 
victimization by strangers occurred 
in public places than in private places
****************************************

In 2005-10, among violence committed by strangers more 
than half (51%) of the victimizations occurred in public 
places, including  in commercial locations (14%), parking 
lots or garages (9%), and on streets, public 
transportation and other open areas (such as public parks) 
(27%) (table 6). About a quarter of violent victimization 
by strangers occurred in private places, such as the 
victim’s or neighbor’s home. The average annual percentage 
of violent victimization by strangers occurring in private 
places increased from about 17% in 1993-98 to 26% in 2005-
10.

A larger percentage of violent crime in public places was 
committed by strangers than in private places. In 2005-10, 
strangers committed 62% of violent victimizations that 
occurred in public places (table 7). In private places, 
about 23% of violent victimizations were committed by 
strangers, including about 9% of violent victimizations 
that occurred in the victim’s home. 

Between 1993-98 and 1999-04, the percentage of violence in 
private places committed by strangers increased slightly, 
while the percentage occurring in public places decreased 
slightly. Between 1999-04 and 2005-10, the percentage of 
violent victimization occurring in private places that was 
committed by strangers remained stable, the percentage 
occurring in public places decreased, and the percentage 
occurring in school increased.

****************************************
In 2005-10, about half of violent 
victimizations by strangers occurred 
while the victims were away from home 
traveling, shopping or doing leisure 
activities 
****************************************

During the three time periods, between 47% and 49% of 
victimizations committed by strangers occurred while the 
victim was traveling, shopping, or participating in 
leisure activities away from home. The average annual 
percentage of violent victimization committed by strangers 
while the victim was doing activities at home increased 
slightly over the three periods, as it did for 
victimizations by offenders known to their victims (table 
8). In both cases, the average annual number of 
victimizations declined over time (not shown in table). In 
1993-98, the percentage of violent victimizations by 
strangers that occurred while the victim was doing 
activities at home (about 8%) was lower than the 
percentage of violent victimizations by strangers 
occurring at work (about 33%). By comparison, in 2005-10, 
14% of violent victimizations by strangers occurred while 
the victim was sleeping or doing other activities at home, 
while about 26% occurred while the victim was working.

**************************************** 
Violent victimizations were more likely 
to involve firearms when the offender 
was a stranger
****************************************

In 2005-10, the average annual percentage of violent 
victimizations by strangers involving a weapon was about 
26%, a decline from 30% in 1993-98 (table 9). In each 
period, the average annual percentage of violent 
victimizations involving a weapon was higher among crimes 
committed by strangers than among those committed by 
someone the victim knew. In 2005-10, 10% of violent crimes 
committed by strangers involved a firearm compared to 5% 
of crimes committed by offenders known to the victim.

****************************************
Victims were less likely to be injured during a violent 
victimization when the offender was a stranger
****************************************

In 2005-10, about 22% of victims of violence by strangers 
were injured, compared to 31% of victims who knew the 
offenders (table 10). For each time period, a smaller 
percentage of victims of violence by strangers were 
injured compared to victims who knew the violent 
offenders. The percentage of victims injured by strangers 
increased between 1993-98 (18%) and 2005-10 (22%). 
 
In 2005-10, a similar percentage (4%) of  violent 
victimizations involving a serious injury (such as gunshot 
wounds, knife wounds, internal injuries, unconsciousness, 
broken bones, and other injuries that required 
hospitalization for more than 2 days) was committed by 
strangers and by persons the victims knew.

****************************************
Multiple offenders were more likely to 
be involved in violent victimizations 
by strangers than in victimizations 
by offenders known to the victims 
****************************************

In 2005-10, 29% of violent victimization by strangers 
involved multiple offenders, compared to 12% of violent 
victimizations by offenders known to the victim 
(table 11). In each time period, the average annual 
percentage of violent victimizations by multiple strangers 
was more than twice that of incidents with multiple 
offenders known to the victim. While the percentage of 
stranger victimizations with multiple offenders decreased 
between 1993-98 and 1999-04, it remained relatively stable 
over time. 

****************************************
Reporting to the police of violent 
victimizations committed by strangers
fluctuated from 1993 to 2010
****************************************

In 2010, more than half (55%) of violent victimizations by 
strangers were reported to police. From 1993 to 2010, the 
percentage of violence committed by strangers that was 
reported to police fluctuated over the 18-year period, 
ranging from 42% to 58% (figure 3). The percentage of 
violent victimizations committed by persons known to the 
victims that was reported to police varied between 36% and 
49% during the same period. The percentages of reporting 
to police for both violent victimizations by strangers and 
known offenders converged over time. 

****************************************
About a third of violent victimization 
by strangers was dealt with in some way 
other than reporting to the police
****************************************
  
The average annual percentage of violent victimization by 
strangers that was dealt with in some way other than 
reporting to the police remained stable from 1993-98 to  
2005-10 (table 12). The percentage of victimizations by 
strangers not reported to police because the respondent 
thought it was not important enough increased from 30% in 
1993-98 to 34% in 2005-10. In each time period, the 
percentage of violent victimization by strangers that was 
dealt with in another way was lower than that for violent 
victimization by an offender known to the victim.

****************************************
From 2005 to 2008, at least 43% of 
homicides by strangers occurred during 
a robbery or argument 
****************************************

From 1993 to 2008, the annual percentage of homicides for 
which the relationship between the victim and offender was 
known varied between 53% and 62%, according to the FBI’s 
Supplementary Homicide Reports (figure 4). Among homicides 
in which the relationship could be determined, between 21% 
and 27% of homicides were committed by strangers and 
between 73% and 79% were committed by offenders known to 
the victims (not shown in table). If the victim-offender 
relationship was known for all homicides, it is likely the 
percentage of stranger homicides would increase slightly.

Robbery and arguments over something other than money were 
the most common circumstances of homicide by a stranger 
(table 13). From 2005 to 2008, 19% of all stranger 
homicides were committed during a robbery, while about 24% 
of stranger homicides were committed during arguments over 
something other than money. About 21% of stranger 
homicides were committed under circumstances unknown to 
the police.

*************
Methodology
*************

The National Crime Victimization Survey (NCVS) is an 
annual data collection conducted by the U.S. Census Bureau 
for the Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS). The NCVS is a 
self-report survey in which interviewed persons are asked 
about the number and characteristics of victimizations 
experienced during the prior six months. The NCVS collects 
information on nonfatal personal crimes (rape or sexual 
assault, robbery, aggravated assault, and simple assault, 
and personal larceny) and property crimes (burglary, motor 
vehicle theft, and other theft) both reported and not 
reported to police. In addition to providing annual level 
and change estimates on criminal victimization, the NCVS 
is the primary source of information on the nature of 
criminal victimization incidents. Survey respondents 
provide information about themselves (such as age, sex, 
race and ethnicity, marital status, education level, and 
income) and whether they experienced victimization. 
Information are collected for each victimization incident 
about the offender (such as age, race and ethnicity, sex, 
and victim-offender relationship), characteristics of the 
crime (including time and place of occurrence, use of 
weapons, nature of injury, and economic consequences), 
whether the crime was reported to police, reasons why the 
crime was or was not reported, and experiences with the 
criminal justice system. 

The NCVS is administered to persons age 12 or older from a 
nationally representative sample of households in the 
United States. The NCVS defines a household as a group of 
members who all reside at a sampled address. Persons are 
considered household members when the sampled address is 
their usual place of residence at the time of the 
interview and when they have no usual place of residence 
elsewhere. Once selected, households remain in the sample 
for three years, and eligible persons in these households 
are interviewed every six months for a total of seven 
interviews. New households rotate into the sample on an 
ongoing basis to replace outgoing households that have 
been in the sample for the three-year period. The sample 
includes persons living in group quarters, such as 
dormitories, rooming houses, and religious group 
dwellings, and excludes persons living in military 
barracks and institutional settings, such as correctional 
or hospital facilities, and the homeless. (For more 
detail, see the Survey Methodology in Criminal 
Victimization in the United States, 2008, NCJ 231173, BJS 
website, May 2011.)

From 2005 to 2010, a total of 835,000 persons from about 
472,000 households were interviewed. This equates to an 
annual average of 139,000 persons age 12 or older in 
76,000 households interviewed each year from 2005 to 2010. 
In 2010, about 41,000 households and 73,300 persons age 12 
or older were interviewed for the NCVS. Each household was 
interviewed twice during the year. The response rate was 
92.3% of households and 87.5% of eligible individuals.

Victimizations that occurred outside of the United States 
were excluded from this report. From 1993 to 2010, about 
1% of about 42,000 unweighted nonfatal violent 
victimizations occurred outside of the United States and 
was excluded from the analysis.

****************************************
Weighting adjustments for estimating 
personal victimization
****************************************

Estimates in this report use data from the 1993 to 2010 
NCVS data files. These files are weighted to produce 
annual estimates of victimization for persons age 12 or 
older living in U.S. households. Because the NCVS relies 
on a sample rather than a census of the entire U.S. 
population, weights are designed to inflate sample point 
estimates to known population totals and to compensate for 
survey nonresponse and other aspects of the sample design.
 
The NCVS data files include both person and household 
weights. Person weights provide an estimate of the 
population represented by each person in the sample. 
Household weights provide an estimate of the total U.S. 
household population. Person weights are most frequently 
used to compute estimates of criminal victimizations of 
persons in the total population. Both household and person 
weights, after proper adjustment, are also used to form 
the denominator in calculations of crime rates.

Victimization weights used in this analysis account for 
the number of persons present during an incident and for 
repeat victims of series incidents. The weight counts 
series incidents as the actual number of incidents 
reported by the victim, up to a maximum of 10 incidents. 
Series victimizations are similar in type but occur with 
such frequency that a victim is unable to recall the 
details of each individual event. Survey procedures allow 
NCVS interviewers to identify and classify these similar 
victimizations as series victimizations and to collect 
detailed information on only the most recent incident in 
the series. 

In 2010, about 3% of all victimizations were series 
incidents. Weighting series incidents as the number of 
incidents up to a maximum of 10 incidents produces more 
reliable estimates of crime levels, while the cap at 10 
minimizes the effect of extreme outliers on the rates. 
Additional information on the series enumeration is 
detailed in the report Methods for Counting High Frequency 
Repeat Victimizations in the National Crime Victimization 
Survey, NCJ 237308, BJS website, April 2012.

*****************************
Standard error computations
*****************************

When national estimates are derived from a sample, as is 
the case with the NCVS, caution must be taken when 
comparing one estimate to another estimate or when 
comparing estimates over time. Although one estimate may 
be larger than another, estimates based on a sample have 
some degree of sampling error. The sampling error of an 
estimate depends on several factors, including the amount 
of variation in the responses, the size of the sample, and 
the size of the subgroup for which the estimate is 
computed. When the sampling error around the estimates is 
taken into consideration, the estimates that appear 
different may, in fact, not be statistically different.

One measure of the sampling error associated with an 
estimate is the standard error. The standard error can 
vary from one estimate to the next. In general, for a 
given metric, an estimate with a smaller standard error 
provides a more reliable approximation of the true value 
than an estimate with a larger standard error. Estimates 
with relatively large standard errors are associated with 
less precision and reliability and should be interpreted 
with caution.

In order to generate standard errors around estimates from 
the NCVS, the Census Bureau produces generalized variance 
function (GVF) parameters for BJS. The GVFs take into 
account aspects of the NCVS complex sample design and 
represent the curve fitted to a selection of individual 
standard errors based on the Jackknife Repeated 
Replication technique. The GVF parameters were used to 
generate standard errors for each point estimate (such as 
counts, percentages, and rates) in the report. For average 
annual estimates, standard errors were based on the ratio 
of the sums of victimizations and respondents across 
years.

In this report, BJS conducted tests to determine whether 
differences in estimated numbers and percentages were 
statistically significant once sampling error was taken 
into account. Using statistical programs developed 
specifically for the NCVS, all comparisons in the text 
were tested for significance. The primary test procedure 
used was Student’s t-statistic, which tests the difference 
between two sample estimates. To ensure that the observed 
differences between estimates were larger than might be 
expected due to sampling variation, the significance level 
was set at the 95% confidence level.

Data users can use the estimates and the standard errors 
of the estimates provided in this report to generate a 
confidence interval around the estimate as a measure of 
the margin of error. The following example illustrates how 
standard errors can be used to generate confidence 
intervals:

According to the NCVS, from 2005 to 2010, 10.4% of violent 
victimization by strangers involved an offender armed with 
a firearm (see table 9). Using the GVFs, BJS determined 
that the estimate has a standard error of 0.8% (see 
appendix table 11). A confidence interval around the 
estimate was generated by multiplying the standard errors 
by ±1.96 (the t-score of a normal, two-tailed distribution 
that excludes 2.5% at either end of the distribution). 
Thus, the confidence interval around the 10.4% estimate 
from 2005 to 2010 is 10.4% ± 1.57% (0.8% X 1.96) or (8.83% 
to 11.97%). In others words, if different samples using 
the same procedures were taken from the U.S. population in 
from 2005 to 2010, 95% of the time the percentage of 
violent victimization by strangers involving an offender 
armed with a firearm would fall between 8.83 and 11.97%.

In this report, BJS also calculated a coefficient of 
variation (CV) for all estimates, representing the ratio 
of the standard error to the estimate. CVs provide a 
measure of reliability and a means to compare the 
precision of estimates across measures with differing 
levels or metrics. If it was the case that the CV was 
greater than 50%, or the unweighted sample had 10 or fewer 
cases, the estimate would have been noted with a “!” 
symbol (interpret data with caution; estimate is based on 
10 or fewer sample cases, or the coefficient of variation 
exceeds 50%). 

Many of the variables examined in this report may be 
related to one another and to other variables not included 
in the analyses. Complex relationships among variables 
were not fully explored in this report and warrant more 
extensive analysis. Readers are cautioned not to draw 
causal inferences based on the results presented.

****************************************
Methodological changes to the NCVS 
in 2006
****************************************

Methodological changes implemented in 2006 may have 
affected the crime estimates for that year to such an 
extent that they are not comparable to estimates from 
other years. Evaluation of 2007 and later data from the 
NCVS conducted by BJS and the Census Bureau found a high 
degree of confidence that estimates for 2007, 2008, 2009, 
and 2010 are consistent with and comparable to estimates 
for 2005 and previous years. The reports, Criminal 
Victimization, 2006, NCJ 219413, December 2007; Criminal 
Victimization, 2007, NCJ 224390, December 2008; Criminal 
Victimization, 2008, NCJ 227777, September 2009; Criminal 
Victimization, 2009, NCJ 231327, October 2010; and 
Criminal Victimization, 2010, NCJ 235508, September 2011, 
are available on the BJS website.

****************************************
FBI’s Supplementary Homicide Reports (SHR)
****************************************

The homicide data in this report are from the FBI’s 
Supplementary Homicide Reports (SHR), which is a part of 
the Uniform Crime Reporting (UCR) program. Supplemental 
data about homicide incidents are submitted monthly with 
details on location, victim, and offender characteristics. 
These reports include information on the reporting agency 
and its residential population, county and Metropolitan 
Statistical Area (MSA) codes, geographic division, and 
population group; on the age, race, and sex of victims and 
offenders; and on the victim-offender relationship, weapon 
use, and circumstance of the crime. From 1980 to 2008, 
contributing agencies provided supplemental data for 
508,568 of the estimated 565,636 homicides.

Homicide as defined here includes murder and nonnegligent 
manslaughter, which is the willful killing of one human 
being by another. The general analyses excluded deaths 
caused by negligence, suicide, or accident; justifiable 
homicides; and attempts to murder. Justifiable homicides 
based on the reports of law enforcement agencies are 
analyzed separately. Deaths from the terrorist attacks of 
September 11, 2001, are not included in any of the 
analyses. These homicide data are based solely on police 
investigation, as opposed to the determination of a court, 
medical examiner, coroner, jury, or other judicial body. 
Not all agencies that report offense information to the 
FBI also submit supplemental data on homicides. About 91% 
of homicides reported in the UCR are included in the SHR. 
To account for the total number of homicides, this 
analysis weighted the total number of homicide victims 
included in the SHR data to match national and state 
estimates of the total number of homicide victims prepared 
by the FBI. All homicide analyses in this report are 
adjusted in this manner.

***************************************************
The Bureau of Justice Statistics is the statistical 
agency of the U.S. Department of Justice. James P. 
Lynch is the director.

This report was written by Erika Harrell. Lynn 
Langton verified the report.

Catherine Bird and Jill Thomas edited the report, 
and Barbara Quinn produced the report under the 
supervision of Doris J. James.

December 2012, NCJ 239424
***************************************************

******************************************************
Office of Justice Programs * Innovation * Partnerships 
* Safer Neighborhoods * http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov
******************************************************
______________________
12/3/12/JER/11:30pm




