U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Programs
Bureau of Justice Statistics

-------------------------------------------------------
This file is text only without graphics and many of the
tables. A Zip archive of the tables in this report in
spreadsheet format (.csv) and the full report including
tables and graphics in .pdf format are available on BJS
website at: 
http://www.bjs.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbdetail&iid=5090

-------------------------------------------------------

****************
Special Report
****************

Violent Victimization in New and 
Established Hispanic Areas, 2007-2010



Hispanic populations in many U.S. communities experienced rapid growth 
during the past 3 decades***Footnote 1**Massey, Douglas S (Ed.) (2008). 
New Faces in New Places: The Changing Geography of American 
Immigration. New York: Russell Sage. *** Before 1980, most Hispanics 
lived in the Southwest and in New York, Florida, and Illinois. From 
1980 to 2010, the number of Hispanics living outside of these areas 
increased from 2.7 million to 13.5 million. Meanwhile, from 2007 to 
2010, the overall rate of violence in new Hispanic areas exhibited no 
statistically significant difference from that in established Hispanic 
areas.

This report is based on data from the Bureau of Justice Statistics' 
(BJS) area-identified National Crime Victimization Survey (NCVS). It 
examines violent victimization (rape or sexual assault, robbery, 
aggravated assault, and simple assault) among blacks, whites, and 
Hispanics in four types of Hispanic areas: (1) established slow-growth 
areas, (2) established fast-growth areas, (3) new Hispanic areas, and 
(4) small Hispanic areas.

The NCVS collects information on nonfatal crimes reported and not 
reported to police against persons age 12 or older from a nationally 
representative sample of U.S. households. The 2007 to 2010 NCVS data 
contain geographic codes for states, metropolitan areas, counties, and 
census tracts based on the respondents' place of residence. The 4 years 
of data were pooled to increase the sample size to produce reliable 
estimates for the area comparison analysis.

***************************************
U.S. Hispanic population has grown 246% 
over the past 30 years 
***************************************

Since 1980, the number of Hispanics in the United States has grown from 
a small proportion of the population to the largest minority group in 
the country. *** Footnote 2 Starting in 1980, the U.S. Census Bureau 
began using only self-identification to enumerate the Hispanic 
population. (See Gibson, Campbell, and Kay Jung (2002). Historical 
Census Statistics on Population Totals by Race, 1970 to 1990, and by 
Hispanic Origin, 1970 to 1990, for the United States, Regions, 
Divisions, and States. Washington, DC: U.S. Census Bureau.*** The 
Hispanic growth rate from 1980 to 2010 (246%) exceeded the rates for 
non-Hispanic blacks (44%) and non-Hispanic whites (9%) (figure 1).

A typology was used to define established and new Hispanic areas based 
on historical and recent Hispanic population counts. ***Footnote 3 
Suro, Roberto, and Audrey Singer (2002). Latino Growth in Metropolitan 
America: Changing Patterns, New Locations. Washington, DC: Brookings 
Institution Center on Urban and Metropolitan Policy and the Pew 
Hispanic Center.*** The typology classified 363 metropolitan areas and 
3,103 counties in the 48 contiguous states and the District of Columbia 
into four categories according to their Hispanic base population in 
1980 and the growth in their Hispanic population from 1980 to 2010. 
Established Hispanic areas were metropolitan areas or counties in which 
the Hispanic base population exceeded the national average of 6.4% in 
1980. These areas were further divided into two groups (i.e., slow or 
fast growth) depending on whether the growth in their Hispanic 
population lagged or exceeded the national average growth rate of 246% 
between 1980 and 2010.

********************************************************
***********
Highlights
***********

This report describes violent victimization rates by victims' race and 
ethnicity within four types of Hispanic areas using National Crime 
Victimization Survey data from 2007 to 2010. Hispanic areas are 
classified based on their historical Hispanic population and the growth 
in their Hispanic population between 1980 and 2010: (1) established 
slow-growth areas, (2) established fast-growth areas, (3) new Hispanic 
areas, and (4) small Hispanic areas.

* From 1980 to 2010, the Hispanic population increased 246%, compared 
to 44% for non-Hispanic blacks and 9% for non-Hispanic whites.

* From 2007 to 2010, new Hispanic areas had a lower overall rate of 
violent victimization compared to small Hispanic areas that had 
relatively little growth in Hispanic populations.

* Unlike blacks and whites, Hispanics experienced higher rates of 
violent victimization in new Hispanic metropolitan areas (26 per 1,000) 
than in other areas (16 to 20 per 1,000).

* Hispanics ages 18 to 34 exhibited the largest variation in 
victimization rates by type of area. Those in new Hispanic areas 
experienced violence at higher rates than those in established and 
small Hispanic areas.

* Among all age groups, new Hispanic areas did not show statistically 
significant higher rates of violent victimization for non-Hispanic 
white and black residents.

* Blacks experienced higher rates of violent victimization in small 
Hispanic metropolitan areas (50 per 1,000) than in new Hispanic areas 
(27 per 1,000). 

* For whites, the overall rate of violent victimization was lower in 
established slow-growth areas, while the other areas showed no 
significant differences in the overall rate of violent victimization.
********************************************************

Small Hispanic areas were those in which the Hispanic base population 
and growth rate were both lower than the national average. New Hispanic 
areas began with a small, lower than average percentage of Hispanics, 
but the growth in their Hispanic population exceeded the national 
average. Using the typology, two maps showing Hispanic residential 
patterns were developed: one for metropolitan areas and one for 
counties (figures 2 and 3). Analyses of the metropolitan areas and 
counties are presented separately throughout this report. Together, 
they provide a comprehensive overview of Hispanic settlement patterns.

Established slow-growth areas contained the major immigration gateways 
(e.g., Los Angeles, New York City, and Chicago) and the major 
metropolitan areas in the Southwest (e.g., California, Arizona, New 
Mexico, Texas, and Colorado) where Hispanic communities developed 
largely along the U.S.-Mexico border. These areas extended beyond the 
metropolitan regions to neighboring non-metro counties, and they formed 
a continuing strip from Texas to Colorado while covering large 
proportions of Arizona, Nevada, Idaho, and Wyoming. With the exception 
of counties near Chicago, New York, and Miami, established Hispanic 
communities traditionally were concentrated in the Southwest and 
neighboring states. More than 8 million Hispanics lived in these areas 
in 1980, and the number grew to nearly 20 million in 2010 (tables 1 and 
2). Overall, the number of Hispanics grew by 143% in established 
Hispanic metropolitan areas and by 120% in established Hispanic 
counties (tables 3 and 4). The growth rates in established slow-growth 
Hispanic metropolitan areas and counties were lower than those of the 
other area types; however, Hispanics still accounted for a substantial 
portion of the overall population growth in these areas. The total 
population grew by about 30% in these areas from 1980 to 2010, with 
Hispanics accounting for 84% of the growth in metropolitan areas and 
98% of the growth in counties.

Established fast-growth Hispanic areas contained metropolitan areas and 
counties that mainly served as secondary destinations for Hispanics 
passing through major immigration gateways. With the exception of a few 
metropolitan areas (e.g., Phoenix, Las Vegas, Denver, and Miami), the 
communities in this category were largely clustered in California and 
Texas, with a few scattered around the edge of the more established 
Hispanic areas. Slightly more than 3 million Hispanics lived in these 
metropolitan areas in 1980, representing 20% of Hispanics in the United 
States. Established fast-growth Hispanic areas saw an increase of close 
to 400% in their Hispanic population, as nearly 30% of Hispanics lived 
in these areas in 2010. The population growth in these areas showed a 
different pattern than in other area types: the increase in the 
Hispanic population accounted for slightly more than 50% of the areas' 
overall population growth. (Compared with the more established Hispanic 
areas, the growth in the Hispanic population in these secondary 
destinations represented a more generalized population expansion among 
all groups.) 

New Hispanic areas contained a large number of metropolitan areas and 
counties outside of the traditional Hispanic gateways. These areas 
varied in the opportunities they provided for new Hispanic residents. 
For example, food-processing industries in the Midwest created a demand 
for labor that was associated with an influx of Hispanics. ***Footnote 
4 Leach, Mark A., and Frank D. Bean (2008). The structure and dynamics 
of Mexican migration to New Destinations in the United States. In 
Douglas S. Massey (Ed.), New Faces in New Places: The Changing 
Geography of American Immigration. New York: Russell Sage***. In the 
meantime, areas in the Southeast, mid-Atlantic, Northeast, and north-
Pacific regions experienced rapid development in technology, 
information, and financial sectors, which resulted in the expansion of 
local labor markets ***Footnote 5 Carnoy, Martin (2000). Sustaining the 
New Economy: Work, Family, and Community in the Information Age. 
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press***. The expansion and 
restructuring of the service economy, manufacturing industry, and 
construction industry was associated with the increased presence of 
Hispanics in many locales where there had been little previous Hispanic 
migration ***Footnote 6 Parrado, Emilio A., and William Kandel (2008). 
New Hispanic migrant destinations: A tale of two industries. In Douglas 
S. Massey (Ed.), New Faces in New Places: The Changing Geography of 
American Immigration. New York: Russell Sage***. In these new Hispanic 
areas, the increase in the Hispanic population accounted for only a 
small proportion (about 25%) of the overall population growth. This 
pattern is not surprising because the growing economies and relatively 
low costs of living in many new Hispanic areas made them attractive for 
both Hispanic and non-Hispanic populations. 

Small Hispanic areas contained metropolitan areas and counties in the 
South (mainly in Louisiana, Mississippi, and Alabama), Midwest, 
northeastern postindustrial rust belt region, and mountain states 
(mainly in Montana and Wyoming). Less than 5% of the U.S. Hispanic 
population lived in these areas in 2010. In addition to showing a 
limited growth in the Hispanic population, these areas showed a slow 
(or lack of) growth in the population of the other racial and ethnic 
groups. The total population of this area type remained essentially 
unchanged from 1980 to 2010. When examined individually, half of the 
metropolitan areas and counties in this category (e.g., Detroit, 
Pittsburgh, and Buffalo) experienced population loss during the 30-year 
period. Without the small increase in the Hispanic population, this 
area type would have shown a greater loss in population. In many cases, 
a sluggish economy and fewer employment opportunities were related to 
the slow rate of growth among Hispanics and other population groups in 
these areas. *** Footnote 7 Beauregard, Robert A (2009). Urban 
population loss in historical perspective: United States, 1820-2000. 
Environment and Planning A41: 514-528.***

**********************************
Social and organizational context 
of Hispanic areas
**********************************

Study of the socioeconomic and organizational structures of the areas 
in the National Crime Victimization Survey sample adds context to the 
understanding of life in different communities. The areas' income, 
poverty rate, unemployment rate, and percentage of female heads of 
households with children were charted using the American Community 
Survey 5-year estimates from 2006 to 2010 (figures 4 and 5). Although 
there was substantial overlap in socioeconomic characteristics among 
area types, new Hispanic areas had relatively high measures of economic 
wealth compared to small Hispanic areas. In both counties and 
metropolitan areas, new Hispanic areas showed higher incomes and lower 
rates of poverty, unemployment, and family disruption compared to small 
Hispanic areas as shown by the median values of the social indicators. 
This pattern was expected as new Hispanic areas were typically formed 
on the foundation of better economic opportunities.

In 2006, each area's organizational structures were charted (per 1,000 
residents) for numbers of police, social service workers, civic and 
social organization employees, and religious organization employees 
(figures 6 and 7). When expressed on a per 1,000 resident basis, these 
represent measures of a community's formal and informal social control 
and support networks. *** Footnote 8 Xie, Min, Janet L. Lauritsen, and 
Karen Heimer (2012). Intimate partner violence in U.S. metropolitan 
areas: The contextual influences of police and social services. 
Criminology 50: 961-992***. In 2006, there were modest differences in 
organizational structures between new and small Hispanic areas, except 
there were fewer social service workers in new Hispanic areas than in 
small Hispanic areas. When compared with established Hispanic areas, 
new Hispanic areas had a relatively large number of employees for both 
civic and social organizations and religious organizations.

************************************************
New Hispanic areas had a lower rate of violent 
victimization compared to small Hispanic areas 
that had little growth in Hispanic populations
************************************************

The rate of nonfatal violence was approximately 24 violent crimes per 
1,000 persons for new Hispanic metropolitan areas when all racial and 
ethnic groups were combined, which was close to the average for all 
metropolitan areas (table 5). The violence rate was lower in 
established slow-growth Hispanic areas (approximately 17 violent crimes 
per 1,000 persons), and higher in small Hispanic areas where there was 
little growth in Hispanic populations (about 31 violent crimes per 
1,000 persons). The county level showed a similar pattern, although the 
difference in victimization between the new and small Hispanic areas 
was not statistically significant at the county level (table 6). 
Overall, when all racial and ethnic groups were combined, new Hispanic 
areas did not show a higher rate of violent victimization than the U.S. 
total population. Instead, small Hispanic areas tended to show higher 
rates of violence. 

************************************************
Hispanics in new Hispanic areas experienced 
higher rates of violent victimization compared 
to other Hispanic areas
************************************************

Hispanics, whites, and blacks showed some similarity with the overall 
patterns of violence; however, important differences existed between 
groups. For whites, the rate of violence for those living in 
established slow-growth Hispanic metropolitan areas (16 per 1,000) was 
lower than in other areas (23 to 27 per 1,000) (table 5). The three 
areas (established fast-growth, new, and small Hispanic metropolitan 
areas) exhibited no significant differences between victimization rates 
for whites. A similar pattern was observed for whites at the county 
level (table 6).

Blacks in small Hispanic metropolitan areas experienced violence at 
higher rates (50 per 1,000) than blacks in new Hispanic areas (27 per 
1,000) and accounted for the higher overall rates of violence in small 
Hispanic areas. Blacks also had relatively higher risks of violent 
victimization in established fast-growth Hispanic metropolitan areas 
(36 per 1,000). New Hispanic areas were not high-risk areas for blacks. 
At the county level, black victimization patterns were similar to the 
metropolitan areas.

Compared to whites and blacks, victimization rates for Hispanics showed 
a different pattern. Hispanics in new Hispanic metropolitan areas 
experienced higher rates of violent victimization (26 per 1,000) than 
those in established areas, regardless of their Hispanic growth rates. 
The differences were more pronounced in metropolitan areas than in 
counties. The victimization rate for Hispanics was also higher in new 
Hispanic metropolitan areas (26 per 1,000) than in small Hispanic areas 
(16 per 1,000), although the difference was only marginally 
statistically significant at the metropolitan area level (p < .10) and 
not statistically significant at the county level. Overall, the pattern 
of victimization for Hispanics was unique in that those living in new 
Hispanic areas experienced more violent victimization compared to other 
areas. 

************************************************
Young Hispanics accounted for the higher rates 
of violent victimization in new Hispanic areas
************************************************

Since Hispanics in new Hispanic areas have a younger age profile and 
younger age is associated with higher victimization rates, violent 
victimization rates were adjusted by age, and the comparison between 
area types accounted for the age differences. The age-adjusted 
victimization rates were calculated using a standard age distribution 
based on the U.S. population in 2000 (tables 7 and 8).

The age-adjusted victimization rates showed that the risk of violent 
victimization appeared to be higher for Hispanics in new Hispanic 
metropolitan areas (21 per 1,000), although the differences were not 
statistically significant (table 7). However, the age-specific 
victimization rates showed that the differences in victimization 
between new Hispanic areas and other area types were the largest for 
Hispanics ages 18 to 24, followed by those ages 25 to 34. Among 
Hispanics ages 18 to 24, those in new Hispanic areas had higher rates 
of violent victimization than those in established and small Hispanic 
areas (figures 8a and 9a). Among those ages 25 to 34, the rate of 
violent victimization was higher in new Hispanic areas than in 
established fast-growth areas. For Hispanics in other age groups, the 
apparent difference in violent victimization was not statistically 
significant across area types. Overall, the victimization of young 
adult Hispanics ages 18 to 34 was the main reason Hispanics showed 
higher rates of violent victimization in new Hispanic areas than in 
other area types. 

In comparison, new Hispanic areas did not present elevated risks of 
violent victimization for non-Hispanic whites and blacks, and the 
pattern was consistent across all age groups (figures 8b, 8c, 9b, and 
9c). For example, small Hispanic areas were the sites of the highest 
victimization rate for whites ages 18 to 24, whereas the rate of 
violent victimization was significantly lower in new Hispanic areas for 
whites in this age group. Blacks also showed higher rates of violent 
victimization in small Hispanic areas compared with new Hispanic areas, 
and the differences were statistically significant for most age groups 
(i.e., ages 12 to 17, ages 25 to 34, and age 50 or older).

************
Methodology
************

The National Crime Victimization Survey (NCVS) is a data collection 
conducted by the U.S. Census Bureau for the Bureau of Justice 
Statistics (BJS). The NCVS is a self-report survey in which interviewed 
persons are asked about the number and characteristics of 
victimizations experienced during the past 6 months. The NCVS collects 
information on nonfatal personal crimes (rape or sexual assault, 
robbery, aggravated assault, and simple assault) and property crimes 
(burglary, larceny-theft, arson, motor vehicle theft, and other theft) 
both reported and not reported to police. In addition to providing 
annual level and change estimates on criminal victimization, the NCVS 
is the primary source of information on the nature of criminal 
victimization incidents. Survey respondents provide information about 
themselves (such as age, sex, race and ethnicity, marital status, 
education level, and income) and whether they experienced 
victimization. For each victimization incident, information is 
collected about the offender (such as age, race and ethnicity, sex, and 
victim-offender relationship), characteristics of the crime (including 
time and place of occurrence, use of weapons, nature of injury, and 
economic consequences), whether the crime was reported to police, 
reasons the crime was or was not reported, and experiences with the 
criminal justice system.

The NCVS is administered to persons age 12 or older from a nationally 
representative sample of households in the United States. The NCVS 
defines a household as a group of members who all reside at a sampled 
address. Persons are considered household members when the sampled 
address is their usual place of residence at the time of the interview 
and when they have no usual place of residence elsewhere. Once 
selected, households remain in the sample for 3 years, and eligible 
persons in these households are interviewed every 6 months for a total 
of seven interviews. New households rotate into the sample on an 
ongoing basis to replace outgoing households that have been in the 
sample for the 3-year period. The sample includes persons living in 
group quarters (such as dormitories, rooming houses, and religious 
group dwellings) and excludes persons living in military barracks and 
institutional settings (such as correctional or hospital facilities) 
and the homeless. (For more information, see Survey Methodology for 
Criminal Victimization in the United States, 2008, NCJ 231173, BJS web, 
May 2011.) 

This report uses the geographic micro-data restricted-use files from 
2007 to 2010 to identify specific counties and metropolitan statistical 
areas. From 2007 to 2010, the NCVS conducted more than 130,000 
interviews each year, providing sufficient observations for each area 
type (appendix tables 1 and 2). For all years, the number of Hispanic 
respondents was relatively small in each Hispanic area type. The data 
were pooled across the 4-year period to increase the reliability of the 
violent victimization estimates.

************************************************
Weighting adjustments for estimating 
personal victimization 
************************************************

NCVS data files are weighted to produce annual estimates of 
victimization for persons age 12 or older living in U.S. households. 
Because the NCVS relies on a sample rather than a census of the entire 
U.S. population, weights are designed to inflate sample point estimates 
to known population totals and to compensate for survey nonresponse and 
other aspects of the sample design. 

The NCVS data files include both household and person weights. 
Household weights provide an estimate of the total U.S. household 
population. Person weights provide an estimate of the population 
represented by each person in the sample. Person weights are most 
frequently used to compute estimates of criminal victimizations of 
persons in the total population. After proper adjustment, both 
household and person weights are also used to form the denominator in 
calculations of crime rates. 

Victimization weights used in this analysis account for the number of 
persons present during an incident and for repeat victims of series 
incidents. The weight counts series incidents as the actual number of 
incidents reported by the victim, up to a maximum of 10 incidents. 
Series victimizations are similar in type but occur with such frequency 
that a victim is unable to recall each individual event or to describe 
each event in detail. Survey procedures allow NCVS interviewers to 
identify and classify these similar victimizations as series 
victimizations and to collect detailed information on only the most 
recent incident in the series. In 2011, about 3% of all victimizations 
were series incidents. Weighting series incidents as the number of 
incidents up to a maximum of 10 produces more reliable estimates of 
crime levels, while the cap at 10 minimizes the effect of extreme 
outliers on the rates. For more information on the series enumeration, 
see Methods for Counting High-Frequency Repeat Victimizations in the 
National Crime Victimization Survey, NCJ 237308, BJS web, April 2012. 

*******************************
Standard error computations 
*******************************

When national estimates are derived from a sample, as is the case with 
the NCVS, caution must be taken when comparing one estimate to another 
estimate or when comparing estimates over time. Although one estimate 
may be larger than another, estimates based on a sample have some 
degree of sampling error. The sampling error of an estimate depends on 
several factors, including the amount of variation in the responses, 
the size of the sample, and the size of the subgroup for which the 
estimate is computed. When the sampling error around the estimates is 
taken into consideration, the estimates that appear different may not 
be statistically different.

One measure of the sampling error associated with an estimate is the 
standard error. The standard error can vary from one estimate to the 
next. In general, for a given metric, an estimate with a small standard 
error provides a more reliable approximation of the true value than an 
estimate with a large standard error. Estimates with relatively large 
standard errors are associated with less precision and reliability and 
should be interpreted with caution. 

In order to generate standard errors around estimates from the NCVS, 
the Census Bureau produced generalized variance function (GVF) 
parameters for BJS. The GVFs take into account aspects of the NCVS 
complex sample design and represent the curve fitted to a selection of 
individual standard errors based on the Jackknife Repeated Replication 
technique. The GVF parameters were used to generate standard errors for 
each point estimate (such as counts, percentages, and rates) in the 
report. For average annual estimates, standard errors were based on the 
ratio of the sums of victimizations and respondents across years. 

In this report, BJS conducted tests to determine whether differences in 
estimated numbers and percentages were statistically significant once 
sampling error was taken into account. Using statistical programs 
developed specifically for the NCVS, all comparisons in the text were 
tested for significance. The primary test procedure used was Student's 
t-statistic, which tests the difference between two sample estimates. 
To ensure that the observed differences between estimates were larger 
than might be expected due to sampling variation, BJS set the 
significance level at the 95% confidence level. 

In this report, BJS also calculated a coefficient of variation (CV) for 
all estimates, representing the ratio of the standard error to the 
estimate. CVs provide a measure of reliability and a means to compare 
the precision of estimates across measures with differing levels or 
metrics. In cases where the CV was greater than 50%, or the unweighted 
sample had 10 or fewer cases, the estimate was noted with a '!' symbol 
(Interpret data with caution. Estimate based on 10 or fewer sample 
cases, or the coefficient of variation exceeds 50%). 

Many of the variables examined in this report may be related to one 
another and to other variables not included in the analyses. Complex 
relationships among variables were not fully explored in this report 
and warrant more extensive analysis. Causal inferences should not be 
made based on the results presented.

************************************************
Direct standardization with the 2000 U.S. 
Standard Population
***Footnote 9 For more information on 
direct standardization, see Curtin, L.R. & 
Klein, R.J. (1995). Direct standardization 
(age-adjusted death rates). Healthy People 
2000: Statistical Notes, 6 Revised. Available 
at http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/statnt/statnt06rv.pdf
************************************************

The method used to generate age-adjusted rates of violent victimization 
presented in this report was direct standardization with the 2000 U.S. 
Standard Population from the Decennial Census as the standard 
population. Age-adjusted standardization eliminates the problem of 
different age distributions between and within groups. Because crime 
rates vary by age, direct standardization produces age-adjusted rates 
that would occur if both populations had the same age distribution as 
the standard population. 

The 2000 U.S. Standard Population was created by the U.S. Census Bureau 
Population Projection Program 
(http://www.census.gov/population/projections/), which uses data from 
the Current Population Survey. To calculate age groups using the 2000 
U.S. Standard Population, populations of single years of age were 
obtained for persons age 12 or older from the Census P25-1130 
(http://www.census.gov/prod/1/pop/p25-1130.pdf) series estimates of the 
2000 populations generated by the U. S. Census Bureau Population 
Projection Program. These single-year populations for persons age 12 or 
older were then summed to create the following age groups: ages 12 to 
17, 18 to 24, 25 to 34, 35 to 49, and 50 or older. In this report, the 
total standard population refers to the 2000 U.S. Standard Population 
age 12 or older.

The violent victimization rate, age-adjusted using direct 
standardization with the 2000 U.S. Standard Population 
(Rd) is calculated as--

Rd = Σ (wa * ra)
 
Where

Rd = age-adjusted rate of violent victimization of the population of 
interest calculated using direct standardization
 
wa = weight calculated from the 2000 U.S. Standard Population for age 
group a
 
ra = unadjusted rate of violent victimization for age group a. 
The weight (wa) for age group a is calculated as--

wa = na / N 

where

wa = weight calculated from the 2000 U.S. Standard Population for age 
group a 

na = number of persons in age group a in the 2000 U.S. Standard 
Population 

N = total number of persons in the 2000 U.S. Standard Population.

************************************************
Standard error computations and statistical 
significance for age-adjusted rates 
***Footnote 10 For more information on computing 
standard errors for age-adjusted rates, see 
Anderson, R.N., & Rosenberg, H.M. (1998). Age 
Standardization of Death Rates: Implementation 
of the Year 2000 Standard. National Vital 
statistics Reports, 47 (3). Available at 
http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/nvsr/nvsr47/nvs47_03.pdf.
************************************************

Due to the complexity in generating age-adjusted rates of violent 
crime, other methods were used to compute standard errors and determine 
statistical significance. For each age-adjusted rate, variances were 
computed for each age group-specific rate using information from the 
generalized variance function (GVF) parameters that the Census Bureau 
produced for the NCVS. For each age group, the variance was multiplied 
by the squared weight for that particular age group in the 2000 U.S. 
Standard Population. The result was then summed across all age groups 
to produce the variance for the age-adjusted rate. The square root of 
this variance was taken to produce the standard error of the age-
adjusted rate. To calculate statistical significance among two age 
adjusted rates, the standard errors were computed for each rate.  Next, 
the estimated standard error for the difference of the two rates was 
calculated.  This was done by taking the square root of the sum of each 
rate's squared standard error (that is, Se12 + Se22). The absolute 
difference in the rates was divided by the estimated standard error for 
the difference to generate a t-statistic.  If the t-statistic was 
greater than 1.96, the difference was statistically significant.  If it 
was equal to or less than 1.96, the difference between the two rates 
was not statistically significant.

************************************************
The Bureau of Justice Statistics of the U.S. Department of Justice is 
the principal federal agency responsible for measuring crime, criminal 
victimization, criminal offenders, victims of crime, correlates of 
crime, and the operation of criminal and civil justice systems at the 
federal, state, tribal, and local levels. BJS collects, analyzes, and 
disseminates reliable and valid statistics on crime and justice systems 
in the United States, supports improvements to state and local criminal 
justice information systems, and participates with national and 
international organizations to develop and recommend national standards 
for justice statistics. William J. Sabol is acting director.

This report was written by Min Xie, Ph.D., University of Maryland at 
College Park, and Michael Planty, Ph.D., Bureau of Justice Statistics. 
Britney Mason, BJS intern, verified the report.

This report was funded by the National Institute of Justice, Office of 
Justice Programs, Department of Justice, Award No. 2012-R2-CX-0017. It 
also received funding from the American Society of Criminology (ASC) 
through the ASC and the Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS) 
Collaborative Research Program for Young Scholars in 2013. The findings 
and conclusions of this report are those of the authors and do not 
necessarily reflect those of the funding agencies.

Jill Thomas and Vanessa Curto edited the report. Barbara Quinn produced 
the report.

August 2014, NCJ 246311
************************************************

************************************************
Office of Justice Programs
Innovation * Partnerships * Safer Neighborhoods
www.ojp.usdoj.gov
************************************************



