U.S. Department of Justice
Office of Justice Programs
Bureau of Justice Statistics

Crime Data Brief

Women in Law Enforcement, 1987-2008

June 2010   NCJ 230521
-------------------------------------------------------------

This file is text only without graphics and many of the
tables. A Zip archive of the tables in this report in
spreadsheet format (.csv) and the full report including
tables and graphics in .pdf format are available from:
http://bjs.ojp.usdoj.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbdetail&iid=2274

-------------------------------------------------------------

Women in Law Enforcement, 1987–2008

Lynn Langton
BJS Statistician

During the 1990s and 2000s, the percent of sworn law
enforcement officers who were women increased only slightly
in federal, state, and local agencies.

By 2007 nearly 4,000 state police, 19,400 sheriffs', and
55,300 local police officers were women.***Footnote 1 
Data for sheriffs’ offices and local police departments 
are estimated from a nationally representative sample.***
In 2008, across 62reporting federal law enforcement agencies 
there were about 90,000 sworn officers, of whom approximately 
18,200 (20%)were women.***Footnote 2 Data available for 62 
of 67 federal law enforcement agencies. In 2004, four 
of the five missing agencies reported an estimated 11,000 sworn 
officers of whom approximately 1,500 were women.*** These 2007 
and 2008 numbers suggest a combined total of almost 100,000 
female sworn officers nationwide in federal, state, and local 
law enforcement agencies.

Using data primarily from the Bureau of Justice Statistics'
Census of Federal Law Enforcement Officers (FLEO) and the Law
Enforcement Management and Administrative Statistics (LEMAS)
series, this report examines the current state of and trends
in the employment of female sworn officers in federal, state,
and local law enforcement agencies.

In 2008 nearly a quarter of the sworn law enforcement
officers in Offices of Inspectors General were women

Of all the federal law enforcement agencies with sworn
officers, the Offices of Inspectors General had the largest
percent of female officers (25%) (figure 1). Among other
agencies, those with more than 500 sworn officers employed
more than double the percent of officers who were women
(21%), compared to both medium-sized (9%) and small (10%)
agencies. The Federal Bureau of Investigation (19% women),
Federal Bureau of Prisons (14% women), and the Administrative
Office of the U.S. Courts (46% women) (not shown) were the
largest employers of female officers. These three agencies
each employed more than 2,000 female officers.
 
Overall, the percent of sworn federal law enforcement
officers who were women increased slightly from 1998 to 2008

Due to the reorganization of several large federal law
enforcement agencies after the September 11, 2001 terrorist
attacks and inconsistencies among some agencies in the
reporting of data on the sex of officers, the trend analysis
was limited to 53 agencies that were consistently organized
and had data available on the sex of officers from 1998 to
2008. Among these common reporting agencies, there was
relative stability in the percent of female sworn officers.
Over the 10-year period, the percent of officers who were
women increased slightly from 14.0% in 1998 to 15.2% in 2008
(figure 2).

The percent of female sworn officers increased from 1998 to
2008 in 10 of the 13 largest federal law enforcement agencies

Among federal law enforcement agencies employing more than
500 full-time sworn officers and reporting data on the sex of
officers in both 1998 and 2008, women accounted for
approximately 16% of the total sworn force (not shown). From
1998 to 2008, the U.S. Postal Inspection Service (USPIS) and
the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) had the greatest increase
in the percent of law enforcement officers who were women
(7%) (table 1). In 2008 the USPIS employed just over 500
(22%) women out of about 2,300 total officers. The agency
employed nearly the same number of female officers in 2008 as
in 1998, but employed about 1,200 fewer law enforcement
officers overall in 2008. 

The U.S. Forest Service, U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, and
the Veterans Health Administration (VHA) each experienced
slight declines in the percent of women in law enforcement
positions. The percent of female officers among Forest
Service law enforcement officers decreased marginally from
16.1% in 1998 to 15.9% in 2008. The total number of Forest
Service officers who were women increased slightly, from 97
to 103. Both the overall size of and the number of female law
enforcement officers employed by the Fish and Wildlife
Service decreased during the 10-year period, from 84 female
officers out of 836 officers total in 1998 to 50 female
officers out of 565 total in 2008. 

From 1998 to 2008, the VHA police force grew substantially,
from 262 to 3,175 sworn officers. Although the percent of
female officers in the VHA declined from 9% to 8% over the
10-year period, the number of sworn officers who were women
increased by more than 200, from 24 to 248 female officers.

Among local agencies in 2007, women accounted for more than
double the percent of sworn personnel in large agencies
compared to small agencies

In 2007 women accounted for about 15% of the total sworn law
enforcement officers in large local police departments
(figure 3). In large sheriffs' offices, female officers
comprised about 13% of the total sworn officers. In contrast,
local police departments with between 1 and 10 full-time
sworn officers employed fewer than 2,000 female law
enforcement officers nationwide (6%). Small sheriffs' offices
across the county employed just over 200 total sworn officers
who were women (4%) in 2007.

Trends in the percent of female officers varied across state
and local police departments and sheriffs' offices, from 1987
to 2007

From 1987 to 2007 trends in the percent of sworn law
enforcement officers who were women varied among state police
departments, local police departments, and sheriffs' offices.
The percent of female officers in local police departments
increased steadily over the two decades, from 7.6% in 1987 to
nearly 12% in 2007 (figure 4). From 1987 to 2007, state
police departments also increased the percent of sworn
officers who were women, but at a slower rate than the local
police departments. In 2007, 6.5% of state police officers
were women, compared to 3.8% in 1987. While the percent of
female officers was higher in 2007 than in 1987, state police
departments did experience a slight decline in the percent of
female officers from 2003 (6.7%) to 2007 (6.5%).

After reaching a high of 15.6% female officers in 1997, the
percent of sheriffs' officers who were women declined to
11.2% in 2007. The 2007 survey excluded sheriffs' offices
that did not perform law enforcement functions. The decline
in female officers may be due in part to this exclusion. 

From 1997 to 2007, the percent of female sworn officers
increased in 12 of the 13 largest local police departments
nationwide

In 2007, women accounted for an average of 18% of the
officers among local police departments with 2,000 or more
sworn personnel. The Detroit Police Department had the
highest percent of female officers (27%) among the largest
police departments (table 2).

From 1997 to 2007, 12 of the 13 largest police departments
that reported data on the sex of officers had increases in
the percent of sworn officers who were women. The Detroit
Police Department had the largest increase in the percent of
female officers, from 22% in 1997 to 27% in 2007. Because the
Detroit Police Department decreased in size by over 1,000
sworn officers overall from 1997 to 2007, the number of
female officers actually declined by approximately 50
officers. 
                                        
The District of Columbia Metropolitan Police Department had a
2% decline in the percent of officers who were women, though
the number of female officers in the department increased by
12 officers from 1997 to 2007. 

Methodology

Data on local police departments and sheriffs' offices were
compiled from the BJS Law Enforcement Management and
Administrative Statistics (LEMAS) survey. LEMAS collects data
from all state and local agencies with 100 or more sworn
officers and a nationally representative sample of smaller
agencies. Agencies that did not primarily perform law
enforcement functions were excluded in 2007. For local police
in 2007, the 95% confidence interval around the number of
officers was between 51,600 and 59,000 and around the percent
of female officers was between 11.1% and 12.7%. Among the
agencies that responded to LEMAS in 2007, over 99% of local
police and 98% of sheriffs' offices provided data on the sex
of officers. See Local Police Departments, 2003
(http//bjs.ojp.usdoj.gov/content/pub/pdf/lpd03.pdf) and
Sheriffs' Offices, 2003.
(http://bjs.ojp.usdoj.gov/content/pub/pdf/so03.pdf) for more
information on the LEMAS survey. Data on state police
agencies were compiled from the Federal Bureau of
Investigation's Crime in the United States series
(http;//www.fbi.gov/ucr/ucr.htm).

Data on federal agencies with full-time sworn law enforcement
officers were compiled from the BJS Census of Federal Law
Enforcement Officers (FLEO). In 2008, FLEO data were
collected from 62 of 67 federal agencies. The U.S. Supreme
Court, Environmental Protection Agency, Agency for
International Development, Bureau of Industry and Security,
and U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement did not provide
2008 data on the number and sex of law enforcment officers.
The sex of officers in the U.S. Secret Service and U.S.
Marshals Service was estimated using the ratio of male to
female officers from 2004, applied to the total number of
officers in 2008. See
htt;//www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/pubalp2.htm#fleo for more
information on the FLEO survey methodology.

-------------------------------------------------------------

The Bureau of Justice Statistics is the statistics agency of
the U.S. Department of Justice. Michael D. Sinclair is acting
director.

This Crime Data Brief was written by Lynn Langton, under the
supervision of Joel Garner. Brian Reaves verified the report.
Jill Duncan edited the report, Barbara Quinn produced the
report, and Jayne E. Robinson prepared the report for final
printing under the supervision of Doris J. James.

June 2010, NCJ 230521

This report in portable document format and in ASCII and its
related statistical data and tables are available at the BJS
World Wide Web Internet site:
<http://bjs.ojp.usdoj.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbdetail&iid=2274>.

Office of Justice Programs
Innovation - Partnerships - Safer Neighborhoods
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
06/16/2010/JER 7:45am
                                             